# Volume  9

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 9







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 9



 
Lenin Collected Works: 

    Volume 9
June--November 1905



Preface




1905



Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution

Preface

    
An Urgent Political Question
What Can We Learn From the Resolution of the
  Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. on a Provisional
  Revolutionary Government?
What Is Meant by “The Revolution's Decisive
  Victory Over Tsarism”?

The Abolition of the Monarch. The Republic
How Should “The Revolution Be
  Advanced”?
Whence is the Proletariat Threatened
  with the
  Danger of Finding Itself with Its Hands Tied in the
  Struggle Against the Inconsistent Bourgeoisie?
The Tactics of “Eliminating the
  Conservatives From the Government”
The Osvobozhdeniye and
New-Iskra Trends
What Is Meant by Being a Party of Extreme
  Opposition in Time of Revolution?
“Revolutionary Communes” and the
  Revolutionary-Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat
  and the Peasantry
A Cursory Comparison Between Several of the
  Resolutions of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. and
  Those of the “Conference”
Will the Sweep of the Democratic Revolution Be
  Diminished If the Bourgeoisie Recoils From It?
Conclusion. Dare We Win?
      


Epilogue. Once Again the Osvobozhdeniye Trend,
    Once Again the New-Iskra Trend

    
Why Do Bourgeois Liberal Realists Praise
Social-Democratic “Realists'?
Comrade Martynov Again Gives “Profundity”
to the Question
The Vulgar Bourgeois and the Marxist Views on
Dictatorship





495k



Concluding Paragraph to the Article “The Paris Commune and the Tasks of the Democratic Dictatorship”

6k


To the Secretariat of the International Socialist Bureau, Brussels

16k


Revolution Teaches

29k


Wrathful Impotence

14k


Original Variant of the Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party

8k


Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party

20k


While the Proletariat is Doing the Fighting the Bourgeoisie is Stealing Towards Power

30k


The Boycott of the Bulygin Duma, and Insurrection

24k


Note on a Resolution of the Conference of R.S.D.L.P. Organisations Abroad

5k


Note on M. N. Pokrovsky's Article “The Professional Intelligentsia and the Social-Democrats”

6k


Reply from the Proletary Editorial Board to Questions Put by Comrade “Worker”

6k


“Oneness of the Tsar and the People, and of the People and the Tsar”

27k


The Black Hundreds and the Organisation of an Uprising

19k


Editorial Epilogue to the Article “The Third Congress on Trial Before the Caucasian Mensheviks”

5k


Are the Zemstvo “Liberals” Already Turning Back?

4k


The Working Class and Revolution

6k


Preface to the Third Edition of the Pamphlet The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats

6k


Note on P. Nikolayev's Pamphlet The Revolution in Russia

5k


In the Wake of the Monarchist Bourgeoisie, or In the Van of the Revolutionary Proletariat and Peasantry?

35k


A Most Lucid Exposition of a Most Confused Plan

11k


Keeping International Social-Democracy Informed of our Party Affairs

7k


Note to the Article “Russia's Finances and the Revolution”

5k


Social-Democracy's Attitude Towards the Peasant Movement

30k


What Our Liberal Bourgeois Want, and What They Fear

17k


The Theory of Spontaneous Generation

18k


Letter to the International Socialist Bureau

5k


Friends Meet

27k


Argue About Tactics, But Give Clear Slogans!

 What Is the Advice the Social-Democrats Are Giving the
      Proletariat with Reference to the State Duma?
    


7k


Playing at Parliamentarianism

44k


The Liberal Unions and Social-Democracy

6k


From the Defensive to the Offensive

10k


On the Current Moment

6k


From the Editorial Board of the Central Organ of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party

7k


The Jena Congress of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party

14k


No Falsehood! Our Strength Lies in Stating the Truth! Letter to the Editorial
  Board

15k


On the So-Called Armenian Social-Democratic Workers' Organisation

5k


The Zemstvo Congress

21k


Socialism and the Peasantry

27k


A Replete Bourgeoisie and a Craving Bourgeoisie

20k


The Landlords on the Boycott of the Duma

11k


On the Question of Party Unity

7k


An Irate Reply

5k


A New Menshevik Conference

7k



Representation of the R.S.D.L.P. in the International Socialist Bureau

11k


Talks With Our Readers

5k


Days of Bloodshed in Moscow

19k


The Bourgeoisie Awakened from its Slumber
    
Subject for an Article

5k


To the Combat Committee of the St. Petersburg Committee

9k


The Political Strike and the Street Fighting in Moscow

24k


The Latest in Iskra Tactics, or Mock Elections as a New Incentive to an Uprising

50k


Note to M. Borisov's Article “On the Trade Union Movement and the Tasks of Social-Democracy”

5k


On the Death of Trubetskoi

5k


The Lessons of the Moscow Events

27k


“The Struggle of the Proletariat”

6k


The Youth Abroad and the Russian Revolution

5k


A Letter to the International Socialist Bureau

6k


The All-Russia Political Strike

11k


The First Results of the Political Alignment

24k


The Hysterics of the Defeated

8k


Revolutionary Riga's Ultimatum

6k


The Plans of a Buffoon-Minister

5k


The Aggravation of the Situation in Russia

8k


Notes on “The British Labour Movement and the Trade Union Congress”

5k


An Equilibrium of Forces

6k


A Social-Democratic Sweetheart

4k


On P. B. Axelrod's Pamphlet The People's Duma and a Workers' Congress
    
Analysis of the Pamphlet

10k


Tasks of Revolutionary Army Contingents

14k


What the Liberals Expect of the Duma

6k


The First Victory of the Revolution

25k


The Latest News

4k


Nikolai Ernestovich Bauman

7k



Petty-Bourgeois and Proletarian Socialism

25k


The Denouement is At Hand

22k


Inserts to V. Kalinin's Article “The Peasant Congress”

6k


Between Two Battles

28k


 


Volume 9
      Transcription/Mark-up: Brian Baggins, David
    Walters and Vigor Kronick
    ("Two Tactics"

    and 

    "Petty-Bourgeois
      and Proletarian Socialism"),  2000.

     •  R. Cymbala (all documents except two
    above), 2004.
  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Preface







LCW: 9: Preface by Progress Publishers







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 9: Preface by Progress Publishers




Lenin Collected Works: 
Volume 9
Preface by
      Progress Publishers



    Volume 9 contains works written by V. I. Lenin in the second half
    (June-November) of 1905.
  

    The volume includes the historic Two Tactics ol Social-Democracy
    in the Democratic Revolution in which Lenin gave a
    classical criticism of the Mensheviks' tactics and a masterly
    exposition of the Bolsheviks' tactics, and enriched Marxism with a
    new theory of revolution. Chapter II of the epilogue to the book
    is published in toto for the first time after the
    manuscript, part of which was found in
    1940.
  

    The volume includes the following articles: “While the
    Proletariat Is Doing the Fighting the Bourgeoisie Is Stealing
    Towards Power”, “The Boycott of the Bulygin Duma, and
    Insurrection”, “In the Wake of the Monarchist
    Bourgeoisie, or in the Van of the Revolutionary Proletariat and
    Peasantry?", “Playing at Parliamentarianism”,
    “From the Defensive to the Offensive”. In these articles
    Lenin defends the revolutionary tactics of the working class, gives
    advice on preparations for an insurrection, and exposes the false
    “democratism” of the liberal bourgeoisie and the
    conciliatory tactics of the Mensheviks.
  

    In the articles “Social-Democracy's Attitude Towards the
    Peasant Movement”, “Socialism and the Peasantry”,
    and “Petty-Bourgeois and Proletarian Socialism”, Lenin
    sets forth and explains the Bolsheviks' strategic plan of struggle
    to make the bourgeois-democratic revolution develop into a
    socialist, revolution.
  

    The articles “The Political Strike and the Street Fighting in
    Moscow”, “The Lessons of the Moscow Events”,
    “The All-Russia Political Strike”, and “The First
    Victory of the

    

    Revolution”, all deal with the October political general
    strike.
  

    Lenin's “Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in
      the Party”, “On the Question of Party
    Unity”, and several others are directed against the
    Mensheviks' acts of schism.
  

    The following works, included in the Collected Works for
    the first time, are published in this volume: “Concluding
    Paragraph to the Article 'The Paris Commune and the Tasks of the
    Democratic Dictatorship'", “Original Variant of the Preface to
    the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party”,
    “Note on a Resolution of the Conference of
    R.S.D.L.P. Organisations Abroad”, “Editorial Epilogue to
    the Article 'The Third Congress on Trial Before the Caucasian
    Mensheviks"', “Note on P. Nikolayev's Pamphlet The
      Revolution in Russia”, “On the Current
    Moment”, “On the So-Called Armenian Social-Democratic
    Workers' Organisation”, “The Struggle of the
    Proletariat”, “The Youth Abroad and the Russian
    Revolution”, “Notes on 'The British Labour Movement and
    the Trade Union Congress'", “Insert to V. Kalinin's Article
    'The Peasant Congress'", and the article “Between Two
    Battles”. In the last-named article Lenin sums up the results
    of the political general strike of October 1905 and calls upon the
    Russian proletariat to rally its forces for the overthrow of the
    tsarist autocracy by means of an insurrection of the whole people.
  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 









==========

## Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution




Lenin: Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution


Written: June-July 1905 
Published: First published as a pamphlet in Geneva, July 1905.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 1962, Moscow, Volume 9, pp. 15-140.
Translated: Abraham Fineburg and Julius Katzer
Transcription: D. 
Walters and V. Kronick
HTML Markup: B. Baggins &
K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (1999). You 
may freely copy, distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents







Preface
  17

1..


An Urgent Political Question
  21

2..


What Can We Learn From the Resolution of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. on a Provisional Revolutionary Government?
  24

3..


What Is A “Decisive Victory of the Revolution Over Tsarism”?
  32

4..


The Abolition of the Monarchist System and the Republic
  38

5..


How Should “The Revolution Be Pushed Forward”?
  44

6..


From what Direction is the Proletariat Threatened with the Danger of Having its Hands Tied in the Struggle Against the Inconsistent Bourgeoisie?
  48

7..


The Tactics of “Eliminating The Conservatives from the Government”
  61

8..


Osvobozhdeniyeism and New Iskra Trends
  65

9..


What Does Being A Party of Extreme Opposition In Time of Revolution Mean?
  74

10..


“Revolutionary Communes” and the Revolutionary-Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Peasantry
  77

11..


A Cursory Comparison Between Several of the Resolutions of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. and Those of the “Conference”
  88

12..


Will the Sweep of the Democratic Revolution be Diminished if the Bourgeoisie Recoils from it?
  92

13..


Conclusion. Dare We Win?
  104

Epilogue.


Once Again Osvobozhdeniye Trend, Once Again New Iskra trend
  115

I..


What Do The Bourgeois Liberal Realists Praise The Social-Democratic “Realists” For?
  115

II..


Comrade Martynov Again Renders the Question “More Profound”
  122

III..


The Vulgar Bourgeois Representation of Dictatorship and Marx’s View of It
  130

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



Two Tactics of Social-Democry in the Democratic
  Revolution was written by Lenin in Geneva, in June-July
  1905. The book was published in late July 1905, by the Central
  Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. It was twice republished in Russia
  in the same year, once by the Central Committee of the
  R.S.D.L.P., and the second time by the Moscow Committee of the
  Party, this time in 10,000 copies.


  The book was illegally distributed throughout the
  country—particularly in St. Petersburg, Moscow, Kazan,
  Tiflis and Baku. On February 19, 1907 it was banned by the
  St. Petersburg Press Department, and on December 22 of the same
  year the St. Petersburg Court issued an injunction for its
  destruction.


  In 1907 Lenin had Two Tactics published in the
  miscellany Twelve Years, supplementing the book with
  new notes. The material prepared by Lenin for this book, his
  plans, précis, and other notes, were published in Lenin
  Miscellany V, pp. 315-20, and XVI, pp. 151-56.







Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Urgent Political Question




Lenin: Two Tactics: An Urgent Political Question








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in 
the Democratic Revolution



1.
An Urgent Political Question

  At the present revolutionary juncture the question of the
  convocation of a popular constituent assembly is on the order of
  the day. Opinions are divided on the point as to how this
  question should be solved. Three political trends are to be
  observed. The tsarist government admits the necessity of
  convening representatives of the people, but it does not want
  under any circumstances to permit their assembly to be a popular
  and a constituent assembly. It seems willing to agree, if we are
  to believe the newspaper reports on the work of the Bulygin

  Commission,[2]

  to an advisory assembly, to be elected without
  freedom to conduct agitation, and on the basis of restricted
  qualifications or a restricted class system. The revolutionary
  proletariat, inasmuch as it is led by the Social-Democratic
  Party, demands complete transfer of power to a constituent
  assembly, and for this purpose strives to obtain not only
  universal suffrage and complete freedom to conduct agitation,
  but also the immediate overthrow of the tsarist government and
  its replacement by a provisional revolutionary
  government. Finally, the liberal bourgeoisie, expressing its
  wishes through the leaders of the so-called “Constitutional-Democratic

  Party”,[3]

  does not demand the
  overthrow of the tsarist government, does not advance the slogan
  of a provisional government and does not insist on real
  guarantees that the elections will be absolutely free and fair
  and that the assembly of representatives will be a genuinely
  popular and a genuinely constituent assembly. As a matter of
  fact, the liberal bourgeoisie, the only serious social support
  of the Osvobozhdeniye trend, is striving to effect as
  peaceful a deal as possible between the tsar and the
  revolutionary people, a deal, moreover,

 

  that would give a maximum of power to itself, the bourgeoisie, and a
  minimum to the revolutionary people—the proletariat and the
  peasantry.


  Such is the political situation at the present time. Such are
  the three main political trends, corresponding to the three main
  social forces in contemporary Russia. We have already shown on
  more than one occasion (in the Proletary, Nos. 3, 4,

  5)[1]

  how the
  Osvobozhdentsi use pseudo-democratic phrases to cover
  up their half-hearted, or, to put it more bluntly and plainly,
  their treacherous, perfidious policy towards the revolution. Let
  us now see how the Social-Democrats appraise the tasks of the
  moment. Excellent material for this purpose is provided by the
  two resolutions that were passed quite recently by the Third
  Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and by
  the “Conference” of the section which has seceded from the
  Party. The question as to which of these resolutions more
  correctly appraises the political situation and more correctly
  defines the tactics of the revolutionary proletariat is of
  enormous importance, and every Social-Democrat who is anxious to
  fulfil his duties as a propagandist, agitator and organiser
  intelligently, must study this question with the closest
  attention, leaving all irrelevant considerations entirely
  aside.


  By the Party’s tactics we mean the Party’s political conduct, or
  the character, the direction and methods of its political
  activity. Tactical resolutions are adopted by Party congresses
  in order precisely to define the political conduct of the Party
  as a whole with regard to new tasks, or in view of a new
  political situation. Such a new situation has been created by
  the revolution that has started in Russia, i.e., the complete,
  resolute and open rupture between the overwhelming majority of
  the people and the tsarist government. The new question concerns
  the practical methods to be adopted in convening a genuinely
  popular and genuinely constituent assembly (the theoretical
  question concerning such an assembly was officially settled by
  Social-Democracy long ago, before all other parties, in its
  Party program).

 

  Since the people have broken with the
  government, and the masses realise the necessity of setting up a
  new order, the party which set itself the object of overthrowing
  the government must necessarily consider what government to put
  up in place of the old, deposed government. A new question
  concerning a provisional revolutionary government arises. In
  order to give a complete answer to this question the Party of
  the class-conscious proletariat must make clear:

  1) the significance of a provisional revolutionary
     government in the revolution that is now going on and in the
     entire struggle of the proletariat in general;

  2) its attitude towards a provisional revolutionary
     government;

  3) the precise conditions of Social-Democratic participation in
     this government;

  4) the conditions under which pressure
     is to be brought to bear on this government from
     below, i.e., in the event of there being no
     Social-Democrats in it. Only after all these questions are
     made clear, will the political conduct of the Party in this
     sphere be principled, clear and firm.


  Let us now consider how the resolution of the Third Congress of
  the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party answers these
  questions. The following is the full text of the resolution:


  “Resolution on a Provisional Revolutionary Government


  “Whereas: 

  “1) both the direct interests of the proletariat and the
  interests of its struggle for the final aims of socialism
  require the fullest possible measure of political liberty and,
  consequently, the replacement of the autocratic form of
  government by a democratic republic;


  “2) the establishment of a democratic republic in Russia is
  possible only as a result of a victorious popular insurrection
  whose organ will be a provisional revolutionary government,
  which alone will be capable of ensuring complete freedom of
  agitation during the election campaign and of convening a
  constituent assembly that will really express the will of the
  people, an assembly elected on the basis of universal and equal
  suffrage, direct elections and secret ballot;


  “3) under the present social and economic order this democratic
  revolution in Russia will not weaken, but strengthen the rule of
  the bourgeoisie, which at a certain moment

 

  will inevitably try,
  stopping at nothing, to take away from the Russian proletariat
  as many of the gains of the revolutionary period as possible:


  “The Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
  Party resolves that:


  “a) that it is necessary to disseminate among the working class
  a concrete idea of the most probable course of the revolution
  and of the necessity, at a certain moment in the revolution, for
  the appearance of a provisional revolutionary government, from
  which the proletariat will demand the realisation of all the
  immediate political and economic demands contained in our
  program (the minimum program);


  “b) that subject to the relation of forces, and other factors
  which cannot be exactly determined beforehand, representatives
  of our Party may participate in the provisional revolutionary
  government for the purpose of relentless struggle against all
  counter-revolutionary attempts and of the defence of the
  independent interests of the working class;


  “c) that an indispensable condition for such participation is
  that the Party should exercise strict control over its
  representatives and that the independence of the
  Social-Democratic Party, which is striving for a complete
  socialist revolution and, consequently, is irreconcilably
  hostile to all bourgeois parties, should be strictly maintained;


  “d) that irrespective whether the participation of
  Social-Democrats in the provisional revolutionary government
  prove possible or not, we must propagate among the broadest
  masses of the proletariat the necessity for permanent pressure
  to be brought to bear upon the provisional government by the
  armed proletariat, led by the Social-Democratic Party, for the
  purpose of defending, consolidating and extending the gains of
  the revolution.”

 

Notes
 

[1] 
“Revolutionary Struggle and Liberal Brokerage”, 1905: “The Democratic
Tasks of the Revolutionary Proletariat”, 1905 and “The First Steps of
Bourgeois Betrayal”, 1905. See present edition, Volume 8, pp. 486-94,
511-25–Ed.—Lenin
 



[2] 
PLACEHOLDER




[3] 
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

Preface

|

What Can We Learn From the Resolution of 
the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. on a Provisional Revolutionary Government?

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Resolution of the
  Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. on a Provisional
  Revolutionary Government




Lenin: Two Tactics: What Can We Learn From the Resolution of the Third 
Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. on a Provisional Revolutionary Government?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy 
in the Democratic Revolution



2.
What Can We Learn From the Resolution of the Third
      Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. on a Provisional Revolutionary
      Government?

As is evident from the title, the resolution of the Third
    Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, is devoted
    wholly and exclusively to the question of a provisional
    revolutionary government. Hence, the participation

 

    of Social-Democrats in a provisional revolutionary government is
    included in it as part of that question. On the other hand, it
    deals only with a provisional revolutionary government and with
    nothing else; consequently, it completely leaves out, for example,
    the question of the “conquest of power” in general, etc. Was the
    Congress right in eliminating this and similar questions?
    Undoubtedly it was right, because the political situation in
    Russia does not at all give rise to such questions as immediate
    issues. On the contrary, the whole of the issue that has been
    raised by the people at the present time is the overthrow of the
    autocracy and the convocation of a constituent assembly. Party
    congresses should take up and decide not issues which this or that
    writer happened to

    mention ,

    but those that are of vital political importance by reason of the
    prevailing conditions and the objective course of social
    development.
    

      Of what importance is a provisional revolutionary government in
      the present revolution, and in the general struggle of the
      proletariat? The resolution of the Congress explains this by
      pointing at the very outset to the need for the “fullest
      possible measure of political liberty,” both from the standpoint
      of the immediate interests of the proletariat and from the
      standpoint of the “final aims of Socialism.” And complete
      political liberty requires that the tsarist autocracy be
      replaced by a democratic republic, as our Party program has
      already recognised. The stress laid in the Congress resolution
      on the slogan of a democratic republic is necessary both as a
      matter of logic and in point of principle, for it is precisely
      complete freedom that the proletariat, as the foremost champion
      of democracy, is striving to attain. Moreover, it is all the
      more advisable to stress this at the present time because right
      now the monarchists, namely, the so-called
      constitutional-“democratic” party, or party of “liberation,” in
      our country, are flying the flag of “democracy.” In order to
      establish a republic it is absolutely necessary to have an
      assembly of people’s representatives; and it must be a popular
      (elected on the basis of universal and equal suffrage, direct
      elections and secret ballot), and a constituent assembly. This
      exactly what  is recognised in the Congress resolution, further
      on. But the resolution

 

      does not stop there. In order to
      establish the new order “that will really express the will of
      the people” it is not enough to call a representative assembly a
      constituent assembly. This assembly must have the authority and
      power to “constitute.” Taking this into consideration, the
      resolution of the Congress does not confine itself to the formal
      slogan of a “constituent assembly,” but adds the material
      conditions which alone will enable that assembly really to carry
      out its tasks. Such specification of the conditions that will
      enable an assembly which is constituent in name to become
      constituent in fact is imperatively necessary, for, as we have
      pointed out more than once, the liberal bourgeoisie, as
      represented by the Constitutional-Monarchist Party, is
      deliberately distorting the slogan of a popular constituent
      assembly and reducing it to a hollow phrase.
    

      The Congress resolution states that a provisional revolutionary

      government 
on its own — one,
      moreover, that will be the organ of a victorious popular
      insurrection — can secure full freedom of agitation in the
      election campaign and convene an assembly that will really
      express the will of the people. Is this postulate correct?
      Whoever took it into his head to dispute it would have to assert
      that it is possible for the tsarist government not to side with
      the reaction, that it is capable of being neutral during the
      elections, that it will see to it that the will of the people is
      really expressed. Such assertions are so absurd that no one
      would venture to defend them openly; but they are being
      surreptitiously smuggled in under liberal colours, by our
      liberationists. Somebody must convene the constituent assembly,
      somebody must guarantee the freedom and fairness of the
      elections; somebody must invest such an assembly with full power
      and authority. Only a revolutionary government, which is the
      organ of the insurrection, can desire this in all sincerity and
      be capable of doing all that is required to achieve this. The
      tsarist government will inevitably counteract this. A liberal
      government, which will come to terms with the tsar, and which
      does not rely in full on the popular uprising, cannot sincerely
      desire this, and could not accomplish it even if it most
      sincerely desired to. Therefore, the resolution of the Congress
      gives the only correct and entirely consistent democratic
      slogan.
    


      But an appraisal of a provisional revolutionary government’s
      significance would be incomplete and wrong if the class nature
      of the democratic revolution were lost sight of. The resolution
      therefore adds that the revolution will strengthen the rule of
      the bourgeoisie. This is inevitable under the present, i.e.,
      capitalist, social and economic system. And the strengthening of
      the bourgeoisie’s rule over the proletariat which has secured
      some measure of political liberty must inevitably lead to a
      desperate struggle between them for power, must lead to
      desperate attempts on the part of the bourgeoisie “to take away
      from the proletariat the gains of the revolutionary period.”
      Therefore the proletariat, which is fighting for democracy in
      front of all and at the head of all, must not for a single
      moment forget about the new antagonisms that are inherent in
      bourgeois democracy and about the new struggle.
    

      Thus, the section of the resolution which we have just reviewed
      fully appraises the significance of a provisional revolutionary
      government in its relation to the struggle for freedom and for a
      republic, in its relation to a constituent assembly and in its
      relation to the democratic revolution, which clears the ground
      for a new class struggle.
    

      The next question is that of the proletariat’s attitude in
      general towards a provisional revolutionary government. The
      Congress resolution answers this first of all by directly
      advising the Party to spread among the working class the
      conviction that a provisional revolutionary government is
      necessary. The working class must be made aware of this
      necessity. Whereas the “democratic” bourgeoisie leaves the
      question of overthrowing the tsarist government in the shade, we
      must push it to the fore and insist on the need for a
      provisional revolutionary government. More than that, we must
      outline for such a government a program of action that will
      conform with the objective conditions of the historic period
      through which we are now passing and with the aims of
      proletarian democracy. This program is the entire
      minimum program of our Party, the program of the immediate
      political and economic reforms which, on the one hand, can be
      fully realised on the basis of the existing social and economic
      relationships and, on the other hand, are requisite

 

      for the next step forward, for the achievement of Socialism.
    

      Thus, the resolution fully clearly defines the nature and aims
      of a provisional revolutionary government. In its origin and
      fundamental nature such a government must be the organ of the
      popular insurrection. Its formal purpose must be to serve as the
      instrument for convening a popular constituent assembly. The
      content of its activities must be to put into effect the minimum
      program of proletarian democracy, the only program capable of
      safeguarding the interests of the people which has risen against
      the autocracy.
    

      It might be argued that being only provisional, a provisional
      government cannot carry out a constructive program which has not
      yet received the approval of the entire people. Such an argument
      would merely be the sophistry of reactionaries and
      “absolutists.” To abstain from carrying out a constructive
      program means tolerating the existence of the feudal regime of
      the putrid autocracy. Such a regime could be tolerated only by a
      government of traitors to the cause of the revolution, but not
      by a government which is the organ of a popular insurrection. It
      would be mockery for anyone to propose that we should refrain
      from exercising freedom of assembly pending the confirmation of
      such freedom by a constituent assembly, on the plea that the
      constituent assembly might not confirm freedom of assembly! It
      is equal mockery to object to the immediate execution of the
      minimum program by a provisional revolutionary government.
    

      Finally, we will note that the resolution, by making
      implementation of the minimum program provisional revolutionary
      government’s task eliminates the absurd, semi-anarchist ideas
      about giving immediate effect to the maximum program, and the
      conquest of power for a socialist revolution. The degree of
      economic development of Russia (an objective condition) and the
      degree of class consciousness and organisation of the broad
      masses of the proletariat (a subjective condition inseparably
      connected with the objective condition) make the immediate
      complete emancipation of the working class impossible. Only the
      most ignorant people can ignore the bourgeois nature

 

      of the democratic revolution which is now taking place; only the most
      naive optimists can forget how little as yet the masses of the
      workers are informed about the aims of Socialism and about the
      methods of achieving it. And we are all convinced that the
      emancipation of the workers can be effected only by the workers
      themselves; a socialist revolution is out of the question unless
      the masses become class conscious and organised, trained and
      educated in open class struggle against the entire
      bourgeoisie. In answer to the anarchist objections that we are
      putting off the socialist revolution, we say: we are not putting
      it off, but we are taking the first step towards it in the only
      possible way, along the only correct road, namely, the road of a
      democratic republic. Whoever wants to reach Socialism by a
      different road, other than that of political democracy, will
      inevitably arrive at conclusions that are absurd and reactionary
      both in the economic and the political sense. If any workers ask
      us at the given moment why we should not go ahead and carry out
      our maximum program, we shall answer by pointing out how far the
      masses of the democratically-minded people still are from
      Socialism, how undeveloped class antagonisms still are, how
      unorganised the proletarians still are. Organise hundreds of
      thousands of workers all over Russia; enlist the sympathy of
      millions for our program! Try to do this without confining
      yourselves to high-sounding but hollow anarchist
      phrases—and you will see at once that in order to achieve
      this organisation, in order to spread this socialist
      enlightenment, we must achieve the fullest possible measure of
      democratic reforms.
    

      Let us continue. Once we are clear about the importance of a
      provisional revolutionary government and the attitude of the
      proletariat toward it, the following question arises: is it
      permissible for us to participate in it (action from above) and,
      if so, under what conditions? What should be our action from
      below? The resolution supplies precise answers to both these
      questions. It emphatically declares that it is
      permissible in principle for Social-Democrats to
      participate in a provisional revolutionary government (during
      the period of a democratic revolution, the period of struggle
      for a republic). By this

 

      declaration we once and for all
      dissociate ourselves both from the anarchists, who answer this
      question in the negative on principle, and from the

      khvostists 

      among the Social-Democrats (like Martynov
      and the new Iskra-ists) who have tried to
      frighten us with the prospect of a situation wherein it
      might prove necessary for us to participate in such a
      government. By this declaration the Third Congress of the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party rejected, once and for
      all, the idea expressed by the new Iskra that the
      participation of Social-Democrats in a provisional revolutionary
      government would be a variety of

      Millerandism,[1]

      that it is impermissible in principle, as sanctifying the
      bourgeois order, etc.
    

      It stands to reason, however, that the question of
      permissibility in principle does not solve the question of
      practical expediency. Under what conditions is this new form of
      struggle—the struggle “from above” recognised by the Party
      Congress—expedient? It goes without saying that at the
      present time it is impossible to speak of concrete conditions,
      such as relation of forces, etc., and the resolution, naturally,
      refrains from defining these conditions in advance. No
      intelligent person would venture at the present time to prophesy
      anything on this subject. What we can and must do is determine
      the nature and aim of our participation. This is precisely what
      is done in the resolution, which points out two objectives of
      our participation: 1) a relentless struggle against
      counter-revolutionary attempts, and 2) the defence of the
      independent interests of the working class. At a time when the
      liberal bourgeoisie is beginning to talk assiduously about the
      psychology of reaction (see Mr. Struve’s most instructive “Open
      Letter” in the Osvobozhdeniye, No. 71) in an attempt to
      frighten the revolutionary people and induce it to show
      compliance towards the autocracy—at such a time it is
      particularly appropriate for the party of the proletariat to
      call attention to the task of waging a real war against
      counterrevolution. In the final analysis, force alone settles
      the great problems of political liberty and the class struggle,
      and it is our business to prepare and organise this force and to
      employ it actively, not only for defence, but also for
      attack. The long reign of political reaction in Europe, which
      has lasted almost uninterruptedly since the days of the Paris
      Commune, has too greatly

 

      accustomed us to the idea that
      action can proceed only “from below,” has too greatly inured us
      to seeing only defensive struggles. We have now, undoubtedly,
      entered a new era: a period of political upheavals and
      revolutions has begun. In a period such as Russia is passing
      through at the present time, it is impermissible to confine
      ourselves to old, stereotyped formulae. We must propagate the
      idea of action from above, we must prepare for the most
      energetic, offensive action, and must study the conditions for
      and forms of such actions. The Congress resolution puts two of
      these conditions into the forefront: one refers to the formal
      aspect of Social-Democratic participation in a provisional
      revolutionary government (strict control by the Party over its
      representatives), the other to the very nature of such
      participation (never for an instant to lose sight of the aim of
      effecting a complete socialist revolution).
    

      Having thus explained from all aspects the Party’s policy with
      regard to action “from above”—this new, hitherto almost
      unprecedented method of struggle—the resolution also
      provides for the eventuality that we shall not be able to act
      from above. We must exercise pressure on the provisional
      revolutionary government from below in any case. In order to be
      able to exercise this pressure from below, the proletariat must
      be armed—for in a revolutionary situation matters develop
      with exceptional rapidity to the stage of open civil
      war—and must be led by the Social-Democratic Party. The
      object of its armed pressure is that of “defending,
      consolidating and extending the gains of the revolution,” i.e.,
      those gains which from the standpoint of the interests of the
      proletariat must consist in the fulfilment of the whole of our
      minimum program.
    

      With this we conclude our brief analysis of the resolution of
      the Third Congress on a provisional revolutionary government. As
      the reader can see, the resolution explains the importance of
      this new question, the attitude of the Party of the proletariat
      toward it, and the policy the Party must pursue both inside a
      provisional revolutionary government and outside of it.
    

      Let us now consider the corresponding resolution of the
      “Conference.”
    

 

Notes
 
 



[1] 
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

An Urgent 
Political Question

|

What Is A “Decisive Victory of the 
Revolution Over Tsarism”?

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Revolution's Decisive
  Victory Over Tsarism




Lenin: Two Tactics: What Is A 'Decisive Victory of the Revolution Over Tsarism'?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in 
the Democratic Revolution



3.
What Is A “Decisive Victory of the Revolution
Over Tsarism”?

      The resolution of the “Conference” is devoted to the question:
      “The conquest of power and participation in a provisional

  government.”[1]

      As we have already pointed out, the very
      manner in which the question is presented betrays confusion. On
      the one hand, the question is presented in a narrow way: it
      deals only with our participation in a provisional government
      and not with the Party’s tasks in regard to a provisional
      revolutionary government in general. On the other hand, two
      totally different questions are confused, viz., the question of
      our participation at one of the stages of the
      democratic revolution, and the question of the
      socialist revolution. Indeed, the “conquest of power”
      by Social-Democracy is a socialist revolution, nor can it be
      anything else if we use these words in their direct and usually
      accepted sense. If, however, we are to understand these words to
      mean the conquest of power for a democratic revolution and not
      for a socialist revolution, then what is the point in talking
      not only about participation in a provisional revolutionary
      government but also about the “conquest of power” in general?
      Obviously our “Conferencers” were not very clear themselves as
      to what they should talk about: the democratic or the socialist
      revolution. Those who have followed the literature on this
      question know that it was Comrade Martynov, in his notorious
      Two Dictatorships; the new-Iskrists are reluctant to
      recall the manner in which this question was presented (even
      before

      January 9)[6]
[the date of Bloody
      Sunday] in that model of tail-ender
      writing. Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that it exerted an
      ideological influence on the Conference.
    

      But let us leave the title of the resolution. Its contents
      reveal mistakes incomparably more profound and serious. Here is
      the first part:
    


      “A decisive victory of the revolution over tsarism may be marked
      either by the establishment of a provisional

 

      government, which
      will emerge from a victorious popular insurrection, or by the
      revolutionary initiative of a representative institution of one
      kind or another, which, under direct revolutionary pressure of
      the people, decides to set up a popular constituent assembly.”
    


      Thus, we are told that a decisive victory of the revolution over
      tsarism may be marked either by a victorious insurrection, or
      ... by a decision of a representative institution to set up a
      constituent assembly! What does this mean? How are we to
      understand it? A decisive victory may be marked by a “decision”
      to set up a constituent assembly?? And such a “victory” is put
      side by side with the establishment of a provisional government
      which will “emerge from a victorious popular insurrection”!! The
      Conference failed to note that a victorious popular
      insurrection and the establishment of a provisional
      government would signify the victory of the revolution in
      actual fact, whereas a “decision” to set up a constituent
      assembly would signify a victory of the revolution in words
      only.
    

      The Conference of the Mensheviks, or new-Iskra, fell
      into the very same error that the liberals, the
      Osvobozhdeniye are constantly committing. The 
      Osvobozhdeniye  group prattle about a “constituent”
      assembly and bashfully shut their eyes to the fact that power
      and authority remain in the hands of the tsar, forgetting that
      in order to “constitute” one must possess the power to
      do so. The Conference also forgot that it is a far cry from a
      “decision” adopted by representatives—no matter who they
      are—to the fulfilment of that decision. The Conference
      further forgot that so long as power remained in the hands of
      the tsar, all decisions passed by any representatives whatsoever
      would remain empty and miserable prattle, as was the case with
      the “decisions” of the Frankfurt
      Parliament, famous in the history of the German Revolution
      of 1848. In his Neue Rheinische

      Zeitung[7]

      Marx, the representative of the revolutionary proletariat, castigated the
      Frankfurt liberal Osvobozhdentsi with merciless sarcasm
      precisely because they uttered fine words, adopted all sorts of
      democratic “decisions,” “constituted” all kinds of liberties,
      while actually they left power in the hands of the king and
      failed to organise an armed struggle against the military forces
      at the disposal of the king. And while the

      Frankfurt 

Osvobozbdentsi were prattling—the king bided his
      time, consolidated his military forces, and the
      counterrevolution, relying on real force, utterly routed the
      democrats with all their fine “decisions.”
    

      The Conference put on a par with a decisive victory the very
      thing that lacks the essential condition of victory. How was it
      possible for Social-Democrats who recognise the republican
      program of our Party to commit such an error? In order to
      understand this strange phenomenon we must turn to the
      resolution of the Third Congress on the section which has
      seceded from the

Party.[2]

      This resolution refers to the fact that
      various trends “akin to Economism” have survived in our
      Party. Our “Conferencers” (it is not for nothing that they are
      under the ideological guidance of Martynov) talk of the
      revolution in exactly the same way as the Economists talked of
      the political struggle or the eight hour day. The Economists
      immediately gave currency to the “theory of stages”:

1) the struggle

 

for rights,

2) political agitation,

3) political struggle;

or, 1) a ten-hour day,

2) a nine-hour day,

3) an eight-hour day. The results of this
      “tactics-as-a-process” are sufficiently well known to all. Now
      we are invited nicely to divide the revolution too in advance
      into the following stages:

1) the tsar
      convenes a representative body;

2) this
      representative body “decides” under pressure of the “people” to
      set up a constituent assembly;

3) ... the Mensheviks have not yet agreed among themselves as to the
      third stage; they have forgotten that the revolutionary pressure
      of the people will meet with the counter-revolutionary pressure
      of tsarism and that, therefore, either the “decision” will
      remain unfulfilled or the issue will be decided after all by the
      victory or the defeat of the popular insurrection. The
      resolution of the Conference is an exact reproduction of the
      following reasoning of the Economists: a decisive victory of the
      workers may be marked either by the realisation of the
      eight-hour day in a revolutionary way, or by the grant of a
      ten-hour day and a “decision” to go over to a nine-hour
      day.... the duplication is perfect.
    

      The objection may be made to us that the authors of the
      resolution did not mean to place on a par  the victory
      of an insurrection with the “decision” of a representative
      institution convened by the tsar, that they only wanted to
      provide for the Party’s tactics in either case. To this our
      answer would be:

      1) The text of the resolution plainly and unambiguously
         describes the decision of a representative
         institution as “a decisive victory of the revolution over
         tsarism.” Perhaps that is the result of careless wording,
         perhaps it could be corrected after consulting the minutes,
         but, so long as it is not corrected, the present wording can
         have only one meaning, and this meaning is entirely in
         keeping with the Osvobozhdeniye line of
         reasoning.

    2) The Osvobozbdeniye line of
    reasoning, into which the authors of the resolution have drifted,
    stands out in incomparably greater relief in other literary
    productions of the new Iskra-ists. For instance, the
    organ of the Tiflis Committee, (in the Georgian language; praised
    by the Iskra in No. 100), in the article “The Zemsky

Sobor[3]

    and Our Tactics,”

    Sotsial-Demokrat,[8]

    organ of the Tiflis Committee (published in the Georgian language;
    praised by Iskra in No. 100) goes so far as to say

 

    that the “Tactics” “which make the Zemsky Sobor the centre of our
    activities” (about the convocation of which, we may add, nothing
    definite is known as yet!) “are more advantageous for us”
    than the “tactics” of armed insurrection and the establishment of
    a provisional revolutionary government. We shall refer to this
    article again further on.

    3) No objection can be made to a preliminary
    discussion of what tactics the Party should adopt in the event of
    the victory of the revolution as well as in the event of its
    defeat, in the event of a successful insurrection as well as in
    the event of the insurrection failing to develop into a serious
    force. It is possible that the tsarist government will succeed in
    convening a representative assembly for the purpose of coming to
    terms with the liberal bourgeoisie; providing for that
    eventuality, the resolution of the Third Congress speaks plainly
    about “hypocritical policy,” “pseudo democracy,” “a travesty of
    popular representation, something like the so-called Zemsky

       Sobor.”[4]

      But the whole point is that this is not said in the resolution
      on a provisional revolutionary government, for it has nothing to
      do with a provisional revolutionary government. This eventuality
      defers the problem of the insurrection and of

 

      the establishment of a provisional revolutionary government; it alters this
      problem, etc. The point in question now is not that all kinds of
      combinations are possible, that both victory and defeat are
      possible, that there may be direct or circuitous paths; the
      point is that it is impermissible for a Social-Democrat to cause
      confusion in the minds of the workers concerning the genuinely
      revolutionary path, that it is impermissible, to describe in the
      Osvobozhdeniye manner, as a decisive victory that which
      lacks the main requisite for victory. It is possible that

      we shall win 

      even the eight-hour day,

       

      not at one stroke, but only by a
      long and roundabout way; but what would you say of a man who
      calls such impotence, such weakness as renders the proletariat
      incapable of counteracting procrastination, delays,
      haggling, treachery and reaction, a victory for the workers? It
      is possible that the Russian revolution will end in an “abortive
      constitution,” as was once stated in the

  Vperyod,[5]

      but can this
      justify a Social-Democrat, who on the eve of a decisive struggle
      would call this abortion a “decisive victory over tsarism”? It
      is possible that, at the worst, not only will we not win a
      republic, but that even the constitution we will get will be an
      illusory one, a constitution “à la

      Shipov”,[9]

      but would it
      be pardonable for a Social-Democrat to obscure our slogan of a
      republic?
    

      Of course the

      new-Iskraists 

      have not as yet gone so far as to obscure it. But the degree to
      which the revolutionary

 

      spirit has fled from them, the degree to which lifeless pedantry has
      blinded them to the militant tasks of the moment is most vividly
      shown by the fact that in their resolution they, of all things,
      forgot to say a word about the republic. It is incredible, but
      it is a fact. All the slogans of Social-Democracy were endorsed,
      repeated, explained and presented in detail in the various
      resolutions of the Conference—even the election of shop
      stewards and deputies by the workers was not forgotten, but in a
      resolution on a provisional revolutionary government they simply
      did not find occasion to mention the republic. To talk of the
      “victory” of the people’s insurrection, of the establishment of
      a provisional government, and not to indicate what relation
      these “steps” and acts have to the winning of a
      republic—means writing a resolution not for the guidance of
      the proletarian struggle, but for the purpose of hobbling along
      at the tail end of the proletarian movement.
    

      To sum up: the first part of the resolution

      1) gave no explanation whatever of the
      significance of a provisional revolutionary government from the
      standpoint of the struggle for a republic and of securing a
      genuinely popular and genuinely constituent assembly;

      2) confused the democratic consciousness of the
      proletariat by placing on a par with a decisive victory of the
      revolution over tsarism a state of affairs in which precisely
      the main requisite for a real victory is lacking.
    
 

Notes
 

[1] 
The full text of this resolution can be reconstructed by the reader
from the quotations given on pp. 400, 403, 407, 431, and 433 of the
pamphlet. (Author’s note to the 1907 edition. See pp. 32-33, 38-39, 44, 78,
82 of this volume.–Ed.)  —Lenin

[2] 
We cite this resolution in full.

“The Congress places on record that since the time of the Party’s fight
against Economism, certain trends have survived in the R.S.D.L.P. which, in
various degrees and respects, are akin to Economism and which betray a
common tendency to belittle the importance of the elements of consciousness
in the proletarian struggle, and to subordinate it to the element of
spontaneity. On questions of organisation, the representatives of these
trends put forward, in theory, the organisation-as-a-process principle,
which is out of harmony with methodical Party work, while in practice they
systematically deviate from Party discipline in very many cases, and in
other cases preach to the least enlightened section of the Party the idea
of a wide application of the elective principle, without taking into
consideration the objective conditions of Russian life, and so strive to
undermine the only basis for Party ties that is possible at the present
time. In tactical questions they betray a striving to narrow the scope of
Party work, declaring their opposition to the Party pursuing completely
independent tactics in relation to the liberal-bourgeois parties, denying
that it is possible and desirable for our Party to assume the role of
organiser in the people’s insurrection and opposing the participation of
the Party in a provisional democratic revolutionary government under any
conditions whatsoever.  

“The Congress instructs all Party members everywhere to conduct an
energetic ideological struggle against such partial deviations from the
principles of revolutionary Social-Democracy; at the same time, however, it
is of the opinion that persons who share such views to any degree may
belong to Party organisations on the indispensable condition that they
recognise the Party congresses and the Party Rules and wholly submit to
Party discipline.” (Author’s note to the 1907 edition.–Ed.)  
—Lenin

[3] 
National Assembly.–Ed.—Lenin

[4] 
The following is the text of this resolution on the attitude towards
    the tactics of the government on the eve of the revolution: 

“Whereas for purposes of self-preservation the government during
      the present revolutionary period, while intensifying the usual
      measures of repression directed mainly against the class-conscious
      elements of the proletariat, at the same time

      1) tries by means of concessions and promises of reform to corrupt
      the working class politically and thereby to divert it from the
      revolutionary struggle;

      2) with the same object clothes its hypocritical policy of
      concessions in pseudo-democratic forms, beginning with an invitation
      to the workers to elect their representatives to commissions and
      conferences and ending with the establishment of a travesty of
      popular representation, something like the so-called Zemsky Sobor;

      3) organises the so-called

      Black Hundreds[10]

      and incites against the revolution all those elements of the people
      in general who are reactionary, ignorant or blinded by racial or
      religious hatred: 

“The Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. resolves to call on all Party
      organisations: 

“a) while exposing the reactionary purpose of the
      government’s concessions, to emphasise in their propaganda and
      agitation the fact that, on the one hand, these concessions were
      granted under compulsion, and, on the other, that it is absolutely
      impossible for the autocracy to grant reforms satisfactory to the
      proletariat; 

“b) taking advantage of the election campaign, to
      explain to the

   

      workers the real significance of the government’s measures and to
      show that it is necessary for the proletariat to convene by
      revolutionary means a constituent assembly on the basis of universal
      and equal suffrage, direct elections and secret ballot; 

“c) to organise the proletariat for the immediate
      realisation, in a revolutionary way, of the eight-hour working day
      and of the other immediate demands of the working class; 

“d) to organise armed resistance to the actions of
the Black
Hundreds, and generally, of all reactionary elements led by the
government.” (Author’s note to the 1907
edition.–Ed.) —Lenin

[5] 
The newspaper Vperyod, published in Geneva, began to appear in
January 1905 as the organ of the Bolshevik section of the Party. From
January to May, eighteen issues appeared. After May, by virtue of the
decision of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
Party, the Proletary was issued in place of the Vperyod
as the central organ of the R.S.D.L.P. (This Congress took place in London
May, the Mensheviks did not appear; they organised their own “Conference”
in Geneva.) (Author’s note to the 1907
edition.–Ed.) —Lenin
 



[6] 
PLACEHOLDER




[7] 
PLACEHOLDER




[8] 
PLACEHOLDER




[10] 
PLACEHOLDER




[9] 
      A constitution à La Shipov — Lenin’s name for the
      draft of state structure drawn up by D. Shipov, a moderate
      liberal leader of the Zemstvos’
      Right wing. In an attempt to curb the sweep of the revolution
      and also to obtain certain concessions from the tsarist
      government in favour of the Zemstvos, Shipov proposed the
      creation of an advisory representative body under the tsar. By a
      deal of this kind the moderate liberals wanted to preserve the
      monarchy, while winning certain political rights for
      themselves.
    

 
  

What Can We Learn From the Resolution of 
the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. on a Provisional Revolutionary Government?

|

The Abolition of the Monarchist System 
and the Republic

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Abolition of the Monarch. The Republic




Lenin: Two Tactics: The Abolition of the Monarchist System and the Republic








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in 
the Democratic Revolution



4.
The Abolition of the Monarchist System and the
Republic

      Let us go over to the next section of the resolution:

      “...in either case such a victory will inaugurate a new phase
      in the revolutionary epoch.
    


      “The final abolition of the whole regime of the monarchy and the
      social estates in the process of mutual struggle between the
      elements of politically emancipated bourgeois society for the
      satisfaction of their social interests and for the direct
      acquisition of power—such is the task in this new phase
      which the objective conditions of social development
      spontaneously evoke.
    


      “Therefore, a provisional government that would under take to
      carry out the tasks of this revolution, bourgeois in its
      historical nature, would, in regulating the mutual struggle
      between antagonistic classes of a nation in the process of
      emancipation, not only have to advance revolutionary
      development, but also to combat factors in that development
      threatening the foundations of the capitalist system.”
    


      Let us examine this section which forms an independent part of
      the resolution. The basic idea in the arguments quoted above
      coincides with the one set forth in the third clause of the
      Congress resolution. However, collation of these parts of the
      two resolutions will at once reveal the following radical
      difference between them. The Congress resolution, which briefly
      describes the social and economic basis of the revolution,
      concentrates attention entirely on the clear-cut struggle of
      classes for definite gains, and places in the fore front the
      militant tasks of the proletariat. The resolution of the
      Conference, which carries a long, nebulous, and confused
      description of the socio-economic basis of the revolution,
      speaks very vaguely about a struggle for definite gains. and
      leaves the militant tasks of the proletariat completely in the
      background. The resolution of the Conference speaks of the old
      order in the process of mutual struggle among the various
      elements of society. The Congress resolution says that we, the
      party of the proletariat, must effect this abolition; that only
      establishment of a democratic republic signifies genuine
      abolition of the old order; that we must win that republic; that
      we shall fight for it and for complete liberty, not only against
      the autocracy, but also against the bourgeoisie, when it
      attempts (and it will surely do so) to wrest our gains from
      us. The Congress resolution calls on a definite class to wage a
      struggle for a precisely defined immediate aim. The Conference
      resolution discourses on the mutual struggle of various
      forces. One resolution expresses the psychology of active
      struggle, the other that of the passive onlooker; one resounds
      with the call for live action, the other is steeped in lifeless
      pedantry. Both resolutions state that the present revolution is
      only our first step, which will be followed by a second; but
      from this, one resolution draws the conclusion that we must take
      this

 

      first step all the sooner, get it over all the sooner, win
      a republic, mercilessly crush the counter-revolution, and
      prepare the ground for the second step. The other resolution,
      however, oozes, so to speak, with verbose descriptions of the
      first step and (excuse the crude expression) simply masticates
      it. The Congress resolution takes the old, yet eternally new,
      ideas of Marxism (the bourgeois nature of a democratic
      revolution) as a preface or first premise, whence it draws
      conclusions as to the progressive tasks of the progressive
      class, which is fighting both for the democratic and for the
      socialist revolution. The Conference resolution does not go
      beyond the preface, chewing it over and over again, and trying
      to be clever about it.
    

      This is the very distinction which has long divided the Russian
      Marxists into two wings: the moralising and the militant wings
      of the old days of “legal Marxism”, and the economic and
      political wings of the period of the nascent mass movement. From
      the correct Marxist premise concerning the deep economic roots
      of the class struggle in general and of the political struggle
      in particular, the Economists have drawn the singular conclusion
      that we must turn our backs on the political struggle and retard
      its development, narrow its scope, and reduce its aims. The
      political wing, on the contrary, has drawn a different
      conclusion from these same premises, namely, that the deeper the
      roots of our present struggle, the more widely, the more boldly,
      the more resolutely, and with greater initiative must we wage
      this struggle. We have the very same controversy before us now,
      only under different circumstances and in a different form. From
      the premises that a democratic revolution is far from being a
      socialist revolution, that the poor and needy are by no means
      the only ones to be “interested” in it, that it is deeply rooted
      in the inescapable needs and requirements of the whole
      of bourgeois society—from these premises we draw the
      conclusion that the advanced class must formulate its democratic
      aims all the more boldly, express them all the more sharply and
      completely, put forward the immediate slogan of a republic, and
      popularise the idea of the need to establish a provisional
      revolutionary government and to crush the counter revolution
      ruthlessly. Our opponents, the new-Iskra group,

 

      however, deduce from these very same premises that the democratic
      conclusions should not be expressed fully, that the republic may
      be omitted from the practical slogans, that we can refrain from
      popularising the idea of the need for a provisional
      revolutionary government, that a mere decision to convene a
      constituent assembly can be termed
      a decisive victory, that there is no need to advance the task of
      combating counter-revolution as our active aim, so that it may
      be submerged in a nebulous (and, as we shall presently see,
      wrongly formulated) reference to a “process of mutual
      struggle”. This is not the language of political leaders, but of
      archive fogeys.
    

      The more closely one examines the various formulations in the
      resolution of the

      new-Iskra group, 

      the clearer its aforementioned basic features become. We are told, for in
      stance, of a “process of mutual struggle between the elements of
      politically emancipated bourgeois society”. Bearing in mind the
      subject this resolution deals with (a provisional revolutionary
      government) one asks in astonishment, “If you are referring to
      the process of mutual struggle, how can you keep silent about
      the elements which are politically enslaving bourgeois
      society? Do the ’conferees’ really imagine that, since they have
      assumed the revolution will be victorious, these elements have
      already disappeared?” Such an idea would be absurd in general
      and an expression of the greatest political naíveté
      and political short-sightedness in particular. After the
      revolution’s victory over counter revolution the latter will not
      disappear; on the contrary, it will inevitably start a new and
      even more desperate struggle. Since the purpose of our
      resolution is to analyse the tasks that will confront us when
      the revolution is victorious, it is our duty to devote
      tremendous attention to the tasks of repelling
      counter-revolutionary attacks (as is done in the Congress
      resolution), and not to submerge these immediate, urgent, and
      vital political tasks of a militant party in general discussions
      on what will happen after the present revolutionary
      period, or what will happen when a “politically emancipated
      society” already exists. Just as the Economists would, by
      repeating the truism that politics are subordinated to
      economics, cover up their incapacity to understand urgent
      political tasks, so the newIskra-ists,

 

      by repeating the
      general truism that struggles will take place in a politically
      emancipated society, cover up their failure to
      understand the urgent revolutionary tasks of the political
      emancipation of this society.
    

      Take the expression “the final abolition of the whole regime of
      social estates and the monarchy.” In plain language, the final
      abolition of the monarchist system means the establishment of a
      democratic republic. But our good Martynov and his admirers
      think that this expression is far too simple and clear. They
      insist on rendering it “more profound” and saying it more
      “cleverly.” As a result, we get, on the one hand, ridiculous and
      vain efforts to appear profound; on the other hand, we get a
      description instead of a slogan, a sort of melancholy looking
      backward instead of a stirring appeal to march forward. We get
      the impression, not of living people eager to fight for a
      republic here and now, but of fossilised mummies who, sub
      specie

  aeternitatis,[1]

      consider the question from the standpoint of
      plusquamperfectum

      viewpoint. 


      Let us proceed further: “... the provisional government
      ... would undertake to carry out the tasks of this
      ... bourgeois revolution.” ...Here we see at once the
      result of the fact that our “Conferencers” have overlooked a
      concrete question which confronts the political leaders of the
      proletariat. The concrete question of a provisional
      revolutionary government was obscured from their field of vision
      by the question of the future series of governments which will
      carry out the aims of the bourgeois revolution in general. If
      you want to consider the question “historically,” the example of
      any European country will show you that it was a series of
      governments, not by any means “provisional,” that carried out
      the historical aims of the bourgeois revolution, that even the
      governments which defeated the revolution were nonetheless
      forced to carry out the historical aims of that defeated
      revolution. But what is called a “provisional revolutionary
      government” is something altogether different from what you are
      referring to: that is the name given to the government of a
      revolutionary epoch, which directly replaces the overthrown
      government and rests on the insurrection of the people,

 

      and not on some kind of representative institutions coming from the
      people. A provisional revolutionary government is the organ of
      struggle for the immediate victory of the revolution, for
      immediately repelling counter-revolutionary attempts, and not by
      any means an organ for carrying out the historical aims of the
      bourgeois revolution in general. Gentlemen, let us leave it to
      the future historians of a future Russkaya

      Starina[2]

      to determine exactly what aims of the bourgeois
      revolution we, or this or that government, shall have
      achieved—there will be time enough to do that thirty years
      from now; at present we must put forward slogans and give
      practical directives for the struggle for a republic and for the
      proletariat’s most active participation in this struggle.
    

      For the reasons stated, the final propositions in the forgoing
      section of the resolution which we have quoted above are also
      unsatisfactory. The expression that the provisional government
      would have to “regulate” the mutual struggle among the
      antagonistic classes is exceedingly inapt, or at any rate
      awkwardly put; Marxists should not use such liberal,
      Osvobozhdeniye formulations, which lead one to believe
      that it is possible to have governments which serve not as
      organs of the class struggle but as its “regulators”. . . . The
      government would “not only have to push revolutionary
      development further forward but also fight against those of its
      factors which threaten the foundations of the capitalist
      system.” But it is the proletariat, the very same in whose name
      the resolution is speaking, that constitutes this “factor”!
      Instead of indicating just how the proletariat should “push
      revolutionary development further forward” at the present time
      (push it further than the constitutionalist bourgeois would care
      to go), instead of advice to prepare definite ways and means of
      combating the bourgeoisie when the latter turns against the
      conquests of the revolution, we are offered a general
      description of a process, which does not say a word about the
      concrete aims of our activity. The new
      Iskra-ist method of expressing its views reminds one of
      Marx’s opinion (in his famous “theses” on
      Feuerbach) of the old materialism, which was alien to the
      ideas of dialectics. The philosophers have only
      interpreted the world, in various ways, said Marx, the
      point, however, is to change

      it.[3]

      Similarly, the new-Iskraists 

      can

 

      give a tolerable description and explanation
      of the process of struggle which is taking place before their
      eyes, but they are altogether incapable of giving a correct
      slogan for this struggle. Good marchers but bad leaders, they
      belittle the materialist conception of history by ignoring the
      active, leading and guiding part in history which can and must
      be played by parties that understand the material prerequisites
      of a revolution and that have placed themselves at the head of
      the progressive classes.

 

Notes
 

[1] 
From the viewpoint of eternity (Latin).—Ed.
 



[2] 
PLACEHOLDER




[3] 
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

What Is A “Decisive Victory of the 
Revolution Over Tsarism”?

|

How Should “The Revolution Be Pushed 
Forward”?

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## How Should “The Revolution Be
  Advanced”




Lenin: Two Tactics: How Should 'The Revolution Be Pushed Forward'?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in
the Democratic Revolution



5.
How Should “The Revolution Be Pushed
Forward”?

      Let us quote the next section of the resolution:
    


      “Under such conditions, Social-Democracy must strive to maintain
      during the whole course of the revolution, a position which will
      best of all secure for it the possibility of pushing the
      revolution forward, which will not tie the hands of
      Social-Democracy in its struggle against the inconsistent and
      self-seeking policy of the bourgeois parties and which will
      preserve it from being merged in bourgeois democracy.
    

      “Therefore, Social-Democracy must not set itself the aim of
      seizing or sharing power in the provisional government, but must
      remain the party of extreme revolutionary opposition.”
    


      The advice to occupy a position which best ensures the
      possibility of advancing the revolution pleases us very much
      indeed. We would only desire that this piece of good advice
      should be accompanied by a direct indication as to how
      Social-Democracy should further advance the revolution right
      now, in the present political situation, in a period of rumours,
      conjectures, and talk and schemes about the convocation of the
      people’s representatives. Can the revolution now be further
      advanced by those who fail to understand the danger of the
      Osvobozhdeniye theory of “compromise” between the
      people and the tsar, by those who call a mere “decision” to
      convene a constituent assembly a victory, who do not set
      themselves the task of carrying on active propaganda of the idea
      of the need for a provisional revolutionary government, or who
      leave the slogan of a democratic republic in the background?
      Such people actually


pull the revolution back, because,
      as far as practical politics are concerned, they have
      stopped at the level of the Osvobozhdeniye stand. What
      is the use of their recognising a programme which demands that
      the autocracy be replaced by a republic, if in a resolution on
      tactics that defines the Party’s present and immediate tasks in
      the period of revolution they omit the slogan of a struggle for
      a republic? It is the Osvobozhdeniye position, the
      position of the constitutionalist bourgeoisie, that is now
      actually characterised by the fact that a decision to convene a
      popular constituent assembly is considered a decisive victory,
      while a prudent silence is maintained on the subject of a
      provisional revolutionary government and a republic! To
      advance the revolution, to take it beyond the limits to
      which the monarchist bourgeoisie advances it, it is necessary
      actively to produce, emphasise, and bring into the forefront
      slogans that will preclude the “inconsistency” of
      bourgeois democracy. At present there are only two such
      slogans:

      1) a provisional revolutionary government, and

      2) a republic, because the slogan of a popular constituent assembly
      has been accepted by the monarchist bourgeoisie (see
      the programme of the Osvobozhdeniye League) and
      accepted for the very purpose of devitalising the revolution,
      preventing its complete victory, and enabling the big
      bourgeoisie to strike a huckster’s bargain with tsarism. And now
      we see that of the two slogans, which alone are capable of
      advancing the revolution, the Conference completely forgot the
      slogan of a republic, and plainly put the slogan of a
      provisional revolutionary government on a par with the
      Osvobozhdeniye slogan of a popular constituent
      assembly, calling both the one and the other “a decisive victory
      of the revolution”!!
    

      Indeed, such is the undoubted fact, which, we are sure, will
      serve as a landmark for the future historian of Russian
      Social-Democracy. The Conference of Social-Democrats held in May
      1905 passed a resolution which contains fine words about the
      necessity of advancing the democratic revolution, but in fact
      pulls it back and goes no farther than the democratic slogans of
      the monarchist bourgeoisie.
    

      The 
      new-Iskra 

      group likes to accuse us of ignoring the
      danger of the proletariat becoming dissolved in bourgeois

 

      democracy. We should like to see the person who would undertake
      to prove this charge on the basis of the text of the resolutions
      passed by the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic
      Labour Party. Our reply to our opponents is—a
      Social-Democratic Party which operates in a bourgeois society
      cannot take part in politics without marching, in certain cases,
      side by side with bourgeois democracy. The difference
      between us in this respect is that we march side by side with
      the revolutionary and republican bourgeoisie, without merging
      with it, whereas you march side by side with the liberal and
      the monarchist bourgeoisie, without merging with it
      either. That is how matters stand.


      The tactical slogans you have formulated in the name of the
      Conference coincide with the slogans of the
      “Constitutional-Democratic” Party, i.e., the party of the
      monarchist bourgeoisie; moreover, you have not even noticed
      or realised this coincidence, thus actually following in the
      wake of the Osvobozhdeniye fraternity.


      The tactical slogans we have formulated in the name of the Third
      Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party coincide
      with the slogans of the democratic-revolutionary and republican
      bourgeoisie. In Russia this bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie
      have not yet formed themselves into a big people’s

party.[1]

      But only one
      who is utterly ignorant of what is now taking place in Russia
      can doubt that elements of such a party exist. We intend to
      guide (if the great Russian revolution makes progress) not only
      the proletariat, organised by the Social-Democratic Party, but
      also this petty bourgeoisie, which is capable of marching side
      by side with us.
    

      Through its resolution the Conference unconsciously
      descends to the level of the liberal and monarchist
      bourgeoisie. The Party Congress in its resolution consciously
      raises to its own level those elements of the
      revolutionary democracy

 

      that are capable of waging a struggle and not of acting as brokers.
    

      Such elements are mostly to be found among the peasants. In
      classifying the big social groups according to their political
      tendencies we can, without danger of serious error, identify
      revolutionary and republican democracy with the mass of the
      peasants—of course, in the same sense and with the same
      reservations and implied conditions as we can identify the
      working class with Social-Democracy. In other words, we can also
      formulate our conclusions in the following terms: in a
      revolutionary period the Conference in its

national-wide[2]
political slogans unconsciously descends to the level
      of the mass of the landlords. The Party Congress in its
      national political slogans raises the peasant masses to the
      revolutionary level. We challenge anyone who because of
      this conclusion may accuse us of evincing a penchant for
      paradoxes, to refute the proposition that if we are not strong
      enough to bring the revolution to a successful conclusion, if
      the revolution terminates in a “decisive victory” in the
      Osvobozhdentsi sense, i.e., exclusively in the form of
      a representative assembly convened by the tsar, which could be
      called a constituent assembly only in derision—then this
      will be a revolution in which the landlord and big
      bourgeois element will preponderate. On the other hand, if
      we are destined to live through a really great revolution, if
      history prevents a “miscarriage” this time, if we are strong
      enough to carry the revolution to a successful conclusion, to a
      decisive victory, not in the Osvobozhdeniye or the new
      Iskra sense of the word, then it will be a revolution
      in which the peasant and proletarian element will preponderate.
    

      Some people may, perhaps, interpret our admission that such a
      preponderance is possible as a renunciation of the view that the
      impending revolution will be bourgeois in character. This is
      very likely, considering how this concept is misused in the
      Iskra. For this reason it will not be at all
      superfluous to dwell on this question.
    

 

Notes
 

[1] 
The Socialist-Revolutionaries are a terrorist group of intellectuals
rather than the embryo of such a party, although the objective significance
of this group’s activities can be reduced to this very task of achieving
the aims of the revolutionary and republican bourgeoisie.  —Lenin

[2] 
We are not referring here to the special peasant slogans which were
dealt with in separate resolutions.  —Lenin
 

 
  

The Abolition of the Monarchist System and the Republic

|

From what Direction is the Proletariat Threatened with the Danger of Having its Hands Tied in the Struggle Against the Inconsistent Bourgeoisie?

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Proletariat Threatened
  with the
  Danger of Finding Itself with Its Hands Tied in the
  Struggle Against the Inconsistent Bourgeoisie




Lenin: Two Tactics: From what Direction is the Proletariat Threatened 
with the Danger of Having its Hands Tied in the Struggle Against the Inconsistent 
Bourgeoisie?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in 
the Democratic Revolution



6.
From what Direction is the Proletariat Threatened with
      the Danger of Having its Hands Tied in the Struggle Against the
      Inconsistent Bourgeoisie?

      Marxists are absolutely convinced of the bourgeois character of
      the Russian revolution. What does this mean? It means that the
      democratic reforms in the political system and the social and
      economic reforms, which have become a necessity for Russia, do
      not in themselves imply the undermining of capitalism, the
      undermining of bourgeois rule; on the contrary, they will, for
      the first time, really clear the ground for a wide and rapid,
      European, and not Asiatic, development of capitalism; they will,
      for the first time, make it possible for the bourgeoisie to rule
      as a class. The Socialist-Revolutionaries cannot grasp this
      idea, for they are ignorant of the rudiments of the laws of
      development of commodity and capitalist production; they fail to
      see that even the complete success of a peasant insurrection,
      even the redistribution of the whole of the land for the benefit
      of the peasants and in accordance with their desires (“Black
      Redistribution” or something of that kind), will not destroy
      capitalism at all, but will, on the contrary, give an impetus to
      its development and hasten the class disintegration of the
      peasantry itself. The failure to grasp this truth makes the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries unconscious ideologists of the petty
      bourgeoisie. Insistence on this truth is of enormous importance
      for Social-Democracy, not only from the theoretical standpoint
      but also from the standpoint of practical politics, for from it
      follows that the complete class independence of the party of the
      proletariat in the present “general democratic” movement is
      obligatory.
    

      But it does not at all follow from this that a
      democratic revolution (bourgeois in its social and
      economic substance) is not of enormous interest for the
      proletariat. It does not at all follow from this that the
      democratic revolution cannot take place in a form advantageous
      mainly to the big capitalist, the financial magnate and the
      “enlightened” landlord, as well as in a form advantageous to the
      peasant and to the worker.
    

      The new-Iskraists thoroughly misunderstand the meaning and
      significance of the category: bourgeois revolution.

 

      Through their arguments there constantly runs the idea that a bourgeois
      revolution is a revolution which can be advantageous only to the
      bourgeoisie. And yet nothing is more erroneous than such an
      idea. A bourgeois revolution is a
      revolution which does not go beyond the limits of the bourgeois,
      i.e., capitalist, social and economic system. A bourgeois
      revolution expresses the need for the development of capitalism,
      and far from destroying the foundations of capitalism, it does
      the opposite, it broadens and deepens them. This revolution
      therefore expresses the interests not only of the working class,
      but of the entire bourgeoisie as well. Since the rule of the
      bourgeoisie over the working class is inevitable under
      capitalism, it is quite correct to say that a bourgeois
      revolution expresses the interests not so much of the
      proletariat as of the bourgeoisie. But it is entirely absurd to
      think that a bourgeois revolution does not express the interests
      of the proletariat at all. This absurd idea boils down either to
      the hoary Narodnik theory that a bourgeois revolution runs
      counter to the interests of the proletariat, and that therefore
      we do not need bourgeois political liberty; or to anarchism,
      which rejects all participation of the proletariat in bourgeois
      politics, in a bourgeois revolution and in bourgeois
      parliamentarism. From the standpoint of theory, this idea
      disregards the elementary propositions of Marxism concerning the
      inevitability of capitalist development where commodity
      production exists. Marxism teaches that a society which is based
      on commodity production, and which has commercial intercourse
      with civilised capitalist nations, at a certain stage of its
      development, itself, inevitably takes the road of
      capitalism. Marxism has irrevocably broken with the ravings of
      the Narodniks and the anarchists to the effect that Russia, for
      instance, can avoid capitalist development, jump out of
      capitalism, or skip over it and proceed along some path other
      than the path of the class struggle on the basis and within the
      framework of this same capitalism.



      All these principles of
      Marxism have been proved and explained over and over again in
      minute detail in general and with regard to Russia in
      particular. And from these principles it follows that the idea
      of seeking salvation for the working class in anything save the
      further development of capitalism is reactionary. In
      countries like Russia, the working class suffers not so much
      from capitalism as from the insufficient development of
      capitalism. The working class

 

suffers not so much from capitalism as from the insufficient
development of capitalism. 

The working class 

is therefore decidedly
      interested in the broadest, freest and most rapid
      development of capitalism. The removal of all the remnants of
      the old order which are hampering the broad, free and rapid
      development of capitalism is of decided advantage to the working
      class. The bourgeois revolution is precisely a revolution that
      most resolutely sweeps away the survivals of the past, the
      remnants of serfdom (which include not only autocracy but
      monarchy as well) and most fully guarantees the broadest, freest
      and most rapid development of capitalism.
    

      That is why a bourgeois revolution is in the
      highest degree advantageous to the proletariat. A bourgeois
      revolution is absolutely necessary in the interests of
      the proletariat. The more complete and determined, the more
      consistent the bourgeois revolution, the more assured will be
      the proletarian struggle against the bourgeoisie for
      Socialism. Only those who are ignorant of the rudiments of
      scientific Socialism can regard this conclusion as new or
      strange, paradoxical. And from this conclusion, among other
      things, follows the thesis that, in a certain sense, a
      bourgeois revolution is more advantageous to the
      proletariat than to the bourgeoisie. This thesis is
      unquestionably correct in the following sense: it is to the
      advantage of the bourgeoisie to rely on certain remnants of the
      past as against the proletariat, for instance, on the monarchy,
      the standing army, etc. It is to the advantage of the
      bourgeoisie if the bourgeois revolution does not too resolutely
      sweep away all the remnants of the past, but leaves some of
      them, i.e., if this revolution is not fully consistent, if it is
      not complete and if it is not determined and
      relentless. Social-Democrats often express this idea somewhat
      differently by stating that the bourgeoisie betrays its own
      self, that the bourgeoisie betrays the cause of liberty, that
      the bourgeoisie is incapable of being consistently
      democratic. It is of greater advantage to the bourgeoisie if the
      necessary changes in the direction of bourgeois democracy take
      place more slowly, more gradually, more cautiously, less
      resolutely, by means of reforms and not by means of revolution;
      if these changes spare the “venerable” institutions of serfdom
      (such as

 

      the monarchy) as much as possible; if these changes
      develop as little as possible the independent revolutionary
      activity, initiative and energy of the common people, i.e., the
      peasantry and especially the workers, for otherwise it will be
      easier for the workers, as the French say, “to hitch the rifle
      from one shoulder to the other,” i.e., to turn against the
      bourgeoisie the guns which the bourgeois revolution will place
      in their hands, the liberty which the revolution will bring, the
      democratic institutions which will spring up on the ground that
      is cleared of serfdom.
    

      On the other hand, it is more advantageous for the working class
      if the necessary changes in the direction of bourgeois democracy
      take place by way of revolution and not by way of reform; for
      the way of reform is the way of delay, of procrastination, of
      the painfully slow decomposition of the putrid parts of the
      national organism. It is the proletariat and the peasantry that
      suffer first of all and most of all from their putrefaction. The
      revolutionary way is the way of quick amputation, which is the
      least painful to the proletariat, the way of the direct removal
      of the decomposing parts, the way of fewest concessions to and
      least consideration for the monarchy and the disgusting, vile,
      rotten and contaminating institutions which go with it.
    

      So it is not only because of the censorship, not only “for fear
      of the Jews,” that our bourgeois-liberal press deplores the
      possibility of a revolutionary way, is afraid of revolution,
      tries to frighten the tsar with the bogey of revolution, is
      anxious to avoid revolution, grovels and toadies for the sake of
      miserable reforms as a basis for a reformist way. This
      standpoint is shared not only by the Russkiye

      Vedomosti,[5]
Syn

      Otechestva,[6]
Nasha

      Zhizn[7]

      and Nashi

      Dni,[8]

      but also by the illegal, uncensored
      Osvobozhdeniye. The very position the bourgeoisie
      occupies as a class in capitalist society inevitably causes it
      to be inconsistent in a democratic revolution. The very position
      the proletariat occupies as a class compels it to be
      consistently democratic. The bourgeoisie looks backward, fearing
      democratic progress, which threatens to strengthen the
      proletariat. The proletariat has nothing to lose but its chains,
      but with the aid of democracy it has the whole world to
      gain. That is why the more consistent the bourgeois revolution
      is in

      achieving 
 

      its democratic changes, the less will it limit itself to
      what is of advantage exclusively to the bourgeoisie. The more
      consistent the bourgeois revolution, the more does it guarantee
      the proletariat and the peasantry the benefits accruing from the
      democratic revolution.
    

      Marxism teaches the proletarian not to keep aloof from the
      bourgeois revolution, not to be indifferent to it, not to allow
      the leadership of the revolution to be assumed by the
      bourgeoisie but, on the contrary, to take a most energetic
      part in it, to fight most resolutely for consistent proletarian
      democracy, for carrying the revolution to its conclusion. We
      cannot jump out of the bourgeois-democratic boundaries of the
      Russian revolution, but we can vastly extend these boundaries,
      and within these boundaries we can and must fight for the
      interests of the proletariat, for its immediate needs and for
      the conditions that will make it possible to prepare its forces
      for the future complete victory. There is bourgeois democracy
      and bourgeois democracy. The Zemstvo
      monarchist who favours an upper chamber, and who “asks” for
      universal suffrage while secretly, on the sly, striking a
      bargain with tsarism for a curtailed constitution, is also a
      bourgeois-democrat. And the peasant who is fighting, arms in
      hand, against the landlords and the government officials and
      with a “naïve republicanism” proposes “to send the tsar

      packing”,[1]

      is also a bourgeois-democrat. There are bourgeois-democratic
      regimes like the one in Germany and also in England, like the
      one in Austria and also like those in America or Switzerland. He
      would be a fine Marxist indeed, who in a period of democratic
      revolution failed to see the difference between the degrees of
      democracy, the difference of its various forms and confined
      himself to “clever” remarks to the effect that, after all, this
      is “a bourgeois revolution,” the fruits of a “bourgeois
      revolution.”
    

      Our new-Iskraists are just such clever fellows flaunting their
      shortsightedness. They confine themselves to disquisitions on
      the bourgeois character of the revolution just when and where it
      is necessary to be able to draw a distinction between
      republican-revolutionary and monarchist-liberal

 

      bourgeois democracy, to say nothing of the distinction between
      inconsistent bourgeois democratism and consistent proletarian
      democratism. They are satisfied—as if they had really
      become like the “man in the

      muffler”[9]—to

      converse dolefully about a “process of mutual struggle of
      antagonistic classes,”
      when the question is one of giving democratic
      leadership in the present revolution, of emphasising
      progressive democratic slogans as distinguished from
      the treacherous slogans of Mr. Struve and Co., of bluntly and
      straight forwardly stating the immediate aims of the really
      revolutionary struggle of the proletariat and the peasantry, as
      distinguished from the liberal haggling of the landlords and
      factory owners. Such now is the gist of the matter, which you,
      gentlemen, have missed: will our revolution result in a real,
      immense victory, or merely in a wretched deal, will it go so far
      as the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat
      and the peasantry, or will it “peter out” in a liberal
      constitution à la Shipov?
    

      At first sight it may appear that in raising this question we
      are deviating entirely from our subject. But this may appear to
      be so only at first sight. As a matter of fact, it is precisely
      this question that lies at the root of the difference in
      principle which has already become clearly marked between the
      Social-Democratic tactics of the Third Congress of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party and the tactics initiated by the
      Conference of the new Iskra supporters. The latter have
      already taken not two but three steps back, resurrecting the
      mistakes of Economism in solving problems that are incomparably
      more complex, more important and more vital to the workers’
      party, viz., questions of its tactics in time of
      revolution. That is why we must analyse the question we have
      raised with all due attention.
    

      The above-quoted section of the new-Iskraists resolution which
      we have quoted above points to the danger of Social-Democracy
      tying its hands in the struggle against the inconsistent policy
      of the bourgeoisie, of its becoming dissolved in bourgeois
      democracy. The idea of this danger runs like a thread through
      all the literature typical of the new Iskra, it is the
      real pivot of the principle involved in our Party split (ever
      since the elements of squabbling in this split were wholly
      eclipsed by the elements of a turn towards

 

      Economism). And
      without any equivocation we admit that this danger really
      exists, that just at the present time, at the height of the
      Russian revolution, this danger has become particularly
      grave. The pressing and extremely responsible duty that devolves
      on all of us theoreticians or—as I should prefer to say of
      myself— publicists of Social-Democracy, is to find out
      from what direction this danger actually threatens. For
      the source of our disagreement is not a dispute as to whether
      such a danger exists, but the dispute as to whether it is caused
      by the so-called

      khvostism 

      of the “Minority” or the
      so-called revolutionism of the “Majority.”
    

      To remove all misinterpretations and misunderstandings, let us
      first of all note that the danger to which we are referring lies
      not in the subjective, but in the objective aspect of the
      matter, not in the formal position which Social-Democracy will
      take in the struggle, but in the material outcome of the entire
      present revolutionary struggle. The question is not whether this
      or that Social-Democratic group will want to dissolve in
      bourgeois democracy or whether they are conscious of the fact
      that they are merging. Nobody suggests that. We do not suspect
      any Social-Democrat of harbouring such a desire, and this is not
      at all a question of desires. Nor is it a question of whether
      this or that Social-Democratic group will formally retain its
      separate identity, individuality and independence of bourgeois
      democracy throughout the course of the revolution. They may not
      only proclaim such “independence” but even retain it formally,
      and yet it may turn out that their hands will
      nonetheless be tied in the struggle against the inconsistency of
      the bourgeoisie. The final political result of the revolution
      may prove to be that, in spite of the formal “independence” of
      Social-Democracy, in spite of its complete organisational
      individuality as a separate party, it will in fact not be
      independent, it will not be able to put the imprint of its
      proletarian independence on the course of events, will prove so
      weak that, on the whole and in the last analysis, its
      “dissolving” in the bourgeois democracy will nonetheless be a
      historical fact.
    

      That is what constitutes the real danger. Now let us see from
      what direction the danger threatens: from the fact that
      Social-Democracy as represented by the new Iskra
 

      is deviating to the Right—as we believe; or from the fact that
      Social-Democracy as represented by the “Majority,” the
      Vperyod, etc., is deviating to the Left—as the
      new-Iskraists believe.
    

      The answer to this question, as we have pointed out, depends on
      the objective combination of the actions of the various social
      forces. The character of these forces has been defined
      theoretically by the Marxian analysis of Russian life; at the
      present time it is being defined in practice by the open action
      of groups and classes in the course of the revolution. Thus, the
      entire theoretical analysis made by the Marxists long before the
      period we are now passing through, as well as all the practical
      observations of the development of revolutionary events, show
      that from the standpoint of objective conditions there are two
      possible courses and outcomes of the revolution in Russia. A
      change in the economic and political system in Russia along
      bourgeois-democratic lines is inevitable and unavoidable. No
      power on earth can prevent such a change. But the combined
      actions of the existing forces which are effecting that change
      may result in one of two things, may bring about one of two
      forms of that change. Either 1) the result will be a “decisive
      victory of the revolution over tsarism,” or 2) the forces will
      be inadequate for a decisive victory and the matter will end in
      a deal between tsarism and the most “inconsistent” and most
      “self-seeking” elements of the bourgeoisie. By and large all the
      infinite variety of detail and combinations, which no one is
      able to foresee, lead to one or the other.
    

      Let us now consider these two outcomes, first, from the
      standpoint of their social significance and, secondly, from the
      standpoint of the position of Social-Democracy (its “dissolving”
      or “having its hands tied”) in one or the other case.
    

      What is a “decisive victory of the revolution over tsarism”? We
      have already seen that in using this expression the
      new-Iskraists fail to grasp even its immediate political
      significance. Still less do they seem to understand the class
      essence of this concept. Surely, we Marxists must not under any
      circumstances allow ourselves to be deluded by words
      such as “revolution” or “the great Russian revolution,” as do
      many revolutionary democrats (of the

      Gapon
 

      type). We must be perfectly clear in our minds as to what real
      social forces are opposed to “tsarism” (which is a real force,
      perfectly intelligible to all) and are capable of gaining a
      “decisive victory” over it. Such a force cannot be the big
      bourgeoisie, the landlords, the factory owners, “society” which
      follows the lead of the Osvobozhdentsi. We see that
      these do not even want a decisive victory. We know that owing to
      their class position they are incapable of waging a decisive
      struggle against tsarism; they are too heavily fettered by
      private property, capital and land to enter into a decisive
      struggle. They need tsarism with its bureaucratic, police and
      military forces for use against the proletariat and the
      peasantry too much to be able to strive for its destruction. No,
      the only force capable of gaining “a decisive victory over
      tsarism,” is the people, i.e., the proletariat and the
      peasantry, if we take the main, big forces and distribute the
      rural and urban petty bourgeoisie (also part of “the people”)
      between the two. “A decisive victory of the revolution over
      tsarism” is the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the
      proletariat and the peasantry. Our new-Iskraists cannot
      escape from this conclusion, which Vperyod pointed out
      long ago. No one else is capable of gaining a decisive victory
      over tsarism.
    

      And such a victory will be precisely a dictatorship, i.e., it
      must inevitably rely on military force, on the arming of the
      masses, on an insurrection, and not on institutions of one kind
      or another, established in a “lawful” or “peaceful” way. It can
      be only a dictatorship, for the realisation of the changes which
      are urgently and absolutely indispensable for the proletariat
      and the peasantry will call forth the desperate resistance of
      the landlords, of the big bourgeoisie and of tsarism. Without a
      dictatorship it is impossible to break down that resistance and
      to repel the counter-revolutionary attempts. But of course it
      will be a democratic, not a socialist dictatorship. It will not
      be able (without a series of intermediary stages of
      revolutionary development) to affect the foundations of
      capitalism. At best it may bring about a radical redistribution
      of landed property in favour of the peasantry, establish
      consistent and full democracy including the formation of a
      republic, eradicate all the oppressive features of Asiatic
      bondage, not only in village but also in factory life,

 

      lay the foundation for a thorough improvement in the position of the
      workers and for a rise in their standard of living,
      and—last but not least—carry the revolutionary
      conflagration into Europe. Such a victory will by no means as
      yet transform our bourgeois revolution into a socialist
      revolution; the democratic revolution will not directly overstep
      the bounds of bourgeois social and economic relationships;
      nevertheless, the significance of such a victory for the future
      development of Russia and of the whole world will be
      immense. Nothing will raise the revolutionary energy of the
      world proletariat so much, nothing will shorten the path leading
      to its complete victory to such an extent, as this decisive
      victory of the revolution that has now started in Russia.
    

      How far such a victory is probable, is another question. We are
      not in the least inclined to be unreasonably optimistic on that
      score, we do not for a moment forget the immense difficulties of
      this task, but since we are out to fight we must desire victory
      and be able to point out the right road to it. Tendencies
      capable of leading to such a victory undoubtedly exist. True,
      our, Social-Democratic, influence on the masses of the
      proletariat is as yet very, very inadequate; the revolutionary
      influence on the mass of the peasantry is altogether
      insignificant; the proletariat, and especially the peasantry,
      are still frightfully scattered, backward and ignorant. But
      revolution unites quickly and enlightens quickly. Every step in
      its development rouses the masses and attracts them with
      irresistible force to the side of the
      revolutionary program, as the only program that fully and
      consistently expresses their real and vital interests.
    

      According to a law of mechanics, every action produces an equal
      reaction. In history also the destructive force of a revolution
      is to a considerable degree dependent on how strong and
      protracted the suppression of the striving for liberty had been,
      and how profound the contradiction between the antediluvian
      “superstructure” and the living forces of the present epoch. The
      international political situation, too, is in many respects
      shaping itself in a way most advantageous for the Russian
      revolution. The insurrection of the workers and peasants has
      already commenced; it is sporadic, spontaneous,

 

      weak, but it unquestionably and undoubtedly proves the existence of forces
      capable of waging a decisive struggle and marching towards a
      decisive victory.
    

      If these forces prove inadequate, tsarism will have time to
      conclude the deal which is already being prepared on two sides,
      by Messrs. the Bulygins on the one side, and Messrs. the
      Struves, on the other. Then the whole thing will end in a
      curtailed constitution, or, if the worst comes to the worst,
      even in a travesty of a constitution. This will also be a
      “bourgeois revolution,” but it will be a miscarriage, a
      premature birth, a mongrel. Social-Democracy entertains no
      illusions on that score, it knows the treacherous nature of the
      bourgeoisie, it will not lose heart or abandon its persistent,
      patient, sustained work of giving the proletariat class training
      even in the most drab, humdrum days of bourgeois-constitutional,
      “Shipov” bliss. Such an outcome would be more or less similar to
      the outcome of almost all the democratic revolutions in Europe
      during the nineteenth century, and our Party development would
      then proceed along the difficult, hard, long, but familiar and
      beaten track.
    

      The question now arises: in which of these two possible outcomes
      will Social-Democracy find its hands actually tied in the fight
      against the inconsistent and self-seeking bourgeoisie, find
      itself actually “dissolved,” or almost so, in bourgeois
      democracy?
    

      It is sufficient to put this question clearly to have not a
      moment’s difficulty in answering it.
    

      If the bourgeoisie succeeds in frustrating the Russian
      revolution by coming to terms with tsarism, Social-Democracy
      will find its hands actually tied in the fight against the
      inconsistent bourgeoisie; Social-Democracy will find itself
      dissolved “in bourgeois democracy” in the sense that the
      proletariat will not succeed in putting its clear imprint on the
      revolution, will not succeed in settling accounts with tsarism
      in the proletarian or, as Marx once said, “in the plebeian”
      way.
    

      If the revolution gains a decisive victory—then we shall
      settle accounts with tsarism in the Jacobin, or, if you like, in
      the plebeian way. “The whole French terrorism,” wrote Marx in
      1848 in the famous Neue Rheinische Zeitung, “was
      nothing but a plebeian manner of settling accounts with the
      enemies of the bourgeoisie, with absolutism, feudalism

 

      and philistinism” (see Marx, Nachlass, Mehring’s edition,
      Volume III,

      p. 211).[10]

      Have those people who, in a period of a democratic revolution,
      try to frighten the Social-Democratic workers in Russia with the
      bogey of “Jacobinism” ever stopped to think of the significance
      of these words of Marx?
    

      The Girondists of contemporary Russian Social-Democracy, the new
      Iskra-ists, do not merge with the
      Osvobozhdentsi, but in point of fact they, by reason of
      the nature of their slogans, follow at the tail of the
      latter. And the Osvobozhdentsi, i.e., the
      representatives of the liberal bourgeoisie, wish to settle
      accounts with the autocracy gently, in a reformist way, in a
      yielding manner, so as not to offend the aristocracy, the
      nobles, the Court—cautiously, without breaking
      anything—kindly and politely, as befits gentlemen in white
      gloves (like the ones Mr. Petrunkevich borrowed from a

      bashi-bazouk
      to wear at the reception of “representatives of the people”[?]
      held by

      Nicholas
      the

      Bloody[2]

.

      See 
Proletary,

No. 5[3]

).

    

      The Jacobins of contemporary Social-Democracy—the
      Bolsheviks, the Vperyodovtsi, Syezdovtsi,

      Proletartsi
(e.g. supporters of the Vperyod,
      the “Congress” group, or supporters of Proletary)
      — all names given to the Bolsheviks, derived from their
      publication of the two papers mentioned, and
      “Syezdovtsi” because they convened the Third Congress
      of the R.S.D.L.P.

      or whatever we may call them—wish
      by their slogans to raise the revolutionary and republican petty
      bourgeoisie, and especially the peasantry, to the level of the
      consistent democratism of the proletariat, which fully retains
      its individuality as a class. They want the people, i.e., the
      proletariat and the peasantry, to settle accounts with the
      monarchy and the aristocracy in the “plebeian way,” ruthlessly
      destroying the enemies of liberty, crushing their resistance by
      force, making no concessions whatever to the accursed heritage
      of serfdom, of Asiatic barbarism and human degradation.
    

      This, of course, does not mean that we necessarily propose to
      imitate the Jacobins of 1793, to adopt their views, program,
      slogans and methods of action. Nothing of the kind. Our program
      is not an old one, it is a new one—the minimum program of
      the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. We have a new
      slogan: the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the
      proletariat and the peasantry. We shall also have, if we live to
      see a real victory of the revolution,




      new methods of action, in harmony with the nature and aims of
      the working-class party that is striving for a complete
      socialist revolution. By our comparison we merely want to
      explain that the representatives of the progressive class of the
      twentieth century, of the proletariat, i.e., the
      Social-Democrats, are divided into two wings (the opportunist
      and the revolutionary) similar to those into which the
      representatives of the progressive class of the eighteenth
      century, the bourgeoisie, were divided, i.e., the Girondists and
      the Jacobins.
    

      Only in the event of a complete victory of the democratic
      revolution will the proletariat have its hands free in the
      struggle against the inconsistent bourgeoisie, only in that
      event will it not become “dissolved” in bourgeois democracy, but
      will leave its proletarian or rather proletarian-peasant imprint
      on the whole revolution.
    

      In a word, in order to avoid finding itself with its hands tied
      in the struggle against the inconsistent bourgeois democrats,
      the proletariat must be sufficiently class conscious and strong
      to rouse the peasantry to revolutionary consciousness, to direct
      its attack, and thereby to pursue the line of consistent
      proletarian democratism independently.
    

      This is how matters stand with regard to the question, so
      ineptly dealt with by the new Iskragroup, of the
      danger of our hands being tied in the struggle against the
      inconsistent bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie will always be
      inconsistent. There is nothing more naïve and futile than
      attempts to set forth conditions and

points[4]

,

      which if satisfied, would enable us to consider that the bourgeois
      democrat is a sincere friend of the people. Only the proletariat
      can be a consistent fighter for democracy. It may become a
      victorious fighter for democracy only if the peasant masses join
      its revolutionary struggle. If the proletariat is not strong
      enough for this, the bourgeoisie will be at the head of the
      democratic revolution and will impart to it an inconsistent and
      self-seeking nature. Nothing short of a revolutionary-democratic
      dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry can prevent
      this.
    


      Thus, we arrive at the indubitable conclusion that it is
      precisely the new Iskra tactics, by its objective
      significance, that are playing into the hands of the
      bourgeois democrats. Preaching organisational diffusion
      that goes to the length of plebiscites, the principle of
      compromise and the divorcement of Party literature from the
      Party, belittling the aims of armed insurrection, confusing the
      popular political slogans of the revolutionary proletariat with
      those of the monarchist bourgeoisie, distorting the requisites
      for a “decisive victory of the revolution over tsarism”—all
      this taken together constitutes that very policy of
      khvostism in a revolutionary period which perplexes the
      proletariat, disorganises it, confuses its understanding and
      belittles the tactics of Social-Democracy, instead of pointing
      out the only way to victory and of rallying all the
      revolutionary and republican elements of the people to the
      proletariat’s slogan.
    
 *     *  * 

      To bear out this conclusion, reached by us through analysis of
      the resolution, let us approach this same question from other
      angles. Let us see, first, how  in the Georgian
      Sotsial-Demokrat a naïve and outspoken Menshevik
      illustrates the new-Iskra. Secondly, let us see who is
      actually making use of the new Iskra slogans in the
      present political situation.
    
 

Notes
 

[1] 
See the Osvobozbdeniye, No. 71, page 337, footnote 2.  —Lenin

[2]


      A reference to the audience granted to the Zemstvo deputation by
      Nicholas II on June 6, 1905. The deputation handed in a petition
      with the request to convene representatives of the people in
      order to establish a “renewed constitution”. The petition
      contained neither the demand for universal, direct and equal
      suffrage by secret ballot, nor the demand for guaranteed free
      elections.
    —Lenin

[3] 
“‘Revolutionaries’ in Kid Gloves”, 1905. 

      See present edition. Volume 8, pp. 526-30.—Ed.

[4] 
As was attempted by Starover in his resolution, annulled by the Third

      Congress,[11]

      and as is attempted by the Conference in an equally bad resolution.
        —Lenin
 



[5] 
PLACEHOLDER




[6] 
PLACEHOLDER




[7] 
PLACEHOLDER




[8] 
PLACEHOLDER




[9]
The man in the muffler–the chief character in
  Chekhov’s story of the same name, a man
  typifying the narrow-minded philistine who abhors all
  innovations or initiative.




[10] 
  Lenin is referring to the book Aus demm
  literarische,. Nachlass von Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels und
  Ferdinand Lassalle. Heraus gegeben von Franz Mshring,
  Bd. III, Stuttgart 1902, S. 211.

  See K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works, Moscow 1958,
  Vol. I, P. 67  




[11] 
  The reference is to the resolution tabled by Starover (pseudonym of
  the Menshevik

  A.
     N. Potresov)

  on the attitude towards the liberals, which was
  adopted at the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., and was
  criticised by Lenin in the article “Working-Class and Bourgeois
  Democracy” (see present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 72-82).


 
  

How Should “The Revolution Be Pushed 
Forward”?

|

The Tactics of “Eliminating The 
Conservatives from the Government”

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Eliminating the
  Conservatives From the Government




Lenin: Two Tactics: The Tactics of 'Eliminating The Conservatives from 
the Government'








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in 
the Democratic Revolution



7.
The Tactics of “Eliminating The Conservatives
from  the Government”

      The article in the organ of the Tiflis Menshevik “Committee”
      (Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 1) to which we have just
      referred is entitled “The Zemsky Sobor and Our Tactics.” Its
      author has not yet entirely forgotten our program; he advances
      the slogan of a republic, but this is how he discusses tactics:
    


      “It is possible to point to two ways of achieving this goal” (a
      republic): “either completely ignore the Zemsky Sobor that is
      being convened by the government and defeat the government by
      force of arms, form a revolutionary government and convene a
      constituent assembly, or declare the Zemsky Sobor the centre of
      our actions, influencing its composition and activity by force
      of arms and either forcibly

 

      compelling it to declare itself a
      constituent assembly or convening a constituent assembly through
      it. These two tactics differ very sharply from one another. Let
      us see which of them is more advantageous to us.”
    


      This is how the Russian new-Iskraists set forth the ideas that
      were subsequently incorporated in the resolution we have
      analysed. Note that this was written before the

      battle of
      Tsushima,[8]

      when the Bulygin “scheme” had not yet seen the
      light of the day. Even the liberals were losing patience and
      expressing their lack of confidence in the pages of the legal
      press; but a new Iskra-ist Social-Democrat proved more
      credulous than the liberals. He declares that the Zemsky Sobor
      “is being convened” and trusts the tsar so much that he proposes
      to make this as yet non-existent Zemsky Sobor (or, possibly,
      “State Duma” or “Advisory Legislative Assembly”?) the centre of
      our actions. Being more outspoken and straightforward than the
      authors of the resolution adopted at the Conference, our
      Tiflisian does not put the two “tactics” (which he expounds with
      inimitable naïveté) on a par but declares that the
      second is more “advantageous.” Just listen:
    


      “The first tactics. As you know, the coming revolution is a
      bourgeois revolution, i.e., its purpose is to effect such
      changes in the present system as are of interest not only to the
      proletariat but to the whole of bourgeois society. All classes
      are opposed to the government, even the capitalists
      themselves. The militant proletariat and the militant
      bourgeoisie are in a certain sense marching together and jointly
      attacking the autocracy from different sides. The government is
      completely isolated and lacks public sympathy. For this reason
      it is very easy to destroy it. The Russian proletariat as a
      whole is not yet sufficiently class conscious and organised to
      be able to carry out the revolution by itself. And even if it
      were able to do so, it would carry through a proletarian
      (socialist) revolution and not a bourgeois revolution. Hence, it
      is in our interest that the government remain without allies,
      that it be unable to disunite the opposition, unable to ally the
      bourgeoisie to itself and leave the proletariat isolated....”
    


      So, it is in the interests of the proletariat that the tsarist
      government shall not be able to disunite the bourgeoisie and the
      proletariat! Is it not by mistake that this Georgian organ is
      called Sotsial-Demokrat instead of
      Osvobozhdeniye? And note its peerless philosophy of
      democratic revolution! Is it not obvious that this poor
      Tiflisian is hopelessly confused by the pedantic
      khvostist interpretation of the concept “bourgeois
      revolution”? He discusses the question of the

 

      possible isolation
      of the proletariat in a democratic revolution and
      forgets ... forgets about a trifle ... about the
      peasantry! of the possible allies of the proletariat he knows
      and favours the landowning Zemstvo-ists and is not aware of the
      peasants. And this in the Caucasus! Well, were we not right when
      we said that by its method of reasoning the new Iskra
      was sinking to the level of the monarchist bourgeoisie instead
      of raising the revolutionary peasantry to the position of our
      ally?
    


      “... Otherwise the defeat of the proletariat and the victory
      of the government is inevitable. This is just what the autocracy
      is striving for. In its Zemsky Sobor it will undoubtedly attract
      to its side the representatives of the nobility, of the
      Zemstvos, the cities, the universities and similar bourgeois
      institutions. It will try to appease them with petty concessions
      and thereby reconcile them to itself. Strengthened in this way,
      it will direct all its blows against the working people who will
      have been isolated. It is our duty to prevent such an
      unfortunate outcome. But can this be done of the first method?
      Let us assume that we paid no attention whatever to the Zemsky
      Sobor, but started to prepare for insurrection ourselves, and
      one fine day came out in the streets armed and ready for
      battle. The result would be that we would be confronted not with
      one but with two enemies: the government and the Zemsky
      Sobor. While we were preparing, they would manage to come to
      terms, enter into an agreement with one another, draw up a
      constitution advantageous to themselves and divide power between
      them. These tactics are of direct advantage to the government,
      and we must reject them in the most energetic fashion....”
    


      Now this is frank! We must resolutely reject the “tactics” of
      preparing an insurrection because “meanwhile” the government
      would come to terms with the bourgeoisie! Can one find in the
      old literature of the most rabid “Economism” anything that would
      even approximate such a disgrace to revolutionary
      Social-Democracy? That insurrections and outbreaks of workers
      and peasants are occurring, first in one place and then in
      another, is a fact. The Zemsky Sobor, however, is a Bulygin
      promise. And the Sotsial-Demokrat of the city of Tiflis
      decides: to reject the tactics of preparing an insurrection and
      to wait for a “centre of influence”—the Zemsky
      Sobor....
    


      “...The second tactics, on the contrary, consist in placing
      the Zemsky Sobor under our surveillance, in not giving it the
      opportunity to act according to its own will and enter into an
      agreement with the

     government.[1]



      “We support the Zemsky Sobor to the extent that it fights the
      autocracy, and we fight it in those cases when it becomes
      reconciled with the autocracy. By energetic interference and
      force we shall cause a split among the

       deputies[2]

,

      rally the
      radicals to our side, eliminate the conservatives from the
      government and thus put the whole Zemsky Sobor on the path of
      revolution. Thanks to such tactics the government will always
      remain isolated, the opposition strong and the establishment of
      a democratic system will thereby be facilitated.”
    


      Well, well! Let anyone now say that we exaggerate the new
      Iskra-ists’ turn to the most vulgar semblance of
      Economism. This is positively like the famous powder for
      exterminating flies: you catch the fly, sprinkle it with the
      powder and the fly will die. Split the deputies of the Zemsky
      Sobor by force, “eliminate the conservatives from the
      government”—and the whole Zemsky Sobor will take
      the path of revolution. . . . No “Jacobin” armed
      insurrection of any sort, but just like that, in genteel, almost
      parliamentary fashion, “influencing” the members of the
      Zemsky Sobor.
    

      Poor Russia! It has been said that she always wears the
      old-fashioned bonnets that Europe discards. We have no
      parliament as yet, even Bulygin has not yet promised one, but we
      have any amount of

      parliamentary
      cretinism.[9]



      “. . . How should this interference be effected? First of all,
      we shall demand that the Zemsky Sobor be convened on the basis
      of universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and secret
      ballot. Simultaneously with the

    announcement[3]

      of this method of election, complete freedom to carry on the
      election campaign, i.e., freedom of assembly, of speech and of
      the press, the inviolability of the electors and the candidates
      and the release of all political prisoners must be made

law.[4]

      The elections themselves must be fixed as late as possible so
      that we have sufficient time to inform and prepare the
      people. And since the drafting of the regulations governing the
      convocation of the Sobor has been entrusted to a commission
      headed by Bulygin, Minister of the Interior, we should also
      exert pressure on this commission and on its

     members.[5]

      If the Bulygin Commission refuses to satisfy our

     demands[6]

      and

 

      grants suffrage only to property
      owners, then we must interfere in these elections and, by
      revolutionary means, force the voters to elect progressive
      candidates and in the Zemsky Sobor demand a constituent
      assembly. Finally, we must, by all possible measures:
      demonstrations, strikes and insurrection if need be, compel the
      Zemsky Sobor to convene a constituent assembly or declare itself
      to be such. The armed proletariat must constitute itself the
      defender of the constituent assembly, and both

       together[7]

      will march forward to a democratic republic.

    

      “Such are the Social-Democratic tactics, and they alone will
      secure us victory.”
    


      Let not the reader imagine that this incredible nonsense is
      simply a maiden attempt at writing on the part of some new
      Iskra adherent with no authority or influence. No, this
      is what is stated in the organ of an entire committee
      of new Iskra-ists, the Tiflis Committee. More than
      that. This nonsense has been openly endorsed by the
      “Iskra” in No. 100 of which we read the following about
      that issue of the Sotsial-Demokrat :
    

      “The first issue is edited in a lively and talented
      manner. The experienced hand of a capable editor and writer is
      perceptible. . . . It may be said with all confidence that the
      newspaper will brilliantly carry out the task it has set
      itself.”
    

      Yes! If that task is clearly to show all and sundry the utter
      ideological decay of new Iskra, then it has indeed been
      carried out “brilliantly.” No one could have expressed the new
      Iskra degradation to liberal bourgeois opportunism in a
      more “lively, talented and capable” manner.
    
 

Notes
 

[1] 
By what means can the Zemstvoists be deprived of their own will?
   Perhaps by the use of a special sort of litmus paper?  —Lenin

[2] 
Heavens! This is certainly rendering tactics “profound”! There are no
   forces available to fight in the streets, but it is possible “to split
   the deputies” “by force.” Listen, comrade from Tiflis, one may
   prevaricate, but one should know the limit....  —Lenin

[3] 
In Iskra? —Lenin

[4] 
By Nicholas?  —Lenin

[5] 
So this is what is meant by the tactic of “eliminating the
   conservatives from the government”!  —Lenin

[6] 
But surely such a thing cannot happen if we follow this correct and
   profound tactic!  —Lenin

[7] 
Both the armed proletariat and the conservatives “eliminated from the
   government”?  —Lenin
 



[8] 
PLACEHOLDER




[9] 
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

From what Direction is the Proletariat 
Threatened with the Danger of Having its Hands Tied in the Struggle Against the 
Inconsistent Bourgeoisie?

|

Osvobozhdeniyeism and New Iskra Trends

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Osvobozhdeniye and
New-Iskra Trends




Lenin: Two Tactics: Osvobozhdeniyeism and New Iskra Trends








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in 
the Democratic Revolution



8.
Osvobozhdeniyeism and New Iskra
Trends

      Let us now proceed to another striking confirmation of the
      political meaning of new-Iskra trend.
    

      In a splendid, remarkable and most instructive article, entitled
      “How to Find Oneself” (Osvobozhdeniye, No. 71),
      Mr. Struve wages war against the “programmatic revolutionism” of
      our extreme parties. Mr. Struve is particularly displeased with
      me

     personally.[1]


 

      Mr. Struve could not please me more: I
      could not wish for a better ally in the fight against the
      renascent Economism of the new-Iskraists and the utter lack of
      principle displayed by the “Socialist-Revolutionaries.” On some
      other occasion we shall relate how Mr. Struve and the
      Osvobozhdeniye proved in practice how utterly
      reactionary are the “amendments” to Marxism made in the draft
      program of the Socialist-Revolutionaries. We have already

      repeatedly[2]

      spoken about how Mr. Struve rendered me
      honest, faithful and real service




      every time he approved of the new-Iskraists in principle and we
      shall say so once more now.
    

      Mr. Struve’s article contains a number of very interesting
      statements, which we can note here only in passing. He intends
      “to create Russian democracy by relying on class collaboration
      and not on class struggle,” in which case “the socially
      privileged intelligentsia” (something in the nature of the
      “cultured nobility” to which Mr. Struve makes obeisance with the
      grace of a truly high-society . . . lackey) will bring the
      weight of its “social position” (the weight of its moneybags) to
      this “non-class” party. Mr. Struve expresses the desire to show
      the youth the worthlessness “of the hackneyed radical opinion
      that the bourgeoisie has become frightened and has sold out the
      proletariat and the cause of liberty.” (We welcome this desire
      with all our heart. Nothing will confirm the correctness of this
      Marxian “hackneyed” opinion better than a war waged against it
      by Mr. Struve. Please, Mr. Struve, don’t pigeonhole this
      splendid plan of yours!)
    

      For the purposes of our subject it is important to note the
      practical slogans against which this politically
      sensitive representative of the Russian bourgeoisie, who is so
      responsive to the slightest change in the weather, is fighting
      at the present time. First, he is fighting against the slogan of
      republicanism. Mr. Struve is firmly convinced that this slogan
      is “incomprehensible and foreign to the masses of the people”
      (he forgets to add: comprehensible, but not of advantage to the
      bourgeoisie!). We should like to see what reply Mr. Struve would
      get from the workers in our study circles and at our mass
      meetings! Or are the workers not the people? And the peasants?
      They are given to what Mr. Struve calls “naïve
      republicanism” (“to kick out the tsar”)—but the liberal
      bourgeoisie believes that naïve republicanism will
      be replaced not by enlightened republicanism but by enlightened
      monarchism! Ça dépend, Mr. Struve; it will
      depend on circumstances. Neither tsarism nor the bourgeoisie can
      help opposing a radical improvement in the condition of the
      peasantry at the expense of the landed estates, whereas the
      working class cannot help assisting the peasantry in this
      respect.
    


      Secondly, Mr. Struve assures us that “in a civil war the
      attacking party always proves to be in the wrong.” This idea
      verges closely on the above-mentioned trends of the new
      Iskra ideas. We will not say, of course, that in civil
      war it is always advantageous to attack; no, sometimes
      defensive tactics are obligatory for a time. But to
      apply a proposition like the one Mr. Struve has made to Russia
      in 1905 means precisely displaying a little of the “hackneyed
      radical opinion” (“the bourgeoisie takes fright and betrays the
      cause of liberty”). Whoever now refuses to attack the autocracy
      and reaction, whoever is not making preparations for such an
      attack, whoever is not advocating it, takes the name of adherent
      of the revolution in vain.
    

      Mr. Struve condemns the slogans: “secrecy” and “rioting” (a riot
      being “an insurrection in miniature”). Mr. Struve spurns both
      the one and the other—and he does so from the standpoint of
      “approaching the masses.” We should like to ask Mr. Struve
      whether he can point to any passage in, for instance,

      What Is To Be
      Done?—the work of an extreme revolutionary from his
      standpoint—which advocates rioting. As regards “secrecy” is
      there really much difference between, for example, us and
      Mr. Struve? Are we not both working on “illegal” newspapers
      which are being smuggled into Russia “secretly” and which serve
      the “secret” groups of either the Osvobozhdeniye League or the
      R.S.D.L.P.? Our workers’ mass meetings are often held “secretly”
      —that sin does exist. But what about the meetings of the
      gentlemen of the Osvobozhdeniye League? Is there any reason why
      you should brag, Mr. Struve, and look down upon the despised
      partisans of despised secrecy?
    

      True, the supplying of arms to the workers demands strict
      secrecy. On this point Mr. Struve is rather more outspoken. Just
      listen: “As regards armed insurrection, or a revolution in the
      technical sense, only mass propaganda in favour of a democratic
      program can create the social-psychological conditions for a
      general armed insurrection. Thus, even from the point of view
      that an armed insurrection is the inevitable
      consummation of the present struggle for emancipation—a
      view I do not share—the permeation of the masses with ideas
      of democratic reform is a most fundamental and most necessary
      task.”
    


      Mr. Struve tries to evade the issue. He speaks of the
      inevitability of an insurrection instead of speaking about its
      necessity for the victory of the revolution. The
      insurrection—unprepared, spontaneous, sporadic—has
      already begun. No one can positively vouch that it will develop
      into an entire and integral popular armed insurrection, for that
      depends on the state of the revolutionary forces (which can be
      fully gauged only in the course of the struggle itself), on the
      behaviour of the government and the bourgeoisie, and on a number
      of other circumstances which it is impossible to estimate
      exactly. There is no point in speaking about inevitability, in
      the sense of absolute certainty with regard to some definite
      event, as Mr. Struve does. What you must discuss, if you want to
      be a partisan of the revolution is whether insurrection is
      necessary for the victory of the revolution, whether it
      is necessary to proclaim it vigorously, to advocate and make
      immediate and energetic preparations for it. Mr. Struve cannot
      fail to understand this difference: he does not, for instance,
      obscure the question of the necessity of universal
      suffrage—which is indisputable for a democrat—by
      raising the question of whether its attainment is inevitable in
      the course of the present revolution—which is debatable and
      of no urgency for people engaged in political activity. By
      evading the issue of the necessity of an insurrection,
      Mr. Struve expresses the inner most essence of the political
      position of the liberal bourgeoisie. In the first place, the
      bourgeoisie would prefer to come to terms with the autocracy
      rather than crush it; secondly, the bourgeoisie in any case
      thrusts the armed struggle upon the shoulders of the
      workers. This is the real meaning of Mr. Struve’s
      evasiveness. That is why he backs out of the question
      of the necessity of an insurrection towards the question of the
      “social-psychological conditions” for it, of preliminary
      “propaganda.” Just as the bourgeois windbags in the Frankfurt
      Parliament of 1848 engaged in drawing up resolutions,
      declarations and decisions, in “mass propaganda” and in
      preparing the “social-psychological conditions” at a time when
      it was a matter of repelling the armed force of the government,
      when the movement “led to the necessity” for an armed struggle,
      when verbal persuasion alone (which is a hundredfold necessary
      during the preparatory period) became banal, bourgeois
      inactivity and cowardice—so

 

      also 

      Mr. Struve evades the
      question of insurrection, screening himself behind
      phrases. Mr. Struve vividly shows us what many
      Social-Democrats stubbornly fail to see, namely, that a
      revolutionary period differs from ordinary, everyday preparatory
      periods in history in that the temper, excitement and
      convictions of the masses must and do reveal themselves in
      action.
    

      Vulgar revolutionism fails to see that the word is also a deed;
      this proposition is indisputable when applied to history
      generally, or to those periods of history when no open
      political mass actions take place, and when they can not be
      replaced or artificially evoked by putsches of any
      sort. Khvostist revolutionaries fail to understand
      that—when a revolutionary period has started, when the old
      “superstructure” has cracked from top to bottom, when open
      political action on the part of the classes and masses who are
      creating a new superstructure for themselves has become a fact,
      when civil war has begun—then, to confine oneself to
      “words” as of old, and fail to advance the direct
      slogan to pass to “deeds,” still to try avoid deeds by
      pleading the need for “psychological conditions” and
      “propaganda” in general, is apathy, lifelessness, pedantry, or
      else betrayal of the revolution and treachery to it. The
      Frankfurt windbags of the democratic bourgeoisie are a memorable
      historical example of just such treachery, or of just such
      pedantic stupidity.
    

      Would you like an explanation of this difference between vulgar
      revolutionism and the khvostism of revolutionaries by
      an example taken from the history of the Social Democratic
      movement in Russia? We shall give you such an explanation. Call
      to mind the years 1901 and 1902, which are so recent but which
      already seem ancient history to us today. Demonstrations had
      begun. The protagonists of vulgar revolutionism raised a cry
      about “storming”

      (Rabocheye

      Dyelo[4])

      “bloodthirsty leaflets” were issued (of Berlin
      origin, if my memory does not fail me), attacks were made on the
      “literature writing” and armchair nature of the idea of
      conducting agitation on a national scale through a newspaper

      (Nadezhdin).[5]

      On the other hand, the
      khvostism of revolutionaries was revealed in preaching
      that “the economic struggle is the best means of
      political agitation.” What was the attitude of the revolutionary
      Social-Democrats?




      They attacked both these trends. They
      condemned flash in-the-pan methods and the cries about storming,
      for it was or should have been obvious to all that open mass
      action was a matter of the days to come. They condemned
      khvostism and bluntly issued the slogan even
      of a popular armed insurrection, not in the sense of a direct
      appeal (Mr. Struve would not discover any appeals to “riots” in
      our utterances of that period), but in the sense of a
      necessary deduction, in the sense of “propaganda”
      (about which Mr. Struve has bethought himself only now—our
      honourable Mr. Struve is always several years behind the times),
      in the sense of preparing those very “social-psychological
      conditions” about which the representatives of the bewildered,
      huckstering bourgeoisie are now holding forth “sadly and
      inappropriately.” At that time propaganda and
      agitation, agitation and propaganda, were really pushed to the
      fore by the objective state of affairs. At that time
      the work of publishing an all-Russian political newspaper, the
      weekly issuance of which was regarded as an ideal, could be
      proposed (and was proposed in What Is To Be Done?) as
      the touchstone of the work of preparing for an
      insurrection. At that time the slogans advocating mass
      agitation instead of direct armed action, preparation
      of the social-psychological conditions for insurrection
      instead of flash-in-the-pan methods, were the only
      correct slogans for the revolutionary Social-Democratic
      movement. At the present time the slogans have been
      superseded by events, the movement has left them behind, they
      have become tatters, rags fit only to cloth the hypocrisy of the
      Osvobozhdeniye and of the new Iskra tailism!
    

      Or perhaps I am mistaken? Perhaps the revolution has not yet
      begun? Perhaps the time for open political action of classes has
      not yet arrived? Perhaps there is still no civil war, and the
      criticism of weapons should not as yet be the necessary
      and obligatory successor, heir, trustee and wielder of the
      weapon of criticism?
    

      Look around, poke your head out of your study and look into the
      street for an answer. Has not the government itself started
      civil war by shooting down hosts of peaceful and unarmed
      citizens everywhere? Are not the armed Black Hundreds acting as
      “arguments” of the autocracy? Has not the bourgeoisie—even
      the bourgeoisie—recognised the need for a citizens’
      militia? Does not Mr. Struve himself, the ideally

 

      moderate and
      punctilious Mr. Struve, say (alas, he says so only to evade the
      issue!) that “the open nature of revolutionary action” (that’s
      the sort of fellows we are today!) “is now one of the most
      important conditions for exerting an educational influence upon
      the masses of the people”?
    

      Those who have eyes to see can have no doubt as to how the
      question of armed insurrection must be presented by the
      partisans of revolution at the present time. Just take a look at
      the three ways in which this question has been
      presented in the organs of the free press which are at all
      capable of influencing the masses.
    

      Presentation one. The resolution of the Third Congress of the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour

Party.[3]

      It is publicly acknowledged and declared that the general

 

      democratic revolutionary movement
      has already brought about the necessity of an armed
      insurrection. The organisation of the proletariat for an
      insurrection has been placed on the order of the day as one of
      the essential, principal and indispensable tasks of the
      Party. Instructions are issued to adopt the most
      energetic measures to arm the proletariat and to ensure the
      possibility of directly leading the insurrection.
    

      The second presentation. An article in the
      Osvobozhdeniye, containing a statement of principles,
      by the “leader of the Russian constitutionalists” (as Mr. Struve
      was recently described by such an influential organ of the
      European bourgeoisie as the

      Frankfurter
      Zeitung[6]),

      or the leader of the Russian progressive bourgeoisie. He does
      not share the opinion that an insurrection is inevitable. Secret
      activity and riots are the specific methods of irrational
      revolutionism. Republicanism is a method of stunning. The
      question of armed insurrection is really a mere technical
      question, whereas “the fundamental and most necessary task” is
      to carry on mass propaganda and to prepare the
      social-psychological conditions.
    

      The third presentation. The resolution of the new
      Iskra-ist Conference. Our task is to prepare an
      insurrection. A planned insurrection is out of the
      question. Favourable conditions for an insurrection are created
      by the disorganisation of the government, by our agitation, and
      by our organisation. Only then “can technical military
      preparations acquire more or less serious significance.”
    

      And is that all? Yes, that is all. The new Iskra-ist
      leaders of the proletariat still do not know whether
      insurrection has become a necessity. It is still not clear to
      them whether the task of organising the proletariat for direct
      battle has become an urgent one. It is not necessary to urge the
      adoption of the most energetic measures; it is far
      more important (in 1905, and not in 1902) to explain in general
      outlines under what conditions these measures “may” acquire
      “more or less serious” significance....
    

      Do you see now, comrades of the new Iskra, where your
      turn to Martynovism has led you? Do you realise that your
      political philosophy has proved to be a rehash of the
      Osvobozhdeniye philosophy?—that (against your will
      and with out your being aware of it) you are following at the
      tail of the monarchist

 

      bourgeoisie? Is it clear to you now that,
      while repeating what you have learned by rote and attaining
      perfection in sophistry, you have lost sight of the fact
      that—in the memorable words of Peter Struve’s memorable
      article—“the open nature of revolutionary action
      is now one of the most important conditions for exerting an
      educational influence upon the masses of the people”?
    
 

Notes
 

[1] 
“In comparison with the revolutionism of Messrs. Lenin and associates,
        the revolutionism of the West-European Social-Democracy of Bebel,
        and even of Kautsky, is opportunism; but the foundations of even
        this already toned down revolutionism have been undermined and
        washed away by history.”

      A most irate thrust. Only Mr. Struve

 

      is mistaken in thinking
      that it is possible to pile everything on to me, as if I were
      dead. It is sufficient for me to issue a challenge to
      Mr. Struve, which he will never be able to accept. When and
      where did I call the “revolutionism of Bebel and Kautsky”
      opportunism? When and where did I ever claim to have created any
      sort of special trend in International Social-Democracy not
      identical with the trend of Bebel and Kautsky? When and
      where have there been brought to light differences between me,
      on the one hand, and Bebel and Kautsky, on the
      other—differences even slightly approximating in
      seriousness the differences between Bebel and Kautsky, for
      instance, on the agrarian question in

      Breslau?[7]

      Let Mr Struve try to answer these three questions.—Lenin


To our readers we say: The liberal bourgeoisie
      everywhere and always has recourse to the method of assuring
      its adherents in a given country that the Social-Democrats of that
      country are the most unreasonable, whereas their comrades in a
      neighbouring country are “good boys.” The German bourgeoisie has held
      up those “good boys” of French Socialists as models for the Bebels
      and the Kautskys hundreds of times. The French bourgeoisie
      quite recently pointed to the “good boy” Bebel as a model for the
      French Socialists. It is an old trick Mr. Struve! You will find only
      children and ignoramuses swallowing that bait. The complete unanimity
      of international revolutionary Social-Democracy on all major
      questions of program and tactics is a most incontrovertible fact.—Lenin

[2] 
Let us remind the reader that the article “What Should Not Be Done?”
    (Iskra, No. 52) was hailed with noise and clamour by the
    Osvobozhdeniye as a “noteworthy turn” towards concessions to
    the opportunists. The trends of the principles behind the new
    Iskra ideas were especially lauded by the
    Osvobozbdeniye in an item on the split among the Russian
    Social-Democrats. Commenting on Trotsky’s pamphlet, “Our Political
    Tasks,” the Osvobozhdeniye printed out the similarity between
    the ideas of this author and what was once written and said by the
    Rabocheye Dyelo-ists Krichevsky, Martynov, Akimov (see the
    leaflet entitled “An Obliging Liberal” published by the
    Vperyod). The Osvobozhdeniye welcomed Martynov’s
    pamphlet on the two dictatorships (see the item in the
    Vperyod, No. 9). Finally Starover’s belated complaints about
    the old slogan of the old Iskra, “first draw a line of
    demarcation and then unite,” met with special sympathy on the part of
    the Osvobozbdeniye.—Lenin

[3] 
The following is the text in full:  
      “Whereas 

      “1. the proletariat, being, by virtue of its very position, the
      most advanced and the only consistently revolutionary class, is
      for that very reason called upon to play the leading part in the
      general democratic revolutionary movement in Russia;
        

      “2. this movement has already brought about the necessity of an
      armed insurrection;
        

      “3. the proletariat will inevitably take a most energetic part
      in this insurrection, this participation determining the fate of
      the revolution in Russia;
        

      “4. the proletariat can play the leading part in this revolution
      only if it is welded into a united and independent political
      force under the banner of the Social-Democratic Labour Party,
      which is to guide its struggle not only ideologically but
      practically as well;
        

      “5. it is only by fulfilling this part that the proletariat can
      be assured of the most favourable conditions for the struggle
      for Socialism against the propertied classes of a
      bourgeois-democratic Russia;
        

      “Therefore the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. recognises that
      the task of organising the proletariat for direct struggle
      against the autocracy through armed insurrection is one of the
      most important and pressing tasks of the Party in the present
      revolutionary period.
        

      “The Congress therefore resolves to instruct all the Party
      organisations:
        

      “a) to explain to the proletariat by means of propaganda and
      agitation not only the political importance, but also the
      practical organisational aspect of the impending armed
      insurrection;
        

      “b) in this propaganda and agitation to explain the part played
      by mass political strikes, which may be of great importance at
      the beginning and in the very process of the insurrection;
        

“c) to adopt the most energetic measures to arm
      the proletariat and also to draw up a plan for the armed insurrection
      and for direct leadership of the latter, establishing for this
      purpose, to the extent that it is necessary, special groups of Party
      functionaries.”

[Author’s note to the 1907 
edition.–Ed.] —Lenin
 



[7] 
  Differences of opinion were revealed during the discussion of
  the draft agrarian programme at the Breslau Congress of the
  German Social-Democratic Party, 1895.




[4] 
PLACEHOLDER




[5] 
      The reference is to Nadezhdin’s press attack on the plan of the
      Leninist Iskra (Nadezhdin was the pseudonym of
      Y. 0. Zelensky). Lenin criticised this attack as far back as
      1902, in his What Is To
      Be Done?.
    



[6] 
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

The Tactics of “Eliminating The 
Conservatives from the Government”

|

What Does Being A Party of Extreme Opposition 
In Time of Revolution Mean?

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Being a Party of Extreme
  Opposition in Time of Revolution




Lenin: Two Tactics: What Does Being A Party of Extreme Opposition In 
Time of Revolution Mean?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in 
the Democratic Revolution



9.
What Does Being A Party of Extreme Opposition In Time of
    Revolution Mean?

      Let us return to the resolution on a provisional government. We
      have shown that the tactics of the new-Iskraists do not push the
      revolution forward—which they may have wanted to make
      possible by their resolution—but back. We have shown that
      it is precisely these tactics that tie the hands of
      Social-Democracy in the struggle against the inconsistent
      bourgeoisie and do not safeguard it against being dissolved in
      bourgeois democracy. Naturally, the false premises of the
      resolution lead to the false conclusion that:

      “Therefore, Social-Democracy must not set itself
      the aim of seizing or sharing power in the provisional
      government, but

      must remain the party of extreme revolutionary
      opposition.” Consider the first half of this conclusion,
      which is part of a statement of aims. Do the new-Iskraists
      declare the aim of Social-Democratic activity to be a decisive
      victory of the revolution over tsarism? They do. They are unable
      correctly to formulate the requisites for a decisive victory and
      stray into the Osvobozhdeniye formulation, but they do
      set themselves the aforementioned aim. Further: do they connect
      a provisional government with insurrection? Yes, they do so
      plainly, by stating that a provisional government “will emerge
      from a victorious popular insurrection.” Finally, do they set
      themselves the aim of leading the insurrection? Yes, they
      do. Like Mr. Struve, they do not admit that an insurrection is
      an urgent necessity, but at the same time, unlike Mr. Struve,
      they say that “Social-Democracy strives to subject it”
      (the insurrection) “to its influence and leadership and
      to use it in the interests of the working class.”
    

      How nicely this hangs together, does it not? We set ourselves
      the aim of subjecting the insurrection of both the

 

      proletarian and non-proletarian masses to our influence
      and our leadership, and of using it in our interests. Hence, we
      set ourselves the aim of leading, in the insurrection, both the
      proletariat and the revolutionary bourgeoisie and petty
      bourgeoisie (“the non-proletarian groups”), i.e., of
      “sharing” the leadership of the insurrection between
      the Social-Democracy and the revolutionary bourgeoisie. We set
      ourselves the aim of securing victory for the insurrection,
      which is to lead to the establishment of a provisional
      government (“which will emerge from a victorious popular
      insurrection”). Therefore. . . therefore we must not
      set ourselves the aim of seizing power or of sharing it in a
      provisional revolutionary government!!
    

      Our friends cannot dovetail their arguments. They vacillate
      between the standpoint of Mr. Struve, who is evading the issue
      of an insurrection, and the standpoint of revolutionary
      Social-Democracy, which calls upon us to undertake this urgent
      task. They vacillate between anarchism, which on principle
      condemns all participation in a provisional revolutionary
      government as treachery to the proletariat, and Marxism, which
      demands such participation on condition that the
      Social-Democratic Party exercises the leading influence in the

      insurrection.[1]

      They have no independent position
      whatever: neither that of Mr. Struve, who wants to come to terms
      with tsarism and is therefore compelled to resort to evasions
      and subterfuges on the question of insurrection, nor that of the
      anarchists, who condemn all action “from above” and all
      participation in a bourgeois revolution. The new-Iskraists
      confuse a deal with tsarism with a victory over tsarism. They
      want to take part in a bourgeois revolution. They have gone
      somewhat beyond Martynov’s Two Dictatorships. They even
      consent to lead the insurrection of the people—in order to
      renounce that leadership immediately after victory is won (or,
      perhaps, immediately before the victory?), i.e., in order
      not to avail themselves of the fruits of victory but to
      turn all these fruits over entirely to the
      bourgeoisie. This is what they call “using the insurrection
      in the interests of the working class....”
    


      There is no need to dwell on this muddle any longer. It will be
      more useful to examine how this muddle originated in
      the formulation which reads: “to remain the party of extreme
      revolutionary opposition.”
    

      This is one of the familiar propositions of international
      revolutionary Social-Democracy. It is a perfectly correct
      proposition. It has become a commonplace for all opponents of
      revisionism or opportunism in parliamentary countries. It has
      become generally accepted as the legitimate and necessary rebuff
      to “parliamentary cretinism,” Millerandism,

      Bernsteinism,[2]

      and the Italian reformism of the Turati brand. Our good
      new-Iskraists have learned this excellent proposition by heart
      and are zealously applying it . . . quite
      inappropriately. Categories of the parliamentary struggle
      are introduced into resolutions written for conditions in which
      no parliament exists. The concept “opposition,” which has become
      the reflection and the expression of a political situation in
      which no one seriously speaks of an insurrection, is senselessly
      applied to a situation in which insurrection has begun
      and in which all the supporters of the revolution are thinking
      and talking about leadership in it. The desire to “stick
      to” old methods, i.e., action only “from below,” is
      expressed with pomp and clamour precisely at a time
      when the revolution has confronted us with the necessity, in the
      event of the insurrection being victorious, of acting from
      above.
    

      No, our new-Iskraists are decidedly out of luck! Even when they
      formulate a correct Social-Democratic proposition they don’t
      know how to apply it correctly. They failed to take into
      consideration that in a period in which a revolution has begun,
      when there is no parliament, when there is civil war, when
      insurrectionary outbreaks occur, the concepts and terms of
      parliamentary struggle are changed and transformed into their
      opposites. They failed to take into consideration the fact that,
      under the circumstances referred to amendments are moved by
      means of street demonstrations, interpolations are introduced by
      means of offensive action by armed citizens, opposition to the
      government is effected by forcibly overthrowing the government.
    

      Like the well-known hero of our folklore, who repeated good
      advice just when it was inappropriate, our admirers of Martynov
      repeat the lessons of peaceful parliamentarism just at a time
      when, as they themselves state, actual hostilities have
      commenced.

 

      There is nothing more ridiculous than this pompous
      emphasis of the slogan “extreme opposition” in a resolution
      which begins by referring to a “decisive victory of the
      revolution” and to a “popular insurrection”! Try to visualise,
      gentlemen, what it means to be the “extreme opposition” in a
      period of insurrection. Does it mean exposing the government or
      deposing it? Does it mean voting against the government or
      defeating its armed forces in open battle? Does it mean refusing
      the government replenishments for its exchequer or the
      revolutionary seizure of this exchequer in order to use it for
      the requirements of the uprising, to arm the workers and
      peasants and to convoke a constituent assembly? Are you not
      beginning to understand, gentlemen, that the term “extreme
      opposition” expresses only negative actions—to expose, to
      vote against, to refuse? Why is this so? Because this term
      applies only to the parliamentary struggle and, moreover, to a
      period when no one makes “decisive victory” the immediate object
      of the struggle. Are you not beginning to understand that things
      undergo a cardinal change in this respect from the moment the
      politically oppressed people launch a determined attack along
      the whole front in desperate struggle for victory?
    

      The workers ask us: Is it necessary energetically to take up the
      urgent business of insurrection? What is to be done to make the
      incipient insurrection victorious? What use should be made of
      the victory? What program can and should then be applied? The
      new Iskra-ists, who are making Marxism more profound,
      answer: We must remain the party of extreme revolutionary
      opposition. . . . Well, were we not right in calling these
      knights past masters in philistinism?
    
 

Notes
 

[1] 
      See Proletary, No. 3, “On the Provisional Revolutionary
      Government,” article two.

      

    —Lenin
 



[2]
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

Osvobozhdeniyeism and New Iskra Trends

|

“Revolutionary Communes” and 
the Revolutionary-Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Peasantry

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Revolutionary Communes” and the
  Revolutionary-Democratic Dictatorship




Lenin: Two Tactics: 'Revolutionary Communes' and the Revolutionary-Democratic
Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Peasantry








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in 
the Democratic Revolution



10.
“Revolutionary Communes” and the
      Revolutionary-Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the
      Peasantry

      The Conference of the new-Iskraists did not keep to the
      anarchist position into which the new Iskra had talked
      itself (only “from below,” not “from below and from above”). The
      absurdity of admitting the possibility of an insurrection and
      not admitting the possibility of victory and participation in a
      provisional revolutionary government was too glaring. The
      resolution therefore introduced certain

 

      reservations and restrictions into the solution of the question
      proposed by Martynov and Martov. Let us consider these
      reservations as stated in the following section of the
      resolution:
    

      “These tactics” (“to remain the party of extreme revolutionary
      opposition”) “do not, of course, in any way exclude the
      expediency of a partial and episodic seizure of power and the
      establishment of revolutionary communes in one or another city,
      in one or another district, exclusively for the purpose of
      helping to spread the insurrection and of disrupting the
      government.”
    

      That being the case, it means that in principle they admit the
      possibility of action not only from below, but also from
      above. It means that the proposition laid down in L. Martov’s
      well-known article in the Iskra (No. 93) is discarded
      and that the tactics of Vperyod, i.e., not only “from
      below,” but also “from above,” are acknowledged as correct.
    

      Further, the seizure of power (even if partial, episodic, etc.)
      obviously presupposes the participation not only of
      Social-Democrats and not only of the proletariat. This follows
      from the fact that it is not only the proletariat that is
      interested and takes an active part in a democratic
      revolution. This follows from the fact that the insurrection is
      a “popular” one, as is stated in the beginning of the resolution
      we are discussing, that “non-proletarian groups” (the words used
      in the Conference resolution on the uprising), i.e., the
      bourgeoisie, also take part in it. Hence, the principle that any
      participation of Socialists in a provisional revolutionary
      government jointly with the petty bourgeoisie is treachery to
      the working class was thrown overboard by the
      Conference, which is what the

      Vperyod [Lenin’s articles
        “Social-Democracy and the Provisional Revolutionary
        Government”, and “The Revolutionary-Democratic Dictatorship of
        the Proletariat and the Peasantry” ]

      sought to achieve. “Treachery” does not
      cease to be treachery because the action which constitutes it is
      partial, episodic, local, etc. Hence, the parallel drawn between
      the participation in a provisional revolutionary government and
      vulgar Jaurèsism was thrown overboard by the
      Conference, which is what the Vperyod sought to

      achieve.[4]

      A government does not cease to be a government because
      its power does not extend to many cities but is confined to a
      single city, does not extend to many districts but is confined
      to a single district; nor because of the name that is given to
      it. Thus, the formulation of the principles of this
      question which the new Iskra tried to give was
      discarded by the Conference.
    


      Let us see whether the restrictions imposed by the Conference on
      the formation of revolutionary governments and participation in
      them, which is now admitted in principle, are reasonable. What
      difference there is between the concept “episodic” and the
      concept

    “provisional”[1]

      we do not know.

      We are afraid that this
      “new” and foreign word is merely a screen for lack of clear
      thinking. It seems “more profound,” but actually it is
      only more obscure and confused. What is the difference between
      the “expediency” of a partial “seizure of power” in a city or
      district, and participation in a provisional revolutionary
      government of the entire state? Do not “cities” include a city
      like St. Petersburg, where the events of January 9 took place?
      Do not districts include the Caucasus, which is bigger than many
      a state? Will not the problems (which at one time vexed the new
      Iskra) of what to do with the prisons, the police,
      public funds, etc., confront us the moment we “seize power” in a
      single city, let alone in a district? No one will deny, of
      course, that if we lack sufficient forces, if the insurrection
      is not wholly successful, or if the victory is indecisive, it is
      possible that provisional revolutionary governments will be set
      up in separate localities, in individual cities and the
      like. But what is the point of such an assumption, gentlemen? Do
      not you yourselves speak in the beginning of the resolution
      about a “decisive victory of the revolution,” about a
      “victorious popular insurrection”?? Since when have the
      Social-Democrats taken over the job of the anarchists: to divide
      the attention and the aims of the proletariat, to direct its
      attention to the “partial” instead of the general, the single,
      the integral and complete? While presupposing the “seizure of
      power” in a city, you yourselves speak of “spreading the
      insurrection”—to another city, may we venture to think? to
      all cities, may we dare to hope? Your conclusions, gentlemen,
      are as unsound and haphazard, as contradictory and confused as
      your premises. The Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. gave an
      exhaustive and clear answer to the question of a provisional
      revolutionary government in general. And this answer covers all
      cases of local provisional governments as

 

      well. The answer given
      by the Conference however, by artificially and arbitrarily
      singling out a part of the question, merely
      evades (but unsuccessfully) the issue as a whole, and
      creates confusion.
    

      What does the term “revolutionary communes” mean? Does it differ
      from the term “provisional revolutionary government,” and, if
      so, in what respect? The Conference gentlemen themselves do not
      know. Confusion of revolutionary thought leads them, as very
      often happens, to revolutionary phrase-mongering. Yes,
      the use of the words “revolutionary commune” in a resolution
      passed by representatives of Social-Democracy is revolutionary
      phrase-mongering and nothing else. Marx more than once condemned
      such phrase-mongering, when “fascinating” terms of the
      bygone past were used to hide the tasks of the
      future. In such cases a fascinating term that has played its
      part in history becomes futile and pernicious trumpery, a
      child’s rattle. We must give the workers and the whole people a
      clear and unambiguous explanation as to why we want a
      provisional revolutionary government to be set up, and
      exactly what changes we shall accomplish, if we
      exercise decisive influence on the government, on the very
      morrow of the victory of the popular insurrection which has
      already commenced. These are the questions that confront
      political leaders.
    

      The Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. gave perfectly clear
      answers to these questions and drew up a complete program of
      these changes—the minimum program of our Party. The word
      “commune,” however, is not an answer at all; it only serves to
      confuse people by the distant echo of a sonorous phrase, or
      empty rhetoric. The more we cherish the memory of the Paris
      Commune of 1871, for instance, the less permissible is it to
      refer to it offhand, without analysing its mistakes and the
      special conditions attending it. To do so would be to follow the
      absurd example of the Blanquists—whom Engels
      ridiculed—who (in 1874, in their “Manifesto”) paid homage
      to every act of the

      Commune.[5]

      What reply will a “Conference” give to a worker who asks him
      about this “revolutionary commune” that is mentioned in
      the resolution? He will only be able to tell him that this is
      the name, known in history, of a workers’ government that was
      unable to, and could

 

      not at that time,
      distinguish between the elements of a democratic revolution and
      those of a socialist revolution, that confused the tasks of
      fighting for a republic with the tasks of fighting for
      Socialism, that was unable to carry out the task of launching an
      energetic military offensive against Versailles, that made a
      mistake in not seizing the Bank of France, etc. In short,
      whether in your answer you refer to the Paris Commune or to some
      other commune, your answer will be: it was a government such
      as ours should not be. A fine answer, indeed! Does it not
      testify to pedantic moralising and impotence on the part of a
      revolutionary who says nothing about the practical program of
      the Party and in appropriately begins to give lessons in history
      in a resolution? Does this not reveal the very mistake which
      they unsuccessfully accuse us of having committed, i.e., of
      confusing a democratic revolution with a socialist revolution,
      between which none of the “communes” was able to distinguish?
    

      Extending the insurrection and the disorganising the government
      are presented as the “exclusive” aim of the provisional
      government. (so in appropriately termed a “commune”). Taken in
      its literal sense, the word “exclusively” eliminates all other
      aims; it is an echo of the absurd theory of “only from below.”
      Such elimination of other aims is another instance of
      short-sightedness and lack of reflection. A “revolutionary
      commune,” i.e., a revolutionary government, even if only in a
      single city, will inevitably have to administer (even if
      provisionally, “partly, episodically”) all the affairs
      of state, and it is the height of folly to hide one’s head under
      one’s wing and refuse to see this. This government will have to
      enact an eight-hour working day, establish workers’ inspection
      of factories, institute free universal education, introduce the
      election of judges, set up peasant committees, etc.; in a word,
      it will certainly have to carry out a number of reforms. To
      designate these reforms as “helping to spread the insurrection”
      would be playing with words and deliberately causing greater
      confusion in a matter which requires absolute clarity.
    
 *     *  * 

      The concluding part of the new Iskra-ists’ resolution
      does not provide any new material for a criticism of

 

      the trends
      of principles of “Economism” which has revived in our Party, but
      it illustrates from a somewhat different angle, what has been
      said above.
    

      Here is that part:
    

      “Only in one event should Social-Democracy, on its own
      initiative, direct its efforts towards seizing power and holding
      it as long as possible—namely, in the event of the
      revolution spreading to the advanced countries of Western
      Europe, where conditions for the achievement of Socialism have
      already reached a certain”(?) “degree of maturity. In that event
      the limited historical scope of the Russian revolution can be
      considerably widened and the possibility of entering the path of
      socialist reforms will arise.
    

      “By framing its tactics in accordance with the view that, during
      the whole period of the revolution, the Social-Democratic Party
      will retain the position of extreme revolutionary opposition to
      all the governments that may succeed one another in the course
      of the revolution, Social-Democracy will best be able to prepare
      itself to utilise governmental power if it falls” (??) “into its
      hands.”
    

      The basic idea here is the one that the Vperyod has
      repeatedly formulated, stating that we must not be afraid (as is
      Martynov) of a complete victory for Social-Democracy in a
      democratic revolution, i.e., of a revolutionary-democratic
      dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, for such a
      victory will enable us to rouse Europe, and the socialist
      proletariat of Europe, after throwing off the yoke of the
      bourgeoisie, will in its turn help us to accomplish the
      socialist revolution. But see how this idea is worsened in the
      new Iskra-ists’ rendering of it. We shall not dwell on
      details—on the absurd assumption that power could “fall”
      into the hands of a class-conscious party which considers
      seizure of power harmful tactics; on the fact that in Europe the
      conditions for Socialism have reached not a certain degree of
      maturity, but are already mature; on the fact that our Party
      program does not speak of socialist changes at all, but only of
      a socialist revolution. Let us take the principal and basic
      difference between the idea presented by the Vperyod
      and that presented in the resolution. The Vperyod set
      the revolutionary proletariat of Russia an active aim: to win
      the battle for democracy and to use this victory for carrying
      the revolution into Europe. The resolution fails to grasp this
      connection

 

      between our “decisive victory” (not in the new
      Iskra sense) and the revolution in Europe, and
      therefore it speaks not about the tasks of the proletariat, not
      about the prospects of its victory, but about one of
      the possibilities in general: “in the event of the revolution
      spreading....” The Vperyod pointedly and definitely
      indicated—and this was incorporated in the resolution of
      the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party—how “governmental power” can and must “be utilised”
      in the interests of the proletariat, bearing in mind what can be
      achieved immediately, at the given stage of social development,
      and what must first be achieved as a democratic prerequisite of
      the struggle for Socialism. Here, also, the resolution
      hopelessly drags at the tail when it states: “will be able to
      prepare itself to utilise,” but fails to say how it
      will be able, how it will prepare itself, and to
      utilise for what? We have no doubt, for instance, that
      the new-Iskraists may be “able to prepare themselves to utilise”
      the leading position in the Party; but the point is that the way
      they have utilised, their preparation up till now, do not hold
      out much hope of possibility being transformed into
      reality. . . .
    

      The Vperyod quite definitely stated wherein lies the
      real “possibility of holding power”—namely, in the
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the
      peasantry, in their joint mass strength, which is capable of
      outweighing all the forces of counterrevolution, in the
      inevitable concurrence of their interests in democratic
      changes. Here, too, the resolution of the Conference gives us
      nothing positive, it merely evades the question. Surely, the
      possibility of holding power in Russia must be determined by the
      composition of the social forces in Russia itself, by the
      circumstances of the democratic revolution which is now taking
      place in our country. A victory of the proletariat in Europe (it
      is still somewhat of a far cry between carrying the revolution
      into Europe and the victory of the proletariat) will give rise
      to a desperate counter-revolutionary struggle on the part of the
      Russian bourgeoisie—yet the resolution of the new-Iskraists
      does not say a word about this counter-revolutionary force, the
      importance of which has been appraised in the resolution of the
      Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. If in our fight for a republic
      and democracy we could not rely upon the peasantry as well as on
      the

 

      proletariat, the prospect of our “holding power” would be
      hopeless. But if it is not hopeless, if a “decisive victory of
      the revolution over tsarism” opens up such a possibility, then
      we must point to it, we must actively call for its
      transformation into reality and issue practical slogans not only
      for the contingency of the revolution being carried
      into Europe, but also for the purpose of carrying it
      there. The reference made by the khvostist
      Social-Democrats to the “limited historical scope of the Russian
      revolution” merely serves to cover up their limited
      understanding of the aims of this democratic revolution and of
      the leading role of the proletariat in this revolution!
    

      One of the objections raised to the slogan of “the
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the
      peasantry” is that dictatorship presupposes a “single will”
      (Iskra, No. 95), and that there can be no single will
      of the proletariat and the petty bourgeoisie. This objection is
      unsound, for it is based on an abstract, “metaphysical”
      interpretation of the term “single will.” There can be a single
      will in one respect and not a single will in another. The
      absence of unity on questions of Socialism and in the struggle
      for Socialism does not preclude singleness of will on questions
      of democracy and in the struggle for a republic. To forget this
      would be tantamount to forgetting the logical and historical
      difference between a democratic and a socialist revolution. To
      forget this would be tantamount to forgetting the character of
      the democratic revolution as a revolution of the whole
      people: if it is “of the whole people” it means that there
      is “singleness of will” precisely in so far as this revolution
      satisfies the common needs and requirements of the whole
      people. Beyond the bounds of democracy there can be no question
      of the proletariat and the peasant bourgeoisie having a single
      will. Class struggle between them is inevitable; but it is in a
      democratic republic that this struggle will be the most
      thoroughgoing and widespread struggle of the people for
      Socialism. Like everything else in the world, the
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the
      peasantry has a past and a future. Its past is autocracy,
      serfdom, monarchy and privilege. In the struggle against this
      past, in the struggle against counterrevolution, a “single will”
      of the proletariat and the peasantry is possible, for here there
      is unity of interests.
    


      Its future is the struggle against private property the struggle
      of the wage worker against the employer the struggle for
      Socialism. Here singleness of will is

     impossible.[2]

      Here our path lies not from autocracy to a republic but from a
      petty-bourgeois democratic republic to Socialism.
    

      Of course, in actual historical circumstances, the elements of
      the past become interwoven with those of the future, the two
      paths cross. Wage labour, with its struggle against private
      property, exists under the autocracy as well; it is generated
      even under serfdom. But this does not in the least prevent us
      from drawing a logical and historical dividing line between the
      major stages of development. We all draw a distinction between
      bourgeois revolution and socialist revolution, we all absolutely
      insist on the necessity of drawing a most strict line between
      them; but can it be denied that individual, particular elements
      of the two revolutions become interwoven in history? Have there
      not been a number of socialist movements and attempts at
      establishing Socialism in the period of democratic revolutions
      in Europe? And will not the future socialist revolution in
      Europe still have to do a very great deal that has been left
      undone in the field of democracy?
    

      A Social-Democrat must never for a moment forget that the
      proletariat will inevitably have to wage the class struggle for
      Socialism even against the most democratic and republican
      bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie. This is beyond doubt. Hence
      the absolute necessity of a separate, independent, strictly
      class party of Social-Democracy. Hence the temporary nature of
      our tactics of “striking jointly” with the bourgeoisie and the
      duty of keeping a strict watch “over our ally, as over an
      enemy,” etc. All this is also beyond the slightest doubt. But it
      would be ridiculous and reactionary to deduce from this that we
      must forget, ignore or neglect these tasks which, although
      transient and temporary, are vital at the

 

      present time. The
      fight against the autocracy is a temporary and transient task of
      the Socialists, but to ignore or neglect this task in any way
      would be tantamount to betraying Socialism and rendering a
      service to reaction. The revolutionary-Democratic dictatorship
      of the proletariat and the peasantry is unquestionably only a
      transient, temporary aim of the Socialists, but to ignore this
      aim in the period of a democratic revolution would be downright
      reactionary.
    

      Concrete political aims must be set in concrete
      circumstances. All things are relative, all things flow and all
      things change. The program of the German Social-Democratic Party
      does not contain the demand for a republic. The situation in
      Germany is such that this question can in practice hardly be
      separated from the question of Socialism (although even as
      regards Germany, Engels, in his comments on the draft of the Erfurt
      Program in 1891, warned against belittling the importance of
      a republic and of the struggle for a

      republic!).[6]

      In the Russian
      Social-Democratic Party the question of eliminating the demand
      for a republic from its program and agitation has never even
      arisen, for in our country there can be no talk of an
      indissoluble connection between the question of a republic and
      the question of Socialism. It was quite natural for a German
      Social-Democrat of 1898 not to put the special question of a
      republic in the forefront, and this evokes neither surprise nor
      condemnation. But a German Social-Democrat who in 1848 would
      have left the question of a republic in the shade would have
      been a downright traitor to the revolution. There is no such
      thing as abstract truth. Truth is always concrete.
    

      The time will come when the struggle against the Russian
      autocracy will end and the period of democratic revolution will
      be over in Russia; then it will be ridiculous to talk about
      “singleness of will” of the proletariat and the peasantry, about
      a democratic dictatorship, etc. When that time comes we shall
      attend directly to the question of the socialist dictatorship of
      the proletariat and deal with it at greater length. But at
      present the party of the advanced class cannot but strive most
      energetically for a decisive victory of the democratic
      revolution over tsarism. And a decisive victory means nothing
      else than the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the
      proletariat and the peasantry.
    

Note[7]


      1) We would remind the reader that in the polemics between the
         Iskra and the Vperyod, the former referred
         among other things to Engels’ letter to Turati, in which
         Engels warned the (future) leader of the Italian reformists
         not to confuse the democratic with the socialist

         revolution.[8]

         The impending revolution in Italy—wrote Engels about the
         political situation in Italy in 1894—will be a
         petty-bourgeois, democratic and not a socialist
         revolution. The Iskra reproached the
         Vperyod with having departed from the principle laid
         down by Engels. This reproach was unjustified, because the
         Vperyod

       (No. 14)[3]

         fully acknowledged, on the whole, the
         correctness of Marx’s theory of the difference between the
         three main forces in the revolutions of the nineteenth
         century. According to this theory, the following forces take
         a stand against the old order, against the autocracy,
         feudalism, serfdom:

         1) the liberal big
         bourgeoisie,

          2) the radical petty bourgeoisie,

          3) the
         proletariat.

         The first fights for
         nothing more than a constitutional monarchy; the second, for
         a democratic republic; the third, for a socialist
         revolution. To confuse the petty-bourgeois struggle for a
         complete democratic revolution with the proletarian struggle
         for a socialist revolution spells political bankruptcy for a
         Socialist. Marx’s warning to this effect is quite
         justified. But it is precisely for this very reason that the
         slogan “revolutionary communes” is erroneous, because the
         very mistake committed by the communes that have existed in
         history is that they confused the democratic revolution with
         the socialist revolution. On the other hand, our
         slogan—a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the
         proletariat and the peasantry—fully safeguards us
         against this mistake. While recognising the uncontestably
         bourgeois nature of the revolution, which is incapable of
         directly overstepping the bounds a mere democratic
         revolution, our slogan pushes forward  this
         particular revolution and strives to mould it into forms most
         advantageous to the proletariat; consequently, it strives to
         make the very most of the democratic revolution in order to
         attain the greatest success in the further struggle of the
         proletariat for Socialism.
    

 

Notes
 

[1] 
The first word was in scholarly use at the term, while the second was,
        and still is, colloquial Russian.—Tr.  

[2] 
The development of capitalism, more widespread and rapid in conditions
        of liberty, will inevitably soon put an end to singleness of will;
        the earlier counter-revolution and reaction are crushed.—Lenin

[3]
“Social-Democracy and the Provisional Revolutionary Government”,
1905. See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 275-92.–Ed.
 



[4] 
PLACEHOLDER




[5] 
   Lenin is refering to the programme published in 1874 by the
  London Blanquist
  group of former members of the Paris Commune (see F. Engels,
  “Flüchtlingslitcratur. II. Programm der blanqui stischen
  Kommunefluichtlinge”, Internationajes aus dem
  Voiksstaot, Berlin 1957, S. 47-56).

 





[6]
PLACEHOLDER




[7] 
PLACEHOLDER




[8]
See K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow
1953  pp. 551-55


 
  

What Does Being A Party of Extreme Opposition 
In Time of Revolution Mean?

|

A Cursory Comparison Between Several of 
the Resolutions of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. and Those of the 
“Conference”

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Cursory Comparison




Lenin: Two Tactics: A Cursory Comparison Between Several of the Resolutions of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. and Those of the 'Conference'








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution



11.
A Cursory Comparison Between Several of the
    Resolutions of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. and Those of the
    “Conference”

      The question of the provisional revolutionary government is the
      pivot of the tactical questions of the Social-Democratic
      movement at the present time. It is neither possible nor
      necessary to dwell in as great detail on the other resolutions
      of the Conference. We shall confine ourselves merely to
      indicating briefly a few points which confirm the difference in
      principle, analysed above, between the tactical trends of the
      resolutions of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. and those of
      the Conference resolutions.
    

      Take the question of the attitude towards the tactics of the
      government on the eve of the revolution. Once again you will
      find a comprehensive answer to this question in one of the
      resolutions of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. This
      resolution takes into consideration all the multifarious
      conditions and tasks of the particular moment: the exposure of
      the hypocrisy of the government’s concessions, the utilisation
      of “travesties of popular representation,” the achievement by
      revolutionary means of the urgent demands of the working class
      (the principal one being the eight-hour working day), and,
      finally, resistance to the Black Hundreds. In the Conference
      resolutions this question is scattered over several sections:
      “resistance to the dark forces of reaction” is mentioned only in
      the preamble of the resolution on the attitude to other
      parties. Participation in elections to representative bodies is
      considered separately from the question of “compromises” between
      tsarism and the bourgeoisie. Instead of calling for the
      achievement of an eight-hour working day by revolutionary means,
      a special resolution, with the high-sounding title “On the
      Economic Struggle,” merely repeats (after high-flown and very
      stupid phrases about “the central place occupied by the labour
      question in the public life of Russia”) the old slogan of
      agitation for “the legislative institution of an eight-hour
      working day.” The inadequacy and the belatedness of this slogan
      at the present time are too obvious to require proof.
    

      The question of open political action. The Third Congress takes
      into consideration the impending radical change in our
      activity. Secret activity and the development of

 

      the secret
      apparatus must on no account be abandoned: this would be playing
      into the hands of the police and be of the utmost advantage to
      the government. But at the same time we cannot start too soon
      thinking about open action as well. Expedient forms of such
      action and, consequently, special apparatus—less
      secret—must be prepared immediately for this
      purpose. The legal and semi-legal societies must be made use of
      with a view to transforming them, as far as possible, into bases
      of the future open Social-Democratic Labour Party in Russia.
    

      Here too the Conference divides up the question, and fails to
      issue any integral slogans. There bobs up as a separate point
      the ridiculous instruction to the Organisation Commission to see
      to the “placing” of its legally functioning publicists. There is
      the wholly absurd decision “to subordinate to its influence the
      democratic newspapers that set themselves the aim of rendering
      assistance to the working-class movement.” This is the professed
      aim of all our legal liberal newspapers, nearly all of which are
      of the Osvobozhdeniye trend. Why should not the editors
      of the Iskra make a start themselves in carrying out
      their advice and give us an example of how to subject the
      Osvobozhdeniye to Social-Democratic influence?

      ... 

      Instead of the slogan of utilising the legally existing
      unions for the purpose of establishing bases for the Party, we
      are given, first, particular advice about the “trade” unions
      only (that all Party members must join them) and, secondly,
      advice to guide “the
      revolutionary organisations of the workers” = “organisations not
      officially constituted” = “revolutionary workers’ clubs.” How
      these “clubs” come to be classed as unofficially constituted
      organisations, what these “clubs” really are—goodness only
      knows. Instead of definite and clear instructions from a supreme
      Party body, we have some jottings of ideas and the rough drafts
      of publicists. We get no complete picture of the beginning of
      the Party’s transition to an entirely new basis in all its
      work.
    

      The “peasant question” was presented by the Party Congress and
      by the Conference in entirely different ways. The Congress drew
      up a resolution on the “attitude to the peasant movement,” the
      Conference on “work among the peasants.” In the one case prime
      importance is attached to the task of

 

      guiding the widespread
      revolutionary-democratic movement in the general national
      interests of the fight against tsarism. In the other instance,
      the question is reduced to mere “work” among a particular
      section of society. In the one case, a central practical slogan
      for our agitation is advanced, calling for the immediate
      organisation of revolutionary peasant committees in order to
      carry out all the democratic changes. In the other, a “demand
      for the organisation of committees” is to be presented to a
      constituent assembly. Why must we wait for this constituent
      assembly? Will it really be constituent? Will it be stable
      without the preliminary and simultaneous establishment of
      revolutionary peasant committees? All these questions are
      ignored by the Conference. All its decisions reflect the general
      idea which we have traced—namely, that in the bourgeois
      revolution we must do only our special work, without setting
      ourselves the aim of leading the entire democratic movement and
      of doing this independently. Just
      as the Economists constantly harped on the idea that the
      Social-Democrats should concern themselves with the economic
      struggle, leaving it to the liberals to take care of the
      political struggle, so the new-Iskraists keep harping in all
      their discussions on the idea that we should creep into a modest
      corner out of the way of the bourgeois revolution, leaving it to
      the bourgeoisie to do the active work of carrying out the
      revolution.
    

      Finally, we cannot but note also the resolution on the attitude
      toward other parties. The resolution of the Third Congress of
      the R.S.D.L.P. speaks of exposing all the limitations and
      inadequacies of the bourgeois movement for emancipation, without
      entertaining the naïve idea of enumerating every possible
      instance of such limitation from congress to congress or of
      drawing a line of distinction between bad bourgeois and good
      bourgeois. The Conference, repeating the mistake made by
      Starover, persistently searched for such a line, developed the
      famous “litmus paper” theory. Starover started from a very good
      idea: to put the strictest possible terms to the
      bourgeoisie. Only he forgot that any attempt to separate in
      advance the bourgeois democrats who are worthy of approval,
      agreements, etc., from those who are unworthy leads to a
      “formula” which is immediately thrown overboard by the
      development of events and which introduces

 

      confusion into the
      proletarian class consciousness. The emphasis is shifted from
      real unity in the struggle to declarations, promises,
      slogans. Starover was of the opinion that “universal and equal
      suffrage, direct elections and secret ballot” was such a radical
      slogan. But before two years elapsed the “litmus paper” proved
      its worthlessness, the slogan of universal suffrage was taken
      over by the Osvobozbdentsi, who not only came no closer
      to Social-Democracy as a result of this, but, on the contrary,
      tried by means of this very slogan to mislead the workers and
      divert them from Socialism.
    

      Now the new-Iskraists are setting “terms” that are even
      “stricter,” they are “demanding” from the enemies of tsarism
      “energetic and unequivocal” (!?) “support of every determined
      action of the organised proletariat,” etc., up to and including
      “active participation in the self-armament of the people.” The
      line has been drawn much further—but nonetheless this line
      is again already obsolete, it revealed its worthlessness at
      once. Why, for instance, is there no slogan of a republic? How
      is it that the Social-Democrats—in the interest of
      “relentless revolutionary war against all the foundations of the
      system of social estates and the monarchy”—“demand” from
      the bourgeois democrats anything you like except a fight for a
      republic?
    

      That this question is not mere captiousness, that the mistake of
      the new-Iskraists is of most vital political significance is
      proved by the “Russian Liberation League” (see
      Proletary,

       No. 4).[1]

      These “enemies of tsarism” will fully
      meet all the “requirements” of the new Iskra
      supporters. And yet we have shown that the spirit of
      Osvobozhdeniye reigns in the program (or lack of
      program) of this “Russian Liberation League” and that the
      Osvobozhdentsi can easily take it in tow. The
      Conference, however, declares in the concluding section of the
      resolution




      that “Social-Democracy will continue to oppose the
      hypocritical friends of the people, all those political
      parties which, though they display a liberal and democratic
      banner, refuse to render genuine support to the revolutionary
      struggle of the proletariat.” The “Russian Liberation League”
      not only does not refuse this support but offers it most
      insistently. Is that a guarantee that the leaders of this League
      are not “hypocritical friends of the people,” even though they
      are Osvobozhdentsi?
    

      You see: by inventing “terms” in advance and presenting
      “demands” which are ludicrous by reason of their grim impotence,
      the new-Iskraists immediately put themselves in a ridiculous
      position. Their terms and demands immediately prove inadequate
      when it comes to gauging living realities. Their chase after
      formulae is hopeless, for no formula can embrace all the various
      manifestations of hypocrisy, inconsistency and limitations of
      the bourgeois democrats. It is not a matter of “litmus paper,”
      of forms, or written and printed demands, nor is it a matter of
      drawing, in advance, a line of distinction between hypocritical
      and sincere “friends of the people”; it is a matter of real
      unity in the struggle, of unabating criticism by
      Social-Democrats of every “uncertain” step taken by bourgeois
      democracy. What is needed for a “genuine consolidation of all
      the social forces interested in democratic change” is not the
      “points” over which the Conference laboured so assiduously and
      so vainly, but the ability to put forward genuinely
      revolutionary slogans. For this slogans are needed that will
      raise the revolutionary and republican bourgeoisie to the level
      of the proletariat and not reduce the aims of the proletariat to
      the level of the monarchist bourgeoisie. For this the most
      energetic participation in the insurrection and not sophist
      evasions of the urgent task of armed insurrection is needed.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
Proletary, No. 4, which appeared on June 4, 1905, contained a
        lengthy article entitled “A New Revolutionary Labour League”

      .

      The article gives the contents of the appeals issued by this league
      which assumed the name of “Russian Liberation League” and which set
      itself the aim of convening a constituent assembly with the aid of an
      armed insurrection. Further, the article defines the attitude of the
      Social-Democrats to such non-Party leagues. How far this league
      really existed, and what its fate was in the revolution is absolutely
      unknown to us. [Author’s note to the 1907
      edition.–Ed.] —Lenin
 

 
  

“Revolutionary Communes” and 
the Revolutionary-Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Peasantry

|

Will the Sweep of the Democratic Revolution 
be Diminished if the Bourgeoisie Recoils from it?

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Sweep of the Democratic Revolution Be
  Diminished If the Bourgeoisie Recoils




Lenin: Two Tactics: Will the Sweep of the Democratic Revolution be Diminished if the Bourgeoisie Recoils from it?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in 
the Democratic Revolution



12.
Will the Sweep of the Democratic Revolution be
    Diminished if the Bourgeoisie Recoils from it?

      The foregoing lines were already written when we received a copy
      of the resolutions adopted by the Caucasian Conference of the
      new Iskra supporters, published by the
      Iskra. Better




      material than this pour la bonne
      bouche (for dessert) we could not even have invented.
    

      The editors of the Iskra quite justly remark: “On the
      fundamental question of tactics, the Caucasian Conference also
      arrived at a decision analogous” (in truth!) “to the
      one adopted by the All-Russian Conference” (i.e., of the new
      Iskra-ists). “The question of the attitude of
      Social-Democracy towards a provisional revolutionary government
      has been settled by the Caucasian comrades in the spirit of most
      outspoken opposition to the new method advocated by the
      Vpeyod group and by the delegates of the so-called
      Congress who joined it.” “It must be admitted that the
      formulation of the tactics of the proletarian party in a
      bourgeois revolution as given by the Conference is very
      apt.”
    

      What is true is true. No one could have given a more “apt”
      formulation of the fundamental error of the new
      Iskra-ists. We shall quote this formulation in full,
      indicating in parentheses first the blossoms and then the fruit
      presented at the end.
    

      Here is the resolution of the Caucasian Conference of
      new-Iskraists on a provisional revolutionary government:
    

      “Whereas we consider it to be our task to take advantage of the
      revolutionary situation to render more profound” (of course!
      They should have added: “à la Martynov!”) “the
      Social-Democratic consciousness of the proletariat” (only to
      render the consciousness more profound, and not to win a
      republic? What a “profound” conception of revolution 1) “and in
      order to secure for the Party fullest freedom to criticise the
      nascent bourgeois-state system” (it is not our business to
      secure a republic! Our business is only to secure freedom of
      criticism. Anarchist ideas give rise to anarchist language:
      “bourgeois-state” system!), “the Conference declares against the
      formation of a Social-Democratic provisional government and
      joining such a government” (recall the resolution passed by the
      Bakunists ten months before the Spanish revolution and referred
      to by Engels: see the Proletary,

      No. 3),[2]

      "and 

      considers it to be the most expedient course to exercise
      pressure from without" (from below and not from above) “upon the
      bourgeois provisional government in order to secure a feasible
      measure” (?!) “of democratisation of the state system. The
      Conference believes that the formation of a provisional
      government by Social-Democrats, or their joining such a
      government,

 

      would lead, on the one hand, to the masses of the
      proletariat becoming disappointed in the Social-Democratic Party
      and abandoning it because the Social-Democrats, in spite of the
      fact that they had seized power, would not be able to satisfy
      the pressing needs of the working class, including the
      establishment of Socialism” (a republic is not a pressing need!
      The authors, in their innocence, do not notice that they are
      speaking a purely anarchist language, as if they were
      repudiating participation in bourgeois revolutions!), “and, on
      the other hand,

      
would cause the bourgeois classes to recoil
      from the revolution and diminish its sweep.”


      That is the crux of the matter. That is where anarchist ideas
      become interwoven (as is constantly the case among the
      West-European Bernsteinians also) with the purest
      opportunism. Just think of it: not to join a provisional
      government because this will cause the bourgeoisie to recoil
      from the revolution and thus diminish the sweep of the
      revolution! Here, indeed, we have the new Iskra
      philosophy in its complete, pure and consistent form: the
      revolution is a bourgeois revolution, therefore we must bow down
      to bourgeois philistinism and make way for it. If we are guided,
      even in part, even for a moment, by the consideration that our
      participation may cause the bourgeoisie to recoil, we thereby
      simply yield leadership in the revolution entirely to the
      bourgeois classes. We thereby place the proletariat entirely
      under the tutelage of the bourgeoisie (while retaining complete
      “freedom of criticism”!!), compelling the proletariat to be meek
      and mild so as not to cause the bourgeoisie to recoil. We
      emasculate the most vital needs of the proletariat, namely, its
      political needs—which the Economists and their epigones
      have never properly understood—so as not to cause the
      bourgeoisie to recoil. We completely abandon the field of
      revolutionary struggle for the achievement of democracy to the
      extent required by the proletariat for the field of bargaining
      with the bourgeoisie, betraying our principles, betraying the
      revolution to purchase the bourgeoisie’s voluntary consent
      (“that it might not recoil”).
    

      In two brief lines, the Caucasian new-Iskraists managed to
      express the quintessence of the tactics of betrayal of the
      revolution and

 

      of converting the proletariat into a wretched
      appendage of the bourgeois classes. The tendency, which we
      traced above to the mistakes of the new Iskra-ists, now
      stands out before us as a clear and definite principle, viz., to
      drag at the tail of the monarchist bourgeoisie. Since the
      establishment of a republic would cause (and is already causing:
      Mr. Struve, for example) the bourgeoisie to recoil, therefore,
      down with the fight for a republic. Since every resolute and
      consistent democratic demand of the proletariat always and
      everywhere in the world causes the bourgeoisie to recoil,
      therefore, hide in your lairs, comrades and fellow workers, act
      only from without, do not dream of using the instruments and
      weapons of the “bourgeois-state” system in the interests of the
      revolution, and reserve for yourselves “freedom to criticize”!
    

      The fundamental fallacy of their very conception of the term
      “bourgeois revolution” has come to the surface. The Martynov or
      new Iskra “conception” of this term leads straight to a
      betrayal of the cause of the proletariat to the bourgeoisie.
    

      Those who have forgotten the old Economism, those who do not
      study it or remember it, will find it difficult to under stand
      the present echo of Economism. Recall the Bernsteinian

      Credo.[3]

      From “purely proletarian” views and programs,
      people arrived at the conclusion: we, the Social-Democrats, must
      concern ourselves with economics, with the real cause of labour,
      with freedom to criticise all political chicanery, with
      rendering Social-Democratic work really more profound. Politics
      are for the liberals. God save us from dropping into
      “revolutionism”: that will cause the bourgeoisie to
      recoil. Those who read the whole Credo over again or
      the Supplement to No. 9 of the Rabochaya
      Mysl

      (September 1899)[4]

      will be able to follow this entire line of reasoning.
    

      Today we have the same thing, only on a large scale, applied to
      an appraisal of the whole of the “great” Russian
      revolution—alas, already vulgarised and reduced to a
      travesty in advance by the theoreticians of orthodox
      philistinism! We, the Social-Democrats, must concern ourselves
      with freedom of criticism, with rendering class consciousness
      more profound, with action from without. They, the bourgeois
      classes, must have freedom to act, a free field for
      revolutionary

 

      (read: liberal) leadership, freedom to put through
      “reforms” from above.
    

      These vulgarizers of Marxism have never pondered over what Marx
      said about the need of substituting the criticism of weapons for
      the

      weapon of criticism.[5]

      Taking the name of Marx in vain, they,
      in actual fact, draw up resolutions on tactics wholly in the
      spirit of the Frankfurt bourgeois windbags, who freely
      criticised absolutism and rendered democratic consciousness more
      profound, but failed to understand that the time of revolution
      is the time of action, of action both from above and from
      below. Having converted Marxism into pedantry, they have made
      the ideology of the advanced, most determined and energetic
      revolutionary class the ideology of its most undeveloped strata,
      which shrink from the difficult revolutionary-democratic tasks
      and leave it to Messrs. the Struves to take care of these
      democratic tasks.
    

      If the bourgeois classes recoil from the revolution because the
      Social-Democrats join the revolutionary government, they will
      thereby “diminish the sweep” of the revolution.
    

      Listen to this, Russian workers: The sweep of the revolution
      will be mightier if it is carried out by Messrs. the Struves,
      who are not frightened away by the Social-Democrats and who
      want, not victory over tsarism, but to come to terms with
      it. The sweep of the revolution will be mightier if, of the two
      possible outcomes which we have outlined above, the first
      eventuates, i.e., if the monarchist bourgeoisie comes to terms
      with the autocracy concerning a “constitution” à
      la Shipov!
    

      Social-Democrats who write such disgraceful things in
      resolutions intended for the guidance of the whole Party, or who
      approve of such “apt” resolutions, are so blinded by their
      pedantry, which has utterly eroded the living spirit out of
      Marxism, that they do not see how these resolutions convert all
      their other fine words into mere phrase-mongering. Take any of
      their articles in the Iskra, or take even the notorious
      pamphlet written by our celebrated Martynov—you will read
      there about a popular insurrection, about carrying the
      revolution to completion, about striving to rely upon
      the common people in the fight against the inconsistent
      bourgeoisie. But then all these excellent things become
      miserable phrase-mongering immediately you accept or approve of
      the idea that “the sweep of the revolution” will be “diminished”
      as a consequence of the alienation




      of the bourgeoisie. One of two things, gentlemen: either we,
      together with the people, must strive to carry out the
      revolution and win a complete victory over tsarism in spite
      of the inconsistent, self-seeking and cowardly bourgeoisie,
      or we do not accept this “in spite of,” we fear lest the
      bourgeoisie “recoil” from the revolution, in which case we
      betray the proletariat and the people to the
      bourgeoisie—to the inconsistent, self-seeking and cowardly
      bourgeoisie.
    

      Don’t try to misinterpret what I have said. Don’t start howling
      that you are being accused of deliberate treachery. No, you have
      always been crawling and have at last crawled into the mire as
      unconsciously as the Economists of old, drawn inexorably and
      irrevocably down the inclined plane of making Marxism “more
      profound” to anti-revolutionary, soulless and lifeless
      “philosophising.”
    

      Have you ever considered, gentlemen, what real social forces
      determine “the sweep of the revolution”? Let us leave aside the
      forces of foreign politics, of international combinations, which
      have turned out very favourably for us at the present time, but
      which we all leave out of our discussion, and rightly so,
      inasmuch as we are concerned with the question of the internal
      forces of Russia. Look at these internal social forces. Aligned
      against the revolution are the autocracy, the imperial court,
      the police, the bureaucracy, the army and the handful of high
      nobility. The deeper the indignation of the people grows, the
      less reliable become the troops, and the more the bureaucracy
      wavers. Moreover, the bourgeoisie, on the whole, is now in
      favour of the revolution, is zealously making speeches about
      liberty, holding forth more and more frequently in the name of
      the people, and even in the name of the

     revolution.[1]

      But we Marxists all know from theory and from daily and hourly
      observation of our liberals, Zemstvo people and
      Orvobozhdentsi, that the bourgeoisie is inconsistent,
      self-seeking and cowardly in its support of the revolution. The
      bourgeoisie, in the mass, will inevitably turn towards
      counterrevolution,

 

      towards the autocracy, against the revolution
      and against the people, immediately its narrow, selfish
      interests are met, immediately it “recoils” from consistent
      democracy (and it is already recoiling from it!). There
      remains the “people,” that is, the proletariat and the
      peasantry: the proletariat alone can be relied on to march to
      the end, for it is going far beyond the democratic
      revolution. That is why the proletariat fights in the front
      ranks for a republic and contemptuously rejects silly and
      unworthy advice to take care not to frighten away the
      bourgeoisie. The peasantry includes a great number of
      semi-proletarian as well as petty-bourgeois elements. This
      causes it also to be unstable and compels the proletariat to
      unite in a strictly class party. But the instability of the
      peasantry differs radically from the instability of the
      bourgeoisie, for at the present time the peasantry is interested
      not so much in the absolute preservation of private property as
      in the confiscation of the landed estates, one of the principal
      forms of private property. While this does not make the
      peasantry become socialist or cease to be petty-bourgeois, it is
      capable of becoming a wholehearted and most radical adherent of
      the democratic revolution. The peasantry will inevitably become
      such if only the progress of revolutionary events, which is
      enlightening it, is not checked too soon by the treachery of the
      bourgeoisie and the defeat of the proletariat. Subject to this
      condition, the peasantry will inevitably become a bulwark of the
      revolution and the republic, for only a completely victorious
      revolution can give the peasantry everything in the
      sphere of agrarian reforms—everything that the
      peasants desire, of which they dream, and of which they truly
      stand in need (not for the abolition of capitalism as the
      “Socialist-Revolutionaries” imagine, but) in order to emerge
      from the mire of semi-serfdom, from the gloom of oppression and
      servitude, in order to improve their living conditions as much
      as it is possible to improve them under the system of commodity
      production.
    

      Moreover, the peasantry is attached to the revolution not only
      by the prospect of radical agrarian reform but by its general
      and permanent interests. Even in fighting the proletariat the
      peasantry stands in need of democracy, for only a democratic
      system is capable of giving exact expression to its interests
      and of ensuring its predominance

 

      as the mass, as the
      majority. The more enlightened the peasantry becomes (and since
      the war with Japan it is becoming enlightened much more rapidly
      than those who are accustomed to measure enlightenment by the
      school standard suspect), the more consistently and determinedly
      will it favour a thoroughgoing democratic revolution; for,
      unlike the bourgeoisie, it has nothing to fear from the
      supremacy of the people, but, on the contrary, stands to gain by
      it. A democratic republic will become the ideal of the peasantry
      as soon as it begins to free itself from its naïve
      monarchism, because the enlightened monarchism of the bourgeois
      stock-jobbers (with an upper chamber, etc.) implies for the
      peasantry the same disfranchisement and the same
      down-troddenness and ignorance as it suffers from today, only
      slightly glossed over with the varnish of European
      constitutionalism.
    

      That is why the bourgeoisie as a class naturally and inevitably
      strives to come under the wing of the liberal-monarchist party,
      while the peasantry, in the mass, strives to come under the
      leadership of the revolutionary and republican party. That is
      why the bourgeoisie is incapable of carrying the democratic
      revolution to its consummation, while the peasantry is capable
      of doing so, and we must exert all our efforts to help it to do
      so.
    

      It may be objected: but this requires no proof, this is all ABC;
      all Social-Democrats understand this perfectly well. But that is
      not so. It is not understood by those who can talk about “the
      sweep” of the revolution being “diminished” because the
      bourgeoisie will fall away from it. Such people repeat the words
      of our agrarian program that they have learned by rote without
      understanding their meaning, for otherwise they would not be
      frightened by the concept of the revolutionary-democratic
      dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, which
      inevitably follows from the entire Marxian world outlook and
      from our program; otherwise they would not restrict the sweep of
      the great Russian revolution to the limits to which the
      bourgeoisie is prepared to go. Such people defeat their abstract
      Marxian revolutionary phrases by their concrete anti-Marxian and
      anti-revolutionary resolutions.
    

      Those who really understand the role of the peasantry in a
      victorious Russian revolution would not dream of saying

 

      that the
      sweep of the revolution would be diminished if the bourgeoisie
      recoiled from it. For, as a matter of fact, the Russian
      revolution will begin to assume its real sweep, will really
      assume the widest revolutionary sweep possible in the epoch of
      bourgeois-democratic revolution, only when the bourgeoisie
      recoils from it and when the masses of the peasantry come out as
      active revolutionaries side by side with the proletariat. In
      order that it may be consistently carried to its conclusion, our
      democratic revolution must rely on such forces as are capable of
      paralysing the inevitable inconsistency of the bourgeoisie
      (i.e., capable precisely of “causing it to recoil from the
      revolution,” which the Caucasian adherents of Iskra
      fear so much because of their lack of judgement).
    

The proletariat must carry to completion the democratic
      revolution, by allying to itself the mass of the peasantry in
      order to crush by force the resistance of the autocracy and
to paralyse the instability of the bourgeoisie. The
      proletariat must accomplish the socialist revolution, by allying
      to itself the mass of the semi-proletarian elements of the
      population in order to crush by force the resistance of the
      bourgeoisie and to paralyse the instability of the peasantry and
      the petty bourgeoisie.

      Such are the tasks of the
      proletariat which the new-Iskraists present so narrowly in all
      their arguments and resolutions about the sweep of the
      revolution.
    

      One circumstance, however, must not be forgotten, although it is
      frequently lost sight of in discussions about the “sweep” of the
      revolution. It must not be forgotten that the point at issue is
      not the difficulties this problem presents, but the road along
      which we must seek and attain its solution. The point is not
      whether it is easy or difficult to make the sweep of the
      revolution mighty and invincible, but how we must act in order
      to make this sweep more powerful. It is precisely on the
      fundamental nature of our activity, on the direction it should
      take, that our views differ. We emphasise this because careless
      and unscrupulous people too frequently confuse two different
      questions, namely, the question of the direction in which the
      road leads, i.e., the selection of one of two different roads,
      and the question of how easily the goal can be reached, or of
      how near the goal is on the given road.
    

      We have not dealt with this last question at all in the
      foregoing because it has not evoked any disagreement or
      divergency



 

      in the Party. But it goes without saying that the
      question itself is extremely important and deserves the most
      serious attention of all Social-Democrats. It would be a piece
      of unpardonable optimism to forget the difficulties which
      accompany the task of drawing into the movement the masses not
      only of the working class, but also of the peasantry. These
      difficulties have more than once been the rock against which the
      efforts to carry a democratic revolution to completion have been
      wrecked; and it was the inconsistent and self-seeking
      bourgeoisie which triumphed most of all, because it “made
      capital” in the shape of monarchist protection against the
      people, and at the same time “preserved the virginity” of
      liberalism . . . or of the Osvobozhdeniye trend. But
      difficult does not mean impossible. The important thing is to be
      convinced that the path chosen is the correct one, and this
      conviction will multiply a hundred-fold the revolutionary energy
      and revolutionary enthusiasm which can perform miracles.
    

      The depth of the rift among present-day Social-Democrats on the
      question of the path to be chosen can be seen at once by
      comparing the Caucasian resolution of the new-Iskraists with the
      resolution of the Third Congress of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party. The Congress resolution says:
      the bourgeoisie is inconsistent, it will certainly try to
      deprive us of the gains of the revolution. Therefore, make more
      energetic preparations for the fight, comrades and fellow
      workers! Arm yourselves, win the peasantry to your side! We
      shall not surrender our revolutionary gains to the self-seeking
      bourgeoisie without a fight. The resolution of the Caucasian
      new-Iskraists says: the bourgeoisie is inconsistent, it may
      recoil from the revolution. Therefore, comrades and fellow
      workers, please do not think of joining a provisional
      government, for, if you do, the bourgeoisie will certainly
      recoil, and the sweep of the revolution will thereby be
      diminished!
    

      One side says: advance the revolution forward, to its
      consummation, in spite of the resistance or the passivity of the
      inconsistent bourgeoisie.
    

      The other side says: do not think of carrying the revolution to
      completion independently, for if you do, the inconsistent
      bourgeoisie will recoil from it.
    

      Are these not two diametrically opposite paths? Is it not
      obvious that one set of tactics absolutely excludes the other?

 

      That the first tactics are the only correct tactics of
      revolutionary Social-Democracy, while the second are in fact
      purely Osvobozhdeniye tactics?
    
 

Notes
 

[1] 
Of interest in this connection is Mr.
  Struve's  open letter to
  Jaurès recently published by the latter in

  L’Humanité[6]

  and by Mr. Struve in the Osvobozhdeniye, No. 72.  —Lenin
 



[2] 
  36.  Lenin has in view the article “On the Provisional Revolutionary
  Government” (see present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 461-81), and also the
  article by F. Engels, Die Bakunisten an der Arbeit. Denkschrift
  über
  den Aufstand in Spanien im Sommmer
  1873, in which he criticises the Bakuninist resolution Lenin is
  referring to (see Der Volksstaat, Nos. 105, 106, 107,
  1873).




[3] 
PLACEHOLDER




[4] 
PLACEHOLDER




[5] 
  39. The reference is to Marx’s words in his Zur Kritik der
  lie gelsehien Rechtsphilosophie, MEGA, 1. Abt., Bd. 1,
  S. 614.




[6] 
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

A Cursory Comparison Between Several of 
the Resolutions of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. and Those of the 
“Conference”

|

Conclusion. Dare We Win?

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Conclusion




Lenin: Two Tactics: Conclusion. Dare We Win?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in
the Democratic Revolution



13.
Conclusion. Dare We Win?

      People who are superficially acquainted with the state of
      affairs in Russian Social-Democracy, or who judge as mere
      onlookers without knowing the whole history of our internal
      Party struggle since the days of Economism, very often also
      dismiss the disagreements on tactics which have now become
      crystallised, especially after the Third Congress, with the

    

      simple argument that there are two natural, inevitable and quite
      reconcilable trends in every Social-Democratic movement. One
      side, they say, lays special emphasis on the ordinary, current,
      everyday work, on the necessity of developing propaganda and
      agitation, of preparing forces, deepening the movement, etc.,
      while the other side lays emphasis on the militant, general
      political, revolutionary tasks of the movement, points to the
      necessity of armed insurrection, advances the slogans: for a
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship, for a provisional
      revolutionary government. Neither one side nor the other should
      exaggerate, they say; extremes are bad, both here and there
      (and, generally speaking, everywhere in the world), etc., etc.
    

      The cheap truisms of worldly (and “political” in quotation
      marks) wisdom, which such arguments undoubtedly contain, too
      often cover up a failure to understand the urgent and acute
      needs of the Party. Take the differences on tactics that now
      exist among the Russian Social-Democrats. of course, the special
      emphasis laid on the everyday, routine aspect of the work, such
      as we observe in the new Iskra-ist arguments about
      tactics, could not in itself present any danger and could not
      give rise to any divergence of opinion regarding tactical
      slogans. But the moment you compare the resolutions of the Third
      Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party with the
      resolutions of the Conference this divergence becomes strikingly
      obvious.
    

      What, then, is the trouble? The trouble is that, in the first
      place, it is not enough to point abstractly to the two currents
      in the movement and to the harmfulness of extremes. One must
      know concretely what the given movement is suffering from at the
      given time,

 

      what constitutes the real political danger to the
      Party at the present time. Secondly, one must know what real
      political forces are profiting by this or that tactical
      slogan—or perhaps by the absence of this or that slogan. To
      listen to the new Iskra-ists, one would arrive at the
      conclusion that the Social-Democratic Party is threatened with
      the danger of throwing overboard propaganda and agitation, the
      economic struggle and criticism of bourgeois democracy, of
      becoming inordinately absorbed in military preparations, armed
      attacks, the seizure of power, etc. Actually, however, real
      danger is threatening the Party from an entirely different
      quarter. Anyone who is at all closely familiar with the state of
      the movement, anyone who follows it carefully and thoughtfully,
      cannot fail to see the ridiculous side of the new
      Iskra’s fears. The entire work
      of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party has already been
      fully moulded into firm, immutable forms which absolutely
      guarantee that our main attention will be fixed on propaganda
      and agitation, impromptu and mass meetings, on the distribution
      of leaflets and pamphlets, assisting in the economic struggle
      and championing the slogans of that struggle. There is not a
      single Party committee, not a single district committee, not a
      single central delegates’ meeting or a single factory group
      where ninety-nine per cent of all the attention, energy and time
      are not always and constantly devoted to these functions, which
      have become firmly established ever since the middle of the
      ’nineties. Only those who are entirely unfamiliar with the
      movement are ignorant of this. Only very naïve or
      ill-informed people can be taken in by the new
      Iskra-ists’ repetition of stated truths when it is done
      with an air of great importance.
    

      The fact is that not only is no excessive zeal displayed among
      us with regard to the tasks of insurrection, to the general
      political slogans and to the matter of leading the entire
      popular revolution, but, on the contrary, it is
      backwardness in this very respect that stands out most
      strikingly, constitutes our weakest spot and a real danger to
      the movement, which may degenerate, and in some places is
      degenerating, from one that is revolutionary in deeds into one
      that is revolutionary in words. Among the many, many hundreds of
      organisations, groups and circles that are conducting the work
      of the Party you will not find a single one which has not from
      its

 

      very inception conducted the kind of everyday work about
      which the wiseacres of the new Iskra now talk with the
      air of people who have discovered new truths. On the other hand,
      you will find only an insignificant percentage of groups and
      circles that have
      understood the tasks an armed insurrection entails, which have
      begun to carry them out, and have realised the necessity of
      leading the entire popular revolution against tsarism, the
      necessity of advancing for that purpose certain definite
      progressive slogans and no other.
    

      We are incredibly behind in our progressive and genuinely
      revolutionary tasks, in very many instances we have not even
      become conscious of them; here and there we have failed to
      notice the strengthening of revolutionary bourgeois democracy
      owing to our backwardness in this respect. But the writers in
      the new Iskra, turning their backs on the course of
      events and on the requirements of the times, keep repeating
      insistently: Don’t forget the old! Don’t let yourselves be
      carried away by the new! This is the principal and unvarying
      leitmotif of all the important resolutions of the Conference;
      whereas in the Congress resolutions you just as unvaryingly
      read: while confirming the old (and without stopping to chew it
      over and over, for the very reason that it is old and has
      already been settled and recorded in literature, in resolutions
      and by experience), we put forward a new task, draw attention to
      it, issue a new slogan, and demand that the genuinely
      revolutionary Social-Democrats immediately set to work to put it
      into effect.
    

      That is how matters really stand with regard to the question of
      the two trends in Social-Democratic tactics. The revolutionary
      period has called forth new tasks, which only the totally blind
      can fail to see. And some Social-Democrats unhesitatingly
      recognise these tasks and place them on the order of the day,
      declaring: the armed insurrection brooks no delay, prepare
      yourselves for it immediately and energetically, remember that
      it is indispensable for a decisive victory, issue the slogans of
      a republic, of a provisional government, of a
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the
      peasantry. Others, however, draw back, mark time, write prefaces
      instead of giving slogans; instead of pointing to the new while
      confirming the old, they chew this old tediously and at great

 

      length, inventing pretexts to avoid the new, unable to determine
      the conditions for a decisive victory or to issue the slogans
      which alone are in line with the striving to attain complete
      victory.
    

      The political result of this khvostism stares us in the
      face. The fable about a rapprochement between the “majority” of
      the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and the revolutionary
      bourgeois democracy remains a fable which has not been confirmed
      by a single political fact, by a single important resolution of
      the “Bolsheviks” or a single act of the Third Congress of the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. On the other hand, the
      opportunist, monarchist bourgeoisie, as represented by the
      Osvobozhdeniye, has long been welcoming the
      trends of the “principles” of new Iskra-ism and now it
      is actually running its mill with their grist, is adopting their
      catchwords and “ideas” directed against “secrecy” and “riots,”
      against exaggerating the “technical” side of the revolution,
      against openly proclaiming the slogan of armed insurrection,
      against the “revolutionism” of extreme demands, etc., etc. The
      resolution of a whole conference of “Menshevik” Social-Democrats
      in the Caucasus, and the endorsement of that resolution by the
      editors of the new Iskra, sums it all up politically in
      an unmistakable way: lest the bourgeoisie recoil if the
      proletariat takes part in a revolutionary-democratic
      dictatorship! This puts it in a nutshell. This gives the
      finishing touch to the transformation of the proletariat into an
      appendage of the monarchist bourgeoisie. The political
      meaning of the khvostism of the new Iskra
      is thereby proved in fact, not by a casual declaration of some
      individual, but by a resolution especially endorsed by a whole
      trend.
    

      Anyone who ponders over these facts will understand the real
      significance of the stock reference to the two sides and the two
      trends in the Social-Democratic movement. For a study of these
      trends on a large scale, take Bernsteinism. The Bernsteinians
      have been dinning into our ears in exactly the same way that it
      is they who understand the true needs of the proletariat, the
      tasks connected with the growth of its forces, with rendering
      the entire activity more profound, with preparing the elements
      of a new society, with propaganda and agitation! Bernstein says:
      we demand a frank recognition of what is, thus sanctifying

 

      a “movement” without “final aims,” sanctifying defensive
      tactics only, preaching the tactics of fear “lest the
      bourgeoisie recoil.” The Bernsteinians also raised an outcry
      against the “Jacobinism” of the revolutionary Social-Democrats,
      against the “publicists” who fail to understand the “initiative
      of the workers,” etc., etc. In reality, as everyone knows, the
      revolutionary Social-Democrats have never even thought of
      abandoning the everyday, petty work, the mustering of forces,
      etc., etc. All they demanded was a clear understanding of the
      final aim, a clear presentation of the revolutionary tasks; they
      wanted to raise the semi-proletarian and semi-petty-bourgeois
      strata to the revolutionary level of the proletariat, not to
      reduce this level to that of opportunist considerations such as
      “lest the bourgeoisie recoil.” Perhaps the most vivid expression
      of this rift between the intellectual opportunist wing and the
      proletarian revolutionary wing of the Party was the question:
      durfen wir siegen? “Dare we win?” Is it permissible for
      us to win? Would it not be dangerous for us to win? Ought we to
      win? This question, which seems so strange at first sight, was
      raised, however, and had to be raised, because the opportunists
      were afraid of victory, were frightening the proletariat away
      from it, were predicting that trouble would come of it, were
      ridiculing the slogans that straightforwardly called for it.
    

      The same fundamental division into an intellectual-opportunist
      and proletarian-revolutionary trend exists also among us, with
      the very material difference, however, that here we are faced
      with the question of a democratic revolution, and not of a
      socialist revolution. The question “dare we win?” which seems so
      absurd at first sight, has been raised among us also. It was
      raised by Martynov in his Two Dictatorships, in which
      he prophesied dire misfortune if we prepare well for and carry
      out an insurrection quite successfully. The question has been
      raised in all the new Iskra literature dealing with a
      provisional revolutionary government, and all the time
      persistent though futile efforts have been made to liken
      Millerand’s participation in a bourgeois-opportunist government
      to

      Varlin’s[1]

      participation in a petty-bourgeois revolutionary government. It
      is embodied in a resolution: “lest the bourgeoisie recoil.” And
      although Kautsky, for instance, now tries to wax ironical and
      says that our dispute about a

 

      provisional revolutionary
      government is like dividing the skin of a bear before the bear
      has been killed, this irony only proves that even clever and
      revolutionary Social-Democrats are liable to put their foot in
      it when they talk about something they know of only by
      hearsay. German Social-Democracy is not yet so near to killing
      its bear (carrying out a socialist revolution), but the dispute
      as to whether we “dare” kill the bear was of enormous importance
      from the point of view of principles and of practical
      politics. Russian Social-Democrats are not yet so near to being
      strong enough to “kill their bear” (to carry out a democratic
      revolution), but the question as to whether we “dare” kill it is
      of extreme importance for the whole future of Russia and for the
      future of Russian Social-Democracy. An army cannot be
      energetically and successfully mustered and led unless we are
      sure that we “dare” win.
    

      Take our old Economists. They too howled that their opponents
      were conspirators, Jacobins (see the Rabocheye Dyelyo,
      especially No. 10, and Martynov’s speech in the debate on the
      program at the Second Congress), that by plunging into politics
      they were divorcing themselves from the masses, that they were
      losing sight of the fundamentals of the working-class movement,
      ignoring the initiative of the workers, etc., etc. In reality
      these supporters of the “initiative of the workers” were
      opportunist intellectuals who tried to foist on the workers
      their own narrow and philistine conception of the tasks of the
      proletariat. In reality the opponents of Economism, as everyone
      can see from the old Iskra, did not neglect or push
      into the background any of the aspects of Social-Democratic
      work, nor did they in the least forget the economic struggle;
      but they were able at the same time to present the urgent and
      immediate political tasks in their full scope and they opposed
      the transformation of the workers’ party into an “economic”
      appendage of the liberal bourgeoisie.
    

      The Economists had learned by rote that politics are based on
      economics and “understood” this to mean that the political
      struggle should be reduced to the level of the economic
      struggle. The new-Iskraists have learned by rote that the
      economic basis of the democratic revolution is the bourgeois
      revolution, and “understood” this to mean that the democratic
      aims of the proletariat should be degraded to the level of
      bourgeois moderation, to the limits beyond which “the
      bourgeoisie

 

      will recoil.” On the pretext of rendering their work
      more profound, on the pretext of rousing the initiative of the
      workers and pursuing a purely class policy, the Economists were
      actually delivering the working class into the hands of the
      liberal-bourgeois politicians, i.e., were leading the Party
      along a path which objectively meant exactly that. On the same
      pretexts, the new-Iskraists are actually betraying the interests
      of the proletariat in the democratic revolution to the
      bourgeoisie, i.e., are leading the Party along a path which
      objectively means exactly that. The Economists thought that
      leadership in the political struggle was no concern of the
      Social-Democrats but properly the business of the liberals. The
      new-Iskraists think that the active conduct of the democratic
      revolution is no concern of the Social-Democrats but properly
      the business of the democratic bourgeoisie, for, they argue, if
      the proletariat takes the leading and pre-eminent part it will
      “diminish the sweep” of the revolution.
    

      In short, the new-Iskraists are the epigones of Economism, not
      only in their origin at the Second Party Congress, but also in
      the manner in which they now present the tactical tasks of the
      proletariat in the democratic revolution. They, too, constitute
      an intellectual-opportunist wing of the Party. In the sphere of
      organisation they made their debut with the anarchist
      individualism of intellectuals and finished with
      “disorganisation-as-a-process,” fixing in the

      “Rules”[2]
[The “Rules of Organisation”
      adopted at the Geneva Menshevik Conference in 1905]

      adopted by the Conference the separation of the Party’s publishing activities
      from the Party organisation, an indirect and practically
      four-stage system of elections, a system of Bonapartist
      plebiscites instead of democratic representation, and finally
      the principle of “agreements” between the part and the whole. In
      Party tactics they continued to slide down the same inclined
      plane. In the “plan of the Zemstvo campaign” they declared that
      speeches to Zemstvo-ists were “the highest type of
      demonstration,” finding only two active forces on the political
      scene (on the eve of January 9!)—the government and the
      democratic bourgeoisie. They made the pressing problem of arming
      “more profound” by substituting for the direct and practical
      slogan of an appeal to arm, the slogan: arm the people with a
      burning desire to arm themselves. The tasks connected with an
      armed insurrection, with the establishment of a provisional
      government and with a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship have
      now been distorted and blunted




      by them in their official resolutions. “Lest the bourgeoisie
      recoil”—this final chord of their last resolution throws a
      glaring light on the question of where their path is leading the
      Party.
    

      The democratic revolution in Russia is a bourgeois revolution by
      reason of its social and economic content. But a mere repetition
      of this correct Marxian proposition is not enough. It must be
      properly understood and properly applied in political
      slogans. In general, all political liberties that are founded on
      present-day, i.e., capitalist, relations of production are
      bourgeois liberties. The demand for liberty expresses primarily
      the interests of the bourgeoisie. Its representatives were the
      first to raise this demand. Its supporters have everywhere used
      the liberty they acquired like masters, reducing it to moderate
      and meticulous bourgeois doses, combining it with the most
      subtle methods of suppressing the revolutionary proletariat in
      peaceful times and with brutally cruel methods in stormy times.
    

      But only the rebel Narodniks, the anarchists and the
      “Economists” could deduce from this that the struggle for
      liberty should be rejected or disparaged. These
      intellectual-philistine doctrines could be foisted on the
      proletariat only for a time and against its will. The
      proletariat always realised instinctively that it needed
      political liberty, needed it more than anyone else, despite the
      fact that its immediate effect would be to strengthen and to
      organise the bourgeoisie. The proletariat expects to find its
      salvation not by avoiding the class struggle but by developing
      it, by widening it, increasing its consciousness, its
      organisation and determination. Whoever degrades the tasks of
      the political struggle transforms the Social-Democrat from a
      tribune of the people into a trade union secretary. Whoever
      degrades the proletarian tasks in a democratic bourgeois
      revolution transforms the Social-Democrat from a leader of the
      people’s revolution into a leader of a free labour union.
    

      Yes, the people’s revolution. Social-Democracy has
      fought, and is quite rightly fighting against the
      bourgeois-democratic abuse of the word “people.” It demands that
      this word shall not be used to cover up failure to understand

 

      the class antagonisms within the people. It insists
      categorically on the need for complete class independence for
      the party of the proletariat. But it divides the “people” into
      “classes,” not in order that the advanced class may become shut
      up within itself, confine itself to narrow aims and emasculate
      its activity for fear that the economic rulers of the world will
      recoil, but in order that the advanced class, which does not
      suffer from the halfheartedness, vacillation and indecision of
      the intermediate classes, may with all the greater energy and
      enthusiasm fight for the cause of the whole of the people, at
      the head of the whole of the people.
    

      That is what the present-day new-Iskraists so often fail to
      understand and why they substitute for active political slogans
      in the democratic revolution a mere pedantic repetition of the
      word “class,” parsed in all genders and cases!
    

      The democratic revolution is a bourgeois revolution. The slogan
      of a Black Redistribution, or “land and liberty”—this most
      widespread slogan of the peasant masses, down trodden and
      ignorant, yet passionately yearning for light and
      happiness—is a bourgeois slogan. But we Marxists should
      know that there is not, nor can there be, any other path to real
      freedom for the proletariat and the peasantry, than the path of
      bourgeois freedom and bourgeois progress. We must not forget
      that there is not, nor can there be, at the present time, any
      other means of bringing Socialism nearer, than complete
      political liberty, than a democratic republic, than the
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the
      peasantry. As the representatives of the advanced and only
      revolutionary class, revolutionary without reservations, doubts
      or looking back, we must present to the whole of the people, as
      widely, as boldly and with the utmost initiative possible, the
      tasks of the democratic revolution. To degrade these tasks in
      theory means making a travesty of Marxism, distorting it in
      philistine fashion, while in practical politics it means
      delivering the cause of the revolution into the hands of the
      bourgeoisie, which will inevitably recoil from the task of
      consistently carrying out the revolution. The difficulties that
      lie on the road to the complete victory of the revolution are
      very great. No one will be able

 

      to blame the representatives of
      the proletariat if, having done everything in their power, their
      efforts are defeated by the resistance of the reaction, the
      treachery of the bourgeoisie and the ignorance of the
      masses. But everybody and the class-conscious proletariat above
      all, will condemn Social-Democracy if it curtails the
      revolutionary energy of the democratic revolution and dampens
      revolutionary ardour because it is afraid to win, because it is
      actuated by the consideration: lest the bourgeoisie recoil.
    

      Revolutions are the locomotives of history, said

      Marx.[3] [In 
      The Class Struggles in France]

      Revolutions are the festivals of
      the oppressed and the exploited. At no other time are the masses
      of the people in a position to come forward so actively as
      creators of a new social order as at a time of revolution. At
      such times the people are capable of performing miracles, if
      judged by the narrow, philistine scale of gradual progress. But
      the leaders of the revolutionary parties must also make their
      aims more comprehensive and bold at such a time, so that their
      slogans shall always be in advance of the revolutionary
      initiative of the masses, serve as a beacon, reveal to them our
      democratic and socialist ideal in all its magnitude and
      splendour and show them the shortest and most direct route to
      complete, absolute and decisive victory. Let us leave to the
      opportunists of the Osvobozhdeniye bourgeoisie the task
      of inventing roundabout, circuitous paths of compromise out of
      fear of the revolution and of the direct path. If we are
      compelled by force to drag ourselves along such paths, we shall
      be able to fulfil our duty in petty, everyday work also. But let
      ruthless struggle first decide the choice of the path. We shall
      be traitors to and betrayers of the revolution if we do not use
      this festive energy of the masses and their revolutionary ardour
      to wage a ruthless and self-sacrificing struggle for the direct
      and decisive path. Let the bourgeois opportunists contemplate
      the future reaction with craven fear. The workers will not be
      frightened either by the thought that the reaction promises to
      be terrible or by the thought that the bourgeoisie proposes to
      recoil. The workers are not looking forward to striking
      bargains, are not asking for sops; they are striving to crush
      the reactionary forces without mercy, i.e., to set up the
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and
      the peasantry.
    


      Of course, greater dangers threaten the ship of our Party in
      stormy times than in periods of the smooth “sailing” of liberal
      progress, which means the painfully slow sweating of the working
      class by its exploiters. of course, the tasks of the
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship are a thousand times more
      difficult and more complicated than the tasks of an “extreme
      opposition” or of the exclusively parliamentary struggle. But
      whoever can deliberately prefer smooth sailing and the path of
      safe “opposition” in the present revolutionary situation had
      better abandon Social-Democratic work for a while, had better
      wait until the revolution is over, until the festive days have
      passed, when humdrum everyday life starts again and his narrow
      routine standards no longer strike such an abominably discordant
      note, or constitute such an ugly distortion of the tasks of the
      advanced class.
    

      At the head of the whole of the people, and particularly of the
      peasantry—for complete freedom, for a consistent democratic
      revolution, for a republic! At the head of all the toilers and
      the exploited—for Socialism! Such must in practice be the
      policy of the revolutionary proletariat, such is the class
      slogan which must permeate and determine the solution of every
      tactical problem, every practical step of the workers’ party
      during the revolution.
    
 *     *  * 

 

Notes
 
 



[1] 
PLACEHOLDER




[2] 
PLACEHOLDER




[3] 
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

Will the Sweep of the Democratic Revolution 
be Diminished if the Bourgeoisie Recoils from it?

|

Once Again Osvobozhdeniye Trend, Once 
Again New Iskra trend

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Epilogue




Lenin: Two Tactics: Once Again Osvobozhdeniye Trend, Once Again New Iskra trend








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy 
in the Democratic Revolution



Epilogue
Once Again Osvobozhdeniye Trend,
   Once Again New Iskra trend

      Numbers 71-72 of the Osvobozhdeniye and Nos. 102-103 of
      the Iskra provide a wealth of additional material on
      the question to which we have devoted Chapter 8 of our
      pamphlet. Since it is quite impossible to make use of the whole
      of this rich material here, we shall confine ourselves to the
      most important points only: firstly, to the kind of “realism” in
      Social-Democracy that Osvobozhdeniye praises and why
      the latter must praise it; secondly, to the relationship between
      the concepts revolution and dictatorship.
    


 
  

Conclusion. Dare We Win?

|

What Do The Bourgeois Liberal Realists 
Praise The Social-Democratic “Realists” For?

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Bourgeois Liberal Realists Praise




Lenin: Two Tactics: What Do The Bourgeois Liberal Realists Praise The Social-Democratic 'Realists' For?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution



I.
What Do The Bourgeois Liberal Realists Praise The
    Social-Democratic “Realists” For?


      The articles entitled “The Split in Russian Social-Democracy”
      and “The Triumph of Common Sense” (Osvobozhdeniye,
      No. 72) set forth the opinion on Social-Democracy held by the
      representatives of the liberal bourgeoisie, an opinion which is
      of remarkable value for class-conscious proletarians. We cannot
      too strongly recommend every Social-Democrat to read these
      articles in full and to ponder over every sentence in them. We
      shall reproduce first of all the most important propositions
      contained in both these articles.
    


      “It is fairly difficult,” writes the Osvobozbdeniye,
      “for an outside observer to grasp the real political meaning of
      the disagreements that have split the Social-Democratic Party
      into two factions. A definition of the ‘Majority’ faction as the
      more radical and unswerving, as distinct from the ‘Minority’
      which allows of certain compromises in the interests of the
      cause would not be quite exact, and in any case would not
      provide an exhaustive characterisation. At any rate the
      traditional dogmas of Marxian orthodoxy are observed by the
      Minority faction with even greater zeal perhaps than by the
      Lenin faction. The

 

      following characterisation would appear to us
      to be more accurate. The fundamental political temper of the
      ’Majority’ is abstract revolutionism, rebellion for the sake of
      rebellion, an eagerness to stir up insurrection among the
      popular masses by any and every means and to seize power
      immediately in their name; to a certain extent this brings the
      ’Leninists’ close to the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      overshadows in their minds the idea of the class struggle with
      the idea of a Russian revolution involving the whole people;
      while abjuring in practice much of the narrow-mindedness of the
      Social-Democratic doctrine, the ’Leninists’ are, on the other
      hand, thoroughly imbued with the narrow-mindedness of
      revolutionism, renounce all practical work except the
      preparation of an immediate insurrection, ignore on principle
      all forms of legal and semi-legal agitation and every species of
      practically useful compromise with other oppositional
      trends. The Minority, on the contrary, while steadfastly
      adhering to the doctrine of Marxism, at the same time preserves
      the realistic elements of the Marxian world outlook. The
      fundamental idea of this faction is to oppose the interests of
      the ’proletariat’ to the interests of the bourgeoisie. But, on
      the other hand, the struggle of the proletariat is
      conceived—of course within certain bounds dictated by the
      immutable dogmas of Social-Democracy—in realistically sober
      fashion, with a clear realisation of all the concrete conditions
      and aims of this struggle. Neither of the two factions pursues
      its basic point of view quite consistently, for in their
      ideological and political activity they are bound by the strict
      formulae of the Social Democratic catechism, which keep the
      ’Leninists’ from becoming unswerving rebels, after the fashion
      of some, at least, of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and the
      ’Iskra-ists’ from becoming the practical leaders of the
      real political movement of the working class.”
    

      And, after quoting the contents of the most important
      resolutions, the Osvobozbdeniye writer goes on to
      illustrate his general “thoughts,” with several concrete remarks
      about them. In comparison with the Third Congress, he says, “the
      Minority Conference takes a totally different attitude towards
      armed insurrection.” “In connection with the attitude towards
      armed insurrection,” there is a difference in the respective
      resolutions on a provisional government. “A similar difference
      is revealed in relation to the workers’ trade unions. The
      ’Leninists’ do not say a single word in their resolution about
      this most important starting point in the political education
      and organisation of the working class. The Minority, on the
      other hand, drew up a very weighty resolution.” With regard to
      the liberals, both factions, he says, are unanimous, but the
      Third Congress “repeats almost word for word Plekhanov’s
      resolution on the attitude towards the liberals adopted at the
      Second Congress and rejects Starover’s resolution adopted by the
      same Congress, which was more favourably inclined towards the
      liberals.” Although the Congress and the Conference resolutions
      on the peasant movement coincide on the whole, "the ‘Majority’
      lays more emphasis on the idea of the revolutionary confiscation
      of the landlords’ estates and other land, while the ‘Minority’
      wants to make the demand for democratic state and administrative
      reforms the basis of its agitation.”
    


      Finally, the Osvobozhdeniye cites from the
      Iskra, No. 100, a Menshevik resolution, the main clause
      of which reads as follows: “In view of the fact that at the
      present time underground work alone does not secure adequate
      participation of the masses in Party life and in some degree
      leads to the masses as such being contrasted to the Party as an
      illegal organisation, the latter must assume leadership of the
      trade union struggle of the workers on a legal basis, strictly
      linking up this struggle with the Social-Democratic tasks.”
      Commenting on this resolution the Osvobozhdeniye
      exclaims: “We heartily welcome this resolution as a triumph of
      common sense, as evidence that a definite section of the
      Social-Democratic Party is beginning to see the light with
      regard to tactics.”
    


      The reader now has before him all the essential opinions of the
      Osvobozhdeniye. It would, of course, be the greatest
      mistake to regard these opinions as correct in the sense that
      they correspond to objective truth. Every Social-Democrat will
      easily detect mistakes in them at every step. It would be
      naïve to forget that these opinions are thoroughly
      permeated with the interests and the points of view of the
      liberal bourgeoisie, and that accordingly they are utterly
      biased and tendentious. They reflect the views of the
      Social-Democrats in the same way as objects are reflected in a
      concave or convex mirror. But it would be an even greater
      mistake to forget that in the final analysis these
      bourgeois-distorted opinions reflect the real interests of the
      bourgeoisie, which, as a class, undoubtedly understands
      correctly which trends in Social-Democracy are advantageous,
      close, akin and agreeable, and which trends are harmful,
      distant, alien and antipathetic to it. A bourgeois philosopher
      or a bourgeois publicist can never understand Social-Democracy
      properly, neither Menshevik nor Bolshevik Social-Democracy. But
      if he is at all a sensible publicist, his class instinct will
      not deceive him, and he will always grasp the significance for
      the bourgeoisie of one or another trend in the Social-Democratic
      movement, on the whole correctly, although he may present it in
      a distorted way. That is why the class instinct of our enemy,
      his class opinion, is always deserving of the most serious
      attention of every class-conscious proletarian.
    

      What, then, does the class instinct of the Russian bourgeoisie,
      as expressed by the Osvobozhdentsi, tell us?
    

      It quite definitely expresses its satisfaction with the trend
      represented by the new Iskra, praises it for its
      realism, sober-mindedness, the triumph of common sense, the
      seriousness of

 

      its resolutions, its beginning to see the light
      on questions of tactics, its practicalness, etc.—and it
      expresses dissatisfaction with the trend of the Third Congress,
      censures it for its narrow-mindedness, revolutionism, its rebel
      spirit,
      its repudiation of practically useful compromises, etc. The
      class instinct of the bourgeoisie suggests to it exactly what
      has been repeatedly proved with the help of most precise facts
      in our literature, namely, that the new-Iskraists are the
      opportunist and their opponents the revolutionary wing of the
      present-day Russian Social-Democratic movement. The liberals
      cannot but sympathise with the trend of the former, and cannot
      but censure the trend of the latter. The liberals, being the
      ideologists of the bourgeoisie, perfectly well understand the
      advantages to the bourgeoisie of “practicalness,
      sober-mindedness and seriousness” on the part of the working
      class, i.e., of actually restricting its field of activity
      within the boundaries of capitalism, reforms, the trade union
      struggle, etc. Dangerous and terrible to the bourgeoisie is the
      “revolutionary narrow-mindedness” of the proletariat and its
      endeavour in order to promote its own class aims to win the
      leadership in a popular Russian revolution.
    

      That this is the real meaning of the word “realism” as employed
      by the Osvobozhdeniye is evident among other things
      from the way it was used previously by the
      Osvobozhdeniye and Mr. Struve. The Iskra
      itself could not but admit that this was the meaning of
      the Osvobozhdeniye’s “realism.” Take, for instance, the
      article entitled “It Is High Time!” in the supplement to the
      Iskra, No. 73-74. The author of this article (a
      consistent exponent of the views of the “Marsh” at the Second
      Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party) frankly
      expressed the opinion that “at the Congress Akimov played the
      part of the ghost of opportunism rather than of its real
      representative.” And the editors of the Iskra were
      forthwith obliged to correct
      the author of the article “It Is High Time!” by stating in a note:
    


      “We cannot agree with this opinion. Comrade Akimov’s views on
      the programme bear the clear imprint of opportunism, which fact
      is admitted even by the Osvobozhdeniye critic,
      who—in one of its recent issues—stated that Comrade
      Akimov is an adherent of the ’realist’— read:
      revisionist—tendency.”
    



      Thus the Iskra itself is perfectly aware that the
      Osvobozhdeniye’s “realism” is simply opportunism and
      nothing else. If in attacking “liberal realism” (Iskra,
      No. 102) the Iskra now says nothing about how it
      was praised by the liberals for its realism, the
      explanation of this circumstance is that such praise is harder
      to swallow than any censure. Such praise (which the
      Osvobozhdeniye uttered not by mere chance and not for
      the first time) actually proves the affinity between liberal
      realism and those tendencies of Social-Democratic “realism”
      (read: opportunism) that run through every resolution of the
      new-Iskraists as a result of the mistaken character of their
      whole tactical line.
    

      Indeed, the Russian bourgeoisie has already fully revealed its
      inconsistency and egoism in the “popular” revolution—has
      revealed it in Mr. Struve’s arguments, by the whole tone and
      content of the numerous liberal newspapers, and by the nature of
      the political utterances of the bulk of the Zemstvo-ists, the
      bulk of the intellectuals and in general of all the adherents of
      Messrs. Trubetskoy, Petrunkevich, Rodichev and Co. of course,
      the bourgeoisie does not always clearly understand, but in
      general and on the whole, its class instinct enables it to grasp
      perfectly well that, on the one hand, the proletariat and the
      “people” are useful for its revolution as cannon fodder, as a
      battering-ram against the autocracy, but that, on the other
      hand, the proletariat
      and the revolutionary peasantry will be terribly dangerous to it
      if they win a “decisive victory over tsarism” and carry the
      democratic revolution to completion. That is why the bourgeoisie
      strains every effort to induce the proletariat to be content
      with a “modest” role in the revolution, to be more sober-minded,
      practical and realistic, to be guided in its activities by the
      principle, “lest the bourgeoisie recoil.”
    

      The bourgeois intellectuals know full well that they will not be
      able to get rid of the working-class movement. That is why they
      do not come out against the working-class movement, they do not
      come out against the class struggle of the proletariat—no,
      they even pay lip service to the right to strike, to a genteel
      class struggle, understanding the working-class movement and the
      class struggle in the Brentano or Hirsch-Duncker sense. In other
      words they are fully prepared to “yield” to the workers the
      right to

 

      strike and to organise in trade unions (which in fact
      has already been almost won by the workers themselves), provided
      the workers renounce their “rebelliousness,” their
      “narrow-minded revolutionism,” their hostility to
      “practically-useful compromises,” their claims and aspirations
      to put on the “popular Russian revolution,” the imprint of
      their class struggle, the imprint of proletarian
      consistency, proletarian determination and “plebeian
      Jacobinism.” That is why the bourgeois intellectuals all over
      Russia exert every effort, resort to thousands of ways and

    means—books,[1]

      lectures, speeches, talks, etc.,
      etc.—to imbue the workers with the ideas of (bourgeois)
      sober-mindedness, (liberal) practicalness, (opportunist)
      realism, (Brentano) class struggle,

      (Hirsch-Duncker)
      trade

      unions,[2]

      etc. The latter two slogans are particularly
      convenient for the bourgeois of the “constitutional-democratic”
      party, or the party of “liberation,” since outwardly they
      coincide with the Marxian slogans, since with a few small
      omissions and some slight distortions they can easily be
      confused with and sometimes even passed off as Social-Democratic
      slogans. For instance, the legal liberal newspaper
      Rassvyet (which we will try some day to discuss in
      greater detail with the readers of the Proletary)
      frequently says such “bold” things about the class struggle,
      about the possible deception of the proletariat by the
      bourgeoisie, about the working-class movement, about the
      initiative of the proletariat, etc., etc., that the inattentive
      reader or an unenlightened worker might easily be led to believe
      that its “social-democratism” is genuine. Actually, however, it
      is a bourgeois imitation of social-democratism, an opportunist
      distortion and perversion of the concept class struggle.
    

      At the bottom of the whole of this gigantic (in breadth of
      influence on the masses) bourgeois subterfuge lies the tendency
      to reduce the working-class movement mainly to a trade union
      movement, to keep it as far away as possible from an independent
      (i.e., revolutionary and directed towards a democratic
      dictatorship) policy, to “overshadow in the minds of the workers
      the idea of a Russian revolution involving the whole people with
      the idea of the class struggle.”
    


      As the reader will perceive, we have turned the
      Osvobozhdeniye formulation upside down. This is an
      excellent formulation that excellently expresses the two views
      of the role of the proletariat in a democratic revolution: the
      bourgeois view and the Social-Democratic view. The bourgeoisie
      wants to confine the proletariat to the trade union movement and
      thereby to “overshadow in its mind the idea of a Russian
      revolution involving the whole people with the idea of the
      (Brentano) class struggle”—which is wholly in the
      spirit of the Bernsteinian authors of the Credo, who
      overshadowed in the minds of the workers the idea of political
      struggle with the idea of a “purely working-class”
      movement. Social-Democracy, however, wants, on the contrary, to
      develop the class struggle of the proletariat to the point where
      the latter will take the leading part in the popular Russian
      revolution, i.e., will lead this revolution to a the
      democratic-dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry.
    

      The revolution in our country is one that involves the whole
      people, says the bourgeoisie to the proletariat. Therefore, you,
      as a separate class, must confine yourselves to your class
      struggle, must in the name of “common sense” devote your
      attention mainly to the trade unions, and their legalisation,
      must consider these trade unions as “the most important starting
      point in your political education and organisation,” must in a
      revolutionary situation draw up for the most part “serious”
      resolutions like the new Iskra resolution, must pay
      careful heed to resolutions that are “more favourably inclined
      towards the liberals,” must show preference for leaders who
      display a tendency to become “practical leaders of the real
      political movement of the working class,” must “preserve the
      realistic elements of the Marxian world outlook” (if you have
      unfortunately already become infected with the “strict formulae”
      of this “unscientific” catechism).
    

      The revolution in our country is one involving the whole people,
      Social-Democracy says to the proletariat. Therefore, you, as the
      most progressive and the only thoroughly revolutionary class,
      must strive not only to take the most active part, but also the
      leading, part in it. Therefore, you must not confine yourselves
      to narrowly conceived limits of the class struggle, meaning
      mainly the trade union movement,

 

      but, on the contrary, you must
      strive to widen the limits and the content of your class
      struggle to include not only all the aims of
      the present, democratic, Russian revolution of the whole of the
      people, but the aims of the subsequent socialist revolution as
      well. Therefore, while not ignoring the trade union movement,
      while not refusing to take advantage of even the slightest legal
      possibilities, you must, in a revolutionary period, put in the
      forefront the tasks of armed insurrection and the formation of a
      revolutionary army and a revolutionary government as being the
      only way to the complete victory of the people over tsarism, to
      the winning of a democratic republic and real political
      liberty.
    

      It would be superfluous to speak about the half-hearted and
      inconsistent stand, which, naturally, is so pleasing to the
      bourgeoisie, that the new Iskra resolutions took on
      this question because of their mistaken “line.”
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
Cf. Prokopovich, The Labour Question in Russia —Lenin
 


[2]
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

Once Again Osvobozhdeniye Trend, Once 
Again New Iskra trend

|

Comrade Martynov Again Renders the Question 
“More Profound”

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Martynov Again Gives “Profundity”




Lenin: Two Tactics: Comrade Martynov Again Renders the Question 'More Profound'






Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy 
in the Democratic Revolution



II.
Comrade Martynov Again Renders the Question
“More Profound”

      Let us pass on to Martynov’s articles in Nos. 102 and 103 of the
      Iskra. We shall, of course, make no reply to Martynov’s
      attempts to prove the incorrectness of our and the correctness
      of his interpretation of a number of citations from Engels and
      Marx. These attempts are so trivial, Martynov’s subterfuges so
      obvious and the question so clear that it would be of no
      interest to dwell on this point again. Every thinking reader
      will be able easily to see through the simple wiles employed by
      Martynov in his retreat all along the line, particularly when
      the complete translations of Engels’ pamphlet The Bakunists
      at Work and Marx’s Address of the Central Council to
      the Communist League of March

      1850,[4]

      on which a group of
      collaborators of the Proletary are now working, are
      published. A single quotation from Martynov’s article will
      suffice to make his retreat clear to the reader.
    

      “The Iskra admits,” says Martynov in No. 103, “that the
      establishment of a provisional government is one of the possible
      and expedient ways of furthering the revolution, and denies the
      expediency of the participation of Social-Democrats in a
      bourgeois provisional government, precisely in the
      interests of a complete seizure, in the future,




      of the state machine for a socialist revolution.” In other
      words, the Iskra now admits the absurdity of all its
      fears concerning the responsibility of a revolutionary
      government for the exchequer and the banks, concerning the
      danger and impossibility of taking over the “prisons,” etc. But
      the Iskra is only muddling things as of old, confusing
      the democratic with the socialist dictatorship. This muddle is
      unavoidable, it is a means to cover up the retreat.
    

      But among the muddleheads of the new Iskra Martynov
      stands out as a muddleheaded of the first order, as a muddlehead
      of talent, if we may so express it. Confusing the question by
      his laborious efforts to render it “more profound,” he almost
      invariably “arrives at” new formulations which show up
      splendidly the entire falsity of the stand he has taken. You
      will remember how in the days of Economism he rendered Plekhanov
      “more profound” and created the formulation: “economic struggle
      against the employers and the government.” It would be difficult
      to find in all the literature of the Economists a more apt
      expression of the entire falsity of this trend. It is the same
      today. Martynov zealously serves the new Iskra and
      almost every time he opens his mouth he furnishes us with new
      and excellent material for an evaluation of the new
      Iskra’s false position. In No. 102 he says that Lenin
      “has imperceptibly substituted the concept dictatorship for that
      of revolution” (p. 3, col. 2).
    

      As a matter of fact all the accusations levelled at us by the
      new-Iskraists can be reduced to this one. And how grateful we
      are to Martynov for this accusation! What an invaluable service
      he renders us in the struggle against the new Iskra
      ideas by formulating his accusation in this way! We must
      positively beg the editors of the Iskra to let Martynov
      loose against us more often for the purpose of rendering the
      attacks on the Proletary “more profound” and for a
      “truly principled” formulation of these attacks. For the more
      Martynov strains to argue on the plane of principles the worse
      his arguments appear, and the more clearly he reveals the gaps
      in the new Iskra ideas, the more successfully he
      performs on himself and on his friends the useful pedagogical
      operation: reductio ad absurdum (reducing the
      principles of the new Iskra to absurdity).
    

      The Vperyod and the Proletary “substitute” the
      term dictatorship for that of revolution. The Iskra
      does not want

 

      such a “substitution.” Just so, most esteemed
      Comrade Martynov! You have unwittingly stated a great
      truth. With this new formulation you have confirmed our
      contention that the Iskra is dragging at the tail of
      the revolution, is straying into an Osvobozhdeniye
      formulation of its tasks, whereas the Vperyod and the
      Proletary are issuing slogans that lead the democratic
      revolution forward.
    

      You don’t understand this, Comrade Martynov? In view of the
      importance of the question we shall try to give you a detailed
      explanation.
    

      The bourgeois character of the democratic
      revolution expresses itself, among other things, in the fact
      that a number of classes, groups and sections of society which
      take their stand entirely on the recognition of private property
      and commodity production and are incapable of going beyond these
      bounds, are led by force of circumstances to recognise the
      uselessness of the autocracy and of the whole feudal order in
      general, and join in the demand for liberty. The bourgeois
      character of this liberty, which is demanded by
      “society” and advocated in a flood of words (and words only!) by
      the landowners and the capitalists, is manifesting itself more
      and more clearly. At the same time the radical difference
      between the struggle of the workers and the struggle of the
      bourgeoisie for liberty, between proletarian and liberal
      democratism, also becomes more obvious. The working class and
      its class-conscious representatives are marching forward and
      pushing this struggle forward, not only without fearing to carry
      it to completion, but striving to go far beyond the uttermost
      limits of the democratic revolution. The bourgeoisie is
      inconsistent and self-seeking, and accepts the slogans of
      liberty only in part and hypocritically. All attempts to draw a
      particular line or to draw up particular “points” (like the
      points in Starover’s or the Conferencers’ resolution) beyond
      which begins this hypocrisy of the bourgeois friends of liberty,
      or, if you like, this betrayal of liberty by its bourgeois
      friends, are inevitably doomed to failure; for the bourgeoisie,
      caught between two fires (the autocracy and the proletariat), is
      capable of changing its position and slogans by a thousand ways
      and means, of adapting itself by moving an inch to the Left or
      an inch to the Right, constantly bargaining and dickering. The
      task of proletarian democratism is

 

      not to invent such lifeless “points,” but unceasingly to
      criticise the developing political situation, to expose the ever
      new and unforeseeable inconsistencies and betrayals on the part
      of the bourgeoisie.
    

      Recall the history of Mr. Struve’s political pronouncements in
      the illegal press, the history of Social-Democracy’s war with
      him, and you will see clearly how these tasks were carried out
      by Social-Democracy, the champion of proletarian
      democratism. Mr. Struve began with a purely Shipov slogan:
      “Rights and an Authoritative Zemstvo” (see my article in the
      Zarya, “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the
      Hannibals of

     Liberalism”[1]).

      Social-Democracy exposed him and
      pushed him in the direction of a definitely constitutionalist
      program. When this “pushing” took effect, thanks to the
      particularly rapid progress of revolutionary events, the
      struggle shifted to the next question of democracy: not only a
      constitution in general, but one providing for universal and
      equal suffrage, direct elections and secret ballot. When we
      “captured” this new position from the “enemy” (the adoption of
      universal suffrage by the Osvobozhdeniye League) we began to
      press further; we showed up the hypocrisy and falsity of a
      two-chamber system, and the fact that universal suffrage had not
      been fully recognised by the Osvobozhdentsi; we pointed
      to their monarchism and showed up the huckstering
      nature of their democratism, or, in other words, the
      bartering away of the interests of the great Russian
      revolution by these Osvobozhderiye heroes of the
      moneybags.
    

      Finally, the savage obstinacy of the autocracy, the enormous
      progress of the civil war and the hopelessness of the position
      into which the monarchists have led Russia have begun to
      penetrate even the thickest skulls. The revolution has become a
      fact. It is no longer necessary to be a revolutionary
      to acknowledge the revolution. The autocratic government has
      actually been and is disintegrating in the sight of all. As has
      justly been remarked in the legal press by a certain liberal
      (Mr. Gredeskul), actual insubordination to this government has
      set in. Despite all its apparent strength the

 

      autocracy has
      proved impotent; the events attending the developing revolution
      have simply begun to brush aside this parasitic organism which
      is rotting alive. Compelled to base their activity (or, to put
      it more correctly, their political wire-pulling) on
      relationships as they are actually taking shape, the liberal
      bourgeois have begun to see the necessity of recognising the
      revolution. They do so not because they are
      revolutionaries, but despite the fact that they are not
      revolutionaries. They do so of necessity and against their will,
      angrily glaring at the successes of the revolution, they blame
      the autocracy for the revolution because it does not want to
      strike a bargain, but wants a life-and-death struggle. Born
      hucksters, they hate struggle and revolution, but circumstances
      force them to tread the ground of revolution, for there is no
      other ground under their feet.
    

      We are witnessing a highly instructive and highly comical
      spectacle. The bourgeois liberal prostitutes are trying to drape
      themselves in the toga of revolution. The
      Osvobozhdentsi—risum teneatis,
     amici![2]—the
      Osvobozhdentsi are beginning to speak in the name of
      the revolution! The Osvobozhdentsi are beginning to
      assure us that they “do not fear revolution” (Mr. Struve in the
      Osvobozhdeniye, No. 72)!!! The Osvobozhdentsi
      are voicing their claims “to be at the head of the
      revolution”!!!
    

      This is an exceptionally significant phenomenon that
      characterises not only the progress of bourgeois liberalism, but
      even more so the progress of the real successes of the
      revolutionary movement, which has compelled
      recognition. Even the bourgeoisie is beginning to feel that it
      is more to its advantage to take its stand on the side of the
      revolution—so shaky is the autocracy. On the other hand,
      this phenomenon, which testifies to the fact that the entire
      movement has risen to a new and higher plane, also sets us new
      and higher tasks. The recognition of the revolution by the
      bourgeoisie cannot be sincere, irrespective of the personal
      integrity of this or that bourgeois ideologist. The bourgeoisie
      cannot help introducing selfishness and inconsistency, the
      bargaining spirit and petty reactionary tricks even into this
      higher

 

      stage of the movement. We must now formulate the
      immediate concrete tasks of the revolution
      differently, in the name of our program and in
      amplification of our program. What was adequate yesterday is
      inadequate today. Yesterday, perhaps, the demand for
      the recognition of the revolution was adequate as an advanced
      democratic slogan. Today this is not enough. The revolution has
      forced even Mr. Struve to recognise it. The advanced class must
      now define exactly the very content of the urgent and
      pressing tasks of this revolution. While recognising the
      revolution, Messrs. the Struves again and again expose their
      asses’ ears and strike up the old song about the possibility of
      a peaceful outcome, about Nicholas calling on the
      Osvobozhdentsi to take power, etc., etc. The
      Osvobozhdentsi recognise the revolution in order the
      more safely for themselves to conjure it away, to betray it. It
      is our duty at the present time to show the proletariat and the
      whole people the inadequacy of the slogan: “Revolution”; we must
      show how necessary it is to have a dear and unambiguous,
      consistent and determined definition of the very
      content of the revolution. And this definition is provided
      by the one slogan that is capable of correctly expressing a
      “decisive victory” of the revolution, the slogan: for the
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the

      peasantry.[5]



      The misuse of terms is a most common practice in politics. The
      term “Socialist,” for example, has often been appropriated by
      the supporters of English bourgeois liberalism (“We are all
      Socialists

now,”[3]

      said Harcourt), by the supporters of Bismarck,
      and by the friends of Pope Leo XIII. The term “revolution” also
      fully lends itself to misuse and at a certain stage in the
      development of the movement such misuse is inevitable. When
      Mr. Struve began to speak in the name of revolution I
      involuntarily remembered Thiers. A few days before the February
      revolution, this monstrous gnome, this most consummate
      expression of the political corruption of the bourgeoisie,
      scented the approach of a popular storm, and so he announced
      from the parliamentary tribune: that he was of the party of
      revolution! (See Marx’s

      The
      Class Struggles in

      France,[6]

      1848-50.)

      The political significance of Osvobozhdeniye’s turn to
      the

 

      party of revolution is
      quite identical with that of Thiers. The fact that the
      Russian Thiers are talking about their belonging to the party of
      revolution shows that the slogan revolution has become
      inadequate, meaningless and defines no tasks: for the revolution
      has become a fact, and the most diverse elements are flocking to
      its side.
    

      Indeed, what is revolution from the Marxist point of view? The
      violent break-up of the obsolete political superstructure, the
      contradiction between which and the new relations of production
      caused its collapse at a certain moment. The contradiction
      between the autocracy and the entire structure of capitalist
      Russia, all the requirements of her bourgeois-democratic
      development, has now caused its collapse, all the more severe
      owing to the lengthy period in which this contradiction was
      artificially sustained. The superstructure is cracking at every
      joint, it is yielding to pressure, it is growing weaker. The
      people, through the representatives of the most diverse classes
      and groups, must now, by its own efforts, build a new
      superstructure for itself. At a certain stage of development the
      uselessness of the old superstructure becomes obvious to
      all. The revolution is recognised by all. The task now is to
      define which classes must build the new superstructure,
      and how they are to build it. If this is not defined,
      the slogan revolution is empty and meaningless at the present
      time; for the feebleness of the autocracy makes
      “revolutionaries” even of the Grand Dukes and of the

      Moskovskiye
      Vyedomosti![7]

      If this is not defined there can be no talk
      about the advanced democratic tasks of the advanced class. This
      definition is given in the slogan: the democratic dictatorship
      of the proletariat and the peasantry. This slogan defines the
      classes upon which the new “builders” of the new superstructure
      can and must rely, the character of the new superstructure (a
      “democratic” as distinct from a socialist dictatorship), and how
      it is to be built (dictatorship, i.e., the violent suppression
      of violent resistance, arming the revolutionary classes of the
      people). Whoever now refuses to recognise this slogan of
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship, the slogan of a
      revolutionary army, of a revolutionary government, of
      revolutionary peasant committees, either hopelessly fails to
      understand the tasks of the revolution, is unable to define the
      new and higher tasks

 

      that are called forth by the present
      situation, or is deceiving the people, betraying the revolution,
      misusing the slogan “revolution.”
    

      The former case applies to Comrade Martynov and his friends. The
      latter applies to Mr. Struve and the whole of the
      “constitutional-democratic” Zemstvo party.
    

      Comrade Martynov was so shrewd and smart that he hurled the
      charge of “substituting” the term dictatorship for that of
      revolution just at the time when the development of the
      revolution called for a definition of its tasks by the slogan
      dictatorship! Actually, Comrade Martynov again had the
      misfortune to remain at the tail end, to get stranded at the
      penultimate stage, to find himself on the level, of
      Osvobozhdeniye-ism, for it is precisely to the political
      stand of Osvobozhdeniye, i.e., to the interests of the
      liberal monarchist bourgeoisie, that recognition of “revolution”
      (in words) and refusal to recognise the democratic dictatorship
      of the proletariat and the peasantry (i.e., revolution in deeds)
      now corresponds. The liberal bourgeoisie, through the mouth of
      Mr. Struve, is now expressing itself in favour of
      revolution. The class-conscious proletariat, through the mouths
      of the revolutionary Social-Democrats, is demanding the
      dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry. And here the
      wiseacre of the new Iskra intervenes in the controversy
      and yells: don’t dare “substitute” the term dictatorship for
      that of revolution! Well, is it not true that the false stand
      taken by the new-Iskraists dooms them to be constantly dragging
      along at the tail of Osvobozhdeniye-ism?
    


      We have shown that the Osvobozhdentsi are ascending
      (not without encouraging prods by the Social-Democrats) step by
      step in the matter of recognising democracy. At first the issue
      in the dispute between us was: the Shipov system (rights and an
      authoritative Zemstvo) or constitutionalism? Then it was:
      limited suffrage or universal suffrage? Later: recognition of
      the revolution or a stock-jobber’s bargain with the autocracy?
      Finally, now it is: recognition of the revolution without the
      dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry or recognition
      of the demand for a dictatorship of these classes in the
      democratic revolution? It is possible and probable that
      Messrs. the Osvobozhdentsi (whether the present ones or
      their successors in the Left wing of the bourgeois democrats
      makes no difference) will ascend another

 

      step, i.e., recognise in time (perhaps by the time Comrade
      Martynov goes up one more step) the slogan of dictatorship
      also. This will inevitably be so if the Russian revolution
      continues to forge ahead successfully and achieves a decisive
      victory. What will be the position of Social-Democracy then? The
      complete victory of the present revolution will mark the end of
      the democratic revolution and the beginning of a determined
      struggle for a socialist revolution. The satisfaction of the
      demands of the present-day peasantry, the utter rout of
      reaction, and the winning of a democratic republic will mark the
      complete end of the revolutionism of the bourgeoisie and even of
      the petty bourgeoisie—will mark the beginning of the real
      struggle of the proletariat for Socialism. The more complete the
      democratic revolution, the sooner, the more widespread, the
      purer and the more determined will be the development of this
      new struggle. The slogan of a “democratic” dictatorship
      expresses the historically limited nature of the present
      revolution and the necessity of a new struggle on the basis of
      the new order for the complete emancipation of the working class
      from all oppression and all exploitation. In other words: when
      the democratic bourgeoisie or petty bourgeoisie ascends another
      step, when not only the revolution but the complete victory of
      the revolution becomes an accomplished fact, we shall
      “substitute” (perhaps amid the horrified cries of new, future,
      Martynovs) for the slogan of the democratic dictatorship, the
      slogan of a socialist dictatorship of the proletariat, i.e., of
      a complete socialist revolution.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]


       First published in 1901. See present edition, Vol. 5,
       pp. 31-80.–Ed. —Lenin

[2]
Restrain your laughter, friends! —Lenin

[3] 
These words are in English in the original.–Ed.—Lenin
 


[4] 
      Engels’s article, “The Bakunists at Work. Review of the Uprising
      in Spain in the Summer of 1873” was translated into Russian
      under Lenin’s editorship and in 1905 was published in Geneva by
      the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. in the form of a
      pamphlet. A second edition came out in 1906 in St. Petersburg.




      Written by Marx and Engels in March 1850, the Address
      to the Central Committee to the Communist League was
      published in Russian in 1906 as a supplement to the pamphlet
      The Cologne Communist Trial, brought out by the Molot
      Publishers in St. Petersburg.





[5]
PLACEHOLDER



[6] 
PLACEHOLDER



[7] 
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

What Do The Bourgeois Liberal Realists 
Praise The Social-Democratic “Realists” For?

|

The Vulgar Bourgeois Representation of 
Dictatorship and Marx’s View of It

  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Vulgar Bourgeois and the Marxist Views on
Dictatorship




Lenin: Two Tactics: The Vulgar Bourgeois Representation of Dictatorship 
and Marx's View of It






Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Two Tactics of Social-Democracy 
in the Democratic Revolution



III.
The Vulgar Bourgeois Representation of Dictatorship
    and Marx’s View of It

Mehring[4] 
      tells us in his notes to Marx’s articles from the Neue
      Rheinische Zeitung of 1848 that he published, that one of
      the reproaches levelled at this newspaper by bourgeois
      publications was that it had allegedly demanded “the immediate
      introduction of a dictatorship as the sole means of achieving
      democracy” (Marx, Nachlass, Volume III, p. 53). From
      the vulgar bourgeois standpoint the terms dictatorship and
      democracy are mutually exclusive. Failing to understand the
      theory of class struggle, and accustomed to

 

      seeing in the
      political arena the petty squabbling of the various bourgeois
      circles and coteries, the bourgeois conceives dictatorship to
      mean the annulment of all the liberties and guarantees of
      democracy, tyranny of every kind, and every sort of abuse of
      power in the personal interests of a dictator. In essence, it is
      precisely this vulgar bourgeois view that is manifested in the
      writings of our Martynov, who winds up his “new campaign” in the
      new Iskra by attributing the partiality of the
      Vperyod and the Proletary for the slogan of
      dictatorship to Lenin’s “passionate desire to try his luck”
      (Iskra, No. 103, p. 3, col. 2). In order to explain to
      Martynov the meaning of the term class dictatorship as distinct
      from personal dictatorship, and the tasks of a democratic
      dictatorship as distinct from those of a socialist dictatorship,
      it would not be amiss to dwell on the views of the Neue
      Rheinische Zeitung.
    


      “Every provisional organisation of the state after a
      revolution,” wrote the Neue Rheinische Zeitung on

      September
      14, 1848, “requires a dictatorship, and an energetic
      dictatorship at that. From the very beginning we have reproached
      Camphausen” (the head of the Ministry after March 8, 1848) “for
      not acting dictatorially, for not having immediately smashed up
      and eliminated the remnants of the old institutions. And while
      Herr Camphausen was lulling himself with constitutional
      illusions, the defeated party (i.e., the party of reaction)
      strengthened its positions in the bureaucracy, and in the army,
      and here and there even began to venture upon open

      struggle.”[5]


      These words, Mehring justly remarks, sum up in a few
      propositions all that was propounded in detail in the Neue
      Rheinische Zeitung in long articles on the Camphausen
      Ministry. What do these words of Marx tell us? That a
      provisional revolutionary government must act dictatorially (a
      proposition which the Iskra was totally unable to grasp
      since it was fighting shy of the slogan: dictatorship) and that
      the task of such a dictatorship is to destroy the remnants of
      the old institutions (which is precisely what was clearly stated
      in the resolution of the Third Congress of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party about the struggle against
      counterrevolution, and what was omitted in the resolution of the
      Conference, as we showed above). Thirdly, and lastly, it follows
      from these words that Marx castigated the bourgeois democrats

 

      for entertaining “constitutional illusions” in a period of
      revolution and open civil war. The meaning of these words
      becomes particularly obvious from the article in the Neue
      Rheinische Zeitung of

      
June 6,
      l848.

      “A Constituent National Assembly,” wrote Marx, “must first of
      all be an active, revolutionary-active assembly. The Frankfurt
      Assembly, however, is busying itself with school exercises in
      parliamentarism while allowing the government to act. Let us
      assume that this learned assembly succeeds after mature
      consideration in working out the best possible agenda and the
      best possible constitution. But what is the use of the best
      possible agenda and of the best possible constitution, if the
      German governments have in the meantime placed the bayonet on
      the

      agenda?”[6]


      That is the meaning of the slogan: dictatorship. We can judge
      from this what Marx’s attitude would have been towards
      resolutions which call a “decision to organise a constituent
      assembly” a decisive victory, or which invite us to “remain the
      party of extreme revolutionary opposition”!
    

      Major questions in the life of nations are settled only by
      force. The reactionary classes themselves are usually the first
      to resort to violence, to civil war; they are the first to
      “place the bayonet on the agenda,” as the Russian autocracy has
      been doing systematically and undeviatingly everywhere ever
      since January 9. And since such a situation has arisen, since
      the bayonet has really become the main point on the political
      agenda, since insurrection has proved to be imperative and
      urgent—constitutional illusions and school exercises in
      parliamentarism become only a screen for the bourgeois betrayal
      of the revolution, a screen to conceal the fact that the
      bourgeoisie is “recoiling” from the revolution. It is therefore
      the slogan of dictatorship that the genuinely revolutionary
      class must advance.
    

      On the question of the tasks of this dictatorship Marx wrote,
      already in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung [of

      June 6,
      l848]:

      “The National Assembly should have acted dictatorially against
      the reactionary attempts of the obsolete governments; the force
      of public opinion in its favour would then have been so strong
      as to shatter all bayonets.... But this Assembly bores the
      German people instead of carrying the people with it or being
      carried away by

      it

      [them].”[7]

      In Marx’s opinion, the

 

      National Assembly should have “eliminated from the regime
      actually existing in Germany everything that contradicted the
      principle of the sovereignty of the people,” then it should have
      “consolidated the revolutionary ground on which it stands in
      order to make the sovereignty of the people, won by the
      revolution, secure against all

      attacks.”[8]


      Thus, the tasks which Marx set before a revolutionary government
      or dictatorship in 1848 amounted in substance primarily to a
      democratic revolution: defence against
      counterrevolution and the actual elimination of everything that
      contradicted the sovereignty of the people. This is nothing else
      than a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship.
    

      To proceed: which classes, in Marx’s opinion, could and should
      have achieved this task (actually to exercise to the full the
      principle of the sovereignty of the people and to beat off the
      attacks of the counterrevolution)? Marx speaks of the “people.”
      But we know that he always ruthlessly combated the
      petty-bourgeois illusions about the unity of the “people” and
      about the absence of a class struggle within the people. In
      using the word “people,” Marx did not thereby gloss over class
      distinctions, but combined definite elements that were capable
      of carrying the revolution to completion.
    

      After the victory of the Berlin proletariat on March 18, wrote
      the Neue Rheinische Zeitung[of

    
June 14,
      1848],

      the results of the revolution proved to be twofold: “On the one
      hand the arming of the people, the right of association, the
      sovereignty of the people actually attained; on the other hand,
      the preservation of the monarchy and the Camphausen-Hansemann
      Ministry, i.e., the government of representatives of the big
      bourgeoisie. Thus, the revolution had two series of results,
      which had inevitably to diverge. The people had achieved
      victory, it had won liberties of a decisive democratic nature,
      but the direct power passed not into its hands, but into those
      of the big bourgeoisie. In a word, the revolution was not
      completed. The people allowed the big bourgeois to form a
      ministry, and the big bourgeois immediately displayed their
      strivings by offering an alliance to the old Prussian nobility
      and bureaucracy. Arnim, Canitz and Schwerin joined the Ministry.
    


      “The upper bourgeoisie, ever anti-revolutionary, concluded a
      defensive end offensive alliance with the reaction out of fear
      of the people, that is to say, the workers and the democratic
      bourgeoisie.”

      (Our italics.)[9]


      Thus, not only a “decision to organise a constituent assembly,”
      but even its actual convocation is insufficient for a decisive
      victory of the revolution! Even after a partial victory in an
      armed struggle (the victory of the Berlin workers over the
      troops on March 18, 1848) an “incomplete” revolution, a
      revolution “that has not been carried to completion,” is
      possible. On what, then, does its completion depend? It depends
      on whose hands the immediate rule passes into, whether into the
      hands of the Petrunkeviches and Rodichevs, that is to say, the
      Camphausens and the Hansemanns, or into the hands of the
      people, i.e., the workers and the democratic
      bourgeoisie. In the first case the bourgeoisie will possess
      power, and the proletariat “freedom of criticism.” freedom to
      “remain the party of extreme
      revolutionary opposition.” Immediately after the victory, the
      bourgeoisie will conclude an alliance with the reaction (this
      would inevitably happen in Russia too, if, for example, the
      St. Petersburg workers gained only a partial victory in street
      fighting with the troops and left it to Messrs. Petrunkeviches
      and Co. to form a government). In the second case, a
      revolutionary-democratic dictatorship, i.e., the complete
      victory of the revolution, would be possible.
    

      It now remains to define more precisely what Marx really meant
      by “democratic bourgeoisie” (demokratische
      Bürgerschaft), which together with the workers he
      called the people, in contradistinction to the big bourgeoisie.
    

      A clear answer to this question is supplied by the following
      passage from an article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung
      of

    
July 30,
      1848:

      “...The German revolution of 1848 is only a parody
      of the French revolution of 1789.
    

      “On August 4, 1789, three weeks after the storming of the
      Bastille, the French people in a single day prevailed over all
      the feudal burdens.
    


      “On July 11, 1848, four months after the March barricades, the
      feudal burdens prevailed over the German people. Teste Gierke
      cum

     Hansemanno.[1]


      “The French bourgeoisie of 1789 did not for a moment leave its
      allies, the peasants, in the lurch. It knew that the foundation
      of its rule was the destruction of feudalism in the countryside,
      the creation of a free landowning (grundbesitzenden)
      peasant class.
    

      “The German bourgeoisie of 1848 is without the least compunction
      betraying the peasants, who are its most natural allies, the
      flesh of its flesh, and without whom it is powerless against the
      nobility.
    

      “The continuance of feudal rights, their sanction under the
      guise of (illusory) redemption—such is the result of the
      German revolution of 1848. The mountain brought forth a

      mouse.”[10]


      This is a very instructive passage: it gives us four important
      propositions:

      1) The incompleted German
      revolution differs from the completed French revolution in that
      the German bourgeoisie betrayed not only democracy in general,
      but also the peasantry in particular.

      2) The foundation for the full consummation of a democratic
      revolution is the creation of a free class of peasants.

      3) The creation of such a class means the
      abolition of feudal burdens, the destruction of feudalism, but
      does not yet mean a socialist revolution.

      4) The peasants are the “most natural” allies of the
      bourgeoisie, that is to say, of the democratic bourgeoisie,
      which without them is “powerless” against the reaction.
    

      Making proper allowances for concrete national peculiarities and
      substituting serfdom for feudalism, all

 

      these propositions can
      be fully applied to Russia in 1905. There is no doubt that by
      learning from the experience of Germany, as elucidated by Marx,
      we cannot arrive at any other slogan for a decisive victory of
      the revolution than: a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of
      the proletariat and the peasantry. There is no doubt that the
      chief components of the “people,” whom Marx in 1848 contrasted
      with the resisting reactionaries and the treacherous
      bourgeoisie, are the proletariat and the peasantry. There is no
      doubt that in Russia too the liberal bourgeoisie and the
      gentlemen of the Osvobozhdeniye League are betraying and will
      continue to betray the peasantry, i.e., will confine themselves
      to a pseudo reform and taking the side of the landlords in the
      decisive battle between them and the peasantry. Only the
      proletariat is capable of supporting the peasantry to the end in
      this struggle. There is no doubt, finally, that in Russia also
      the success of the peasant struggle, i.e., the transfer of the
      whole of the land to the peasantry, will signify a complete
      democratic revolution and constitute the social support of the
      revolution carried to its completion, but it will by no means be
      a socialist revolution, or “socialisation” that the ideologists
      of the petty bourgeoisie, the Socialist-Revolutionaries talk
      about. The success of the peasant insurrection, the victory of
      the democratic revolution will merely clear the way for a
      genuine and decisive struggle for Socialism on the basis of a
      democratic republic. In this struggle the peasantry as a
      landowning class will play the same treacherous, vacillating
      part as is now being played by the bourgeoisie in the struggle
      for democracy. To forget this is to forget Socialism, to deceive
      oneself and others as to the real interests and tasks of the
      proletariat.
    

      In order to leave no gaps in the presentation of the views held
      by Marx in 1848, it is necessary to note one essential
      difference between German Social-Democracy of that time (or the
      Communist Party of the Proletariat, to use the language of that
      period) and present-day Russian Social Democracy. Here is what
      Mehring says:
    

      “The Neue Rheinische Zeitung appeared in the political
      arena as the ’organ of democracy.’ There is no mistaking the
      thread that ran through all its articles. But in the direct
      sense, it championed the interests of the bourgeois revolution

 

      against absolutism and feudalism more than the interests of the
      proletariat against the bourgeoisie. Very little is to be found
      in its columns about the separate working-class movement during
      the years of the revolution, although one should not forget that
      along with it there appeared twice a week, under the editorship
      of Moll and Schapper, a special organ of the Cologne Workers’

      League.[11] [Zeitung
      des Arbeiter-Vereins zu Köln]

      At any rate, the
      present day reader will be struck by the little attention the
      Neue Rheinische Zeitung paid to the German
      working-class movement of its day, although its most capable
      mind, Stephan Born, was a pupil of Marx and Engels in Paris and
      Brussels and in 1848 was the Berlin correspondent for their
      newspaper. Born relates in his Memoirs that Marx and
      Engels never expressed a single word in disapproval of his
      agitation among the workers; nevertheless, it appears probable
      from subsequent declarations of Engels’ that they were
      dissatisfied, at least with the methods of this agitation. Their
      dissatisfaction was justified inasmuch as Born was obliged to
      make many concessions to the as yet totally undeveloped class
      consciousness of the proletariat in the greater part of Germany,
      concessions which do not stand the test of criticism from the
      viewpoint of the Communist Manifesto. Their
      dissatisfaction was unjustified inasmuch as Born managed
      nonetheless to maintain the agitation conducted by him on a
      relatively high plane. . . . Without doubt, Marx and Engels were
      historically and politically right in thinking that the primary
      interest of the working class was to push the bourgeois
      revolution forward as far as possible. . . . Nevertheless, a
      remarkable proof of how the elementary instinct of the
      working-class movement is able to correct the conceptions of the
      greatest minds is provided by the fact that in April 1849 they
      declared in favour of a specific workers’ organisation and
      decided to participate in the workers’ congress, which was being
      prepared especially by the East Elbe (Eastern Prussia)
      proletariat.”
    

      Thus, it was only in April 1849, after the revolutionary
      newspaper had been appearing for almost a year (the Neue
      Rheinische Zeitung began publication on June 1, 1848) that
      Marx and Engels declared in favour of a special workers’
      organisation! Until then they were merely running an “organ of
      democracy” unconnected by any organisational ties with

 

      an independent workers’ party. This fact, monstrous and improbable
      as it may appear from our present-day standpoint, clearly shows
      us what an enormous difference there is between the German
      Social-Democratic Party of those days and the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party of today. This fact shows how
      much less the proletarian features of the movement, the
      proletarian current within it, were in evidence in the German
      democratic revolution (because of the backwardness of Germany in
      1848 both economically and politically—its disunity as a
      state). This should not be forgotten in judging Marx’s repeated
      declarations during this period and somewhat later about the
      need for organising an independent proletarian party. Marx
      arrived at this practical conclusion only as a result of the
      experience of the democratic revolution, almost a year
      later—so philistine, so petty-bourgeois was the whole
      atmosphere in Germany at that time. To us this conclusion is an
      old and solid acquisition of half a century’s experience of
      international Social-Democracy—an acquisition with which we
      began to organise the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party. In our case there can be no question, for instance, of
      revolutionary proletarian newspapers being outside the
      Social-Democratic Party of the proletariat, or of their
      appearing even for a moment simply as “organs of democracy.”
    

      But the contrast which had hardly begun to reveal itself between
      Marx and Stephan Born exists in our case in a form which is more
      developed by reason of the more powerful manifestation of the
      proletarian current in the democratic stream of our
      revolution. Speaking of the probable dissatisfaction of Marx and
      Engels with the agitation conducted by Stephan Born, Mehring
      expresses himself too mildly and too evasively. Here is what
      Engels wrote of Born in 1885 (in his preface to the
      Enthüllungen über den Kommunistenprocess zu
      Köln. Zürich,

 1885[2]

):

    

      The members of the

      Communist

      League[12]

      everywhere stood at the head of the extreme
      democratic movement, proving thereby that the League was an
      excellent school of revolutionary action.



“. . . the compositor
      Stephan Born, who had worked in Brussels and Paris as an active
      member of

 

      the League, founded a Workers’ Brotherhood”
      (“Arbeiterverbruderung”) “in Berlin which became fairly
      widespread and existed until 1850. Born, a very talented young
      man, who, however, was a bit too much in a hurry to become a big
      political figure, ‘fraternised’ with the most miscellaneous
      ragtag and bobtail” (Kreti und Plethi) “in order to get a crowd
      together, and was not at all the man who could bring unity into
      the conflicting tendencies, light into the chaos. Consequently,
      in the official publications of the association the views
      represented in the Communist Manifesto were mingled
      hodgepodge with guild recollections and guild aspirations,
      fragments of Louis Blanc and Proudhon, protectionism, etc.; in
      short, they wanted to please everybody [allen alles
      sein].” “In particular, strikes, trade unions and
      producers’ co-operatives were set going and it was forgotten
      that above all it was a question of first conquering, by means
      of political victories, the field in which alone such
      things could be realised on a lasting basis.” (Our italics.)
      “When, afterwards. the victories of the reaction made the
      leaders of the Brotherhood realise the necessity of taking a
      direct part in the revolutionary struggle, they were naturally
      left in the lurch by the confused mass which they had grouped
      around themselves. Born took part in the Dresden uprising in
      May, 1849 and had a lucky escape. But, in contrast to the great
      political movement of the proletariat, the Workers’ Brotherhood
      proved to be a pure Sonderbund [separate league], which
      to a large extent existed only on paper and played such a
      subordinate role that the reaction did not find it necessary to
      suppress it until 1850, and its surviving branches until several
      years later. Born, whose real name was

     Buttermilch[3]
 

      has not become a big political figure but a petty Swiss
      professor, who no longer translates Marx into guild language but
      the meek Renan into his own fulsome

      German.”[13]


      That is how Engels judged the two tactics of Social Democracy in
      the democratic revolution!
    

      Our new-Iskraists are also pushing towards “Economism,” and with
      such unreasonable zeal as to earn the praises of the monarchist
      bourgeoisie for their “seeing the light.” They too collect
      around themselves a motley crowd, flattering the “Economists,”
      demagogically attracting the undeveloped masses by the slogans
      of “initiative,” “democracy,” “autonomy,” 
  etc., etc. Their labour unions, too, exist only on the pages of the

      Khlestakov-type[14]


      new Iskra. Their slogans and resolutions betray a
      similar failure to understand the tasks of the “great political
      movement of the proletariat.”
    

 
Notes
 

[1]
“Witnesses: Herr Gierke and Herr Hansemann.”  Hansemann was a minister
        who represented the party of the big bourgeoisie (Russian
        counterpart: Trubetskoy or Rodichev, and the like); Gierke was
        Minister of Agriculture in the Hansemann Cabinet, who drew up a
        plan, a “bold” plan for “abolishing feudal burdens,” professedly
        “without compensation,” but in fact for abolishing only the minor
        and unimportant burdens while preserving or granting compensation
        for the more essential ones. Herr Gierke was something like the
        Russian Messrs. Kablukov, Manuilov. Hertzenstein and similar
        bourgeois liberal friends of the muzhik who desire the “extension
        of peasant landownership” but do not wish to offend the landlords.
        —Lenin

[2] Revelations
About the Cologne Communist Trial, Zürich, 1885.–Ed. 
—Lenin

[3] 
In translating Engels I made a mistake in the first edition by taking
        the word Buttermilch to be not a proper noun but a common
        noun. This mistake naturally afforded great delight to the
        Mensheviks. Koltsov wrote that I had “rendered Engels more
        profound” (reprinted in Two Years, a collection of
        articles) and Plekhanov even now recalls this mistake in the
      Tovarishch[15]—in

      short, it afforded an excellent pretext to slur over the question
      of the two tendencies in the working-class movement of 1848 in
      Germany, the Born tendency (akin to our Economists) and the Marxist
      tendency. To take advantage of the mistake of an opponent, even if it
      was only on the question of Born’s name, is more than natural. But to
      use a correction to a translation to slur over the question of the
      two tactics is to dodge the real issue. [Author’s
      note to the 1907 edition.—Ed.)] —Lenin
 


[4] 
PLACEHOLDER



[5] 
PLACEHOLDER



[6] 
PLACEHOLDER



[7] 
PLACEHOLDER



[8] 
PLACEHOLDER



[9] 
PLACEHOLDER



[10] 
PLACEHOLDER



[11] 
PLACEHOLDER



[12] 
PLACEHOLDER



[15] 
PLACEHOLDER



[13] 
PLACEHOLDER



[14] 
PLACEHOLDER


 
  

Comrade Martynov Again Renders the Question 
“More Profound”

|


  
   





Download:
 
Macintosh | Windows




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Concluding Paragraph to the Article “The Paris Commune and the Tasks of the Democratic Dictatorship”









Lenin: Concluding Paragraph to the Article 'The Paris Commune and the Tasks of the Democratic Dictatorship'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Concluding Paragraph to the Article “The Paris Commune and the Tasks of the Democratic Dictatorship”[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 8, July 17 (4), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 141.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

This article teaches us, first and foremost, that for representatives
of the socialist proletariat to take part in a revolutionary government together
with the petty bourgeoisie is fully permissible in principle, and, in certain
conditions, even obligatory. It shows us further that the real task the Commune
had to perform was primarily the achievement of the democratic and not the
socialist dictatorship, the implementation of our “minimum
programme”. Finally, the article reminds us that when we study the lessons
of the Paris Commune we should imitate not the mistakes it made (the failure to
seize the Bank of France and to launch an offensive against Versailles, the
lack of a clear programme, etc.), but its successful practical measures, which
indicate the correct road. It is not the word “Commune” that we must
adopt from the great fighters of 1871; we should not blindly repeat each of
their slogans; what we must do is to single out those programmatic and practical
slogans that bear upon the state of affairs in Russia and can be formulated in
the words “a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and
the peasantry”.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The article “The Paris Commune and the Tasks of the
Democratic Dictatorship” was published in Proletary, No. 8 of
July 17 (4), 1905. Its author, who is not known, provided a historical note on
the activities of the Paris Commune and the composition of its government,
which, besides representatives of the petty bourgeoisie, included socialist
workingmen prominent in the labour movement. The article was directed against
the tactics of the Mensheviks, who denied the possibility of Social-Democrats
participating in a provisional revolutionary government. The article was edited
by Lenin, who changed the title, made a number of changes in the wording, and
wrote the conclusion.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## To the Secretariat of the International Socialist Bureau, Brussels









Lenin: To the Secretariat of the International Socialist Bureau, Brussels







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Secretariat of the International Socialist Bureau, Brussels




Published:

      First published in 1925, in the magazine Krasnaya Letopis, No. 1.

      Published according to the text in the magazine and checked against the typewritten French version.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 142-145.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 
Geneva, July 24, 1905

Dear Comrades,


We received your letter of June 28 several days ago, with some interesting
documents (letters from Comrades Bebel and Plekhanov) enclosed, but being
extremely busy we were unable to reply at once.


1. As regards Comrade Plekhanov’s letter, we are obliged to make the following
   observations:


1) Comrade Plekhanov’s assertion that since the Second Congress of our Party
   (August 1903) we have differed only on the question of organisation is not in
   full keeping with the facts. The “Minority” at the Second
   Congress (headed by Comrades Axelrod, Vera Zasulich, and Martov) actually
   split the Party immediately after the Congress by declaring a boycott of the
   central bodies elected by the Congress and by setting up a secret
   “Minority” organisation, which was dissolved only in the autumn
   of 1904. Comrade Plekhanov himself, who sided with us at the Second Congress
   of the Party and at the Congress of the League of Russian Social- Democracy
   Abroad (October 1903), evidently held a some what different opinion
   concerning our differences when he publicly stated in Iskra, No. 52
   (November 1903) that we must make skilful concessions to the
   “revisionists” (Plekhanov’s expression) in order to avoid a split
   in the Party.


2) The assertion that the Third Congress of the Party was convened “quite
   arbitrarily” does not correspond to the facts either. According to
   Party Rules, the Council is obliged to call a congress if so demanded by half
   of the commit tees. As you know from the resolution.s of the Third Congress,
   which have been translated into French, the Council ignored the Party
   Rules. The Party committees and the “Bureau of

    

Majority Committees”[1]

which they elected were morally and
formally obliged to convene the Congress, .even against the will of the Council,
which did nothing to convene it.


3) You know from the selfsame resolutions of the Third Congress that it was not
   “something like half of the duly authorised organisations” that
   were represented at the Congress, but a considerable majority of the biggest
   committees.


4) It is true that there are comrades in our Party who are referred to in jest
   as the “Marsh”. Its members were continually changing sides
   during the controversies within our Party. The first of these turncoats was
   Plekhanov, who went over from the Majority to the Minority in November 1903,
   only to leave the Minority on May 29 of this year, when he resigned from
   Iskra’s Editorial Board. We do not approve of changing sides like
   that, but think we cannot be blamed if after much vacillation members of the
   “Marsh” are inclined to follow us. 5) In his letter to the Bureau
   (June 16, 1905) Comrade Plekhanov most inappropriately forgot to mention his
   letter of May 29, 1905, published in Iskra (No. 101), a complete and
   exact translation of which we have already forwarded to you. 6) When he says
   that the other section in the Party is grouped around Iskra, the
   Party’s former Central Organ, Comrade Plekhanov again forgot to add that the
   “Minority” Conference (May 1905) annulled the Rules drawn up at
   the Second Congress, and failed to set up a new Central Organ. We think that
   the International Socialist Bureau should have a complete translation of all
   resolutions of that conference. If Iskra refuses to send them to
   the Bureau we are prepared to do so ourselves. 7) Comrade Plekhanov states
   that only the two remaining members of the Central Committee (the others had
   been arrested) declared them selves in favour of convening the Third
   Congress.


Comrade Plekhanov’s letter is dated June 16, 1905. The next day, June 17, No. 4
of Proletary, the Central Organ of the Party, which had been set up by
the Third Congress, published the following statement: “After reading the
Central Committee’s Open Letter to Comrade Plekhanov, Chairman of the Party
Council, and being in full agreement with the Central Committee, we consider it
necessary— for reasons which comrades acquainted with the state of affairs
in the Party will understand—publicly to declare

    

our solidarity with the Central Committee.” Signed (pseudonyms): Ma, Bern,
Vladimir, Innokenty, Andrei, Voron. We may inform you in confidence that
these pseudonyms belong to the arrested members of the Central
Committee.[2]

Consequently, as soon as the members of the
    Central Commit tee learned of the conflict between the Central Committee and
    Comrade Plekhanov (and, therefore, the Council as well) regarding the
    convocation of the Congress, most of them at once declared in favour of the
    Central Committee and against Comrade Plekhanov. We earnestly request the
    International Secretariat to inform us whether Comrade Plekhanov deemed it
    necessary to acquaint the Bureau with this important statement by the
    arrested members of the Central Committee, which completely refutes the
    assertions contained in Comrade Plekhanov’s letter of June 16. 8)
    Comrade. Plekhanov is mistaken in saying that both groups asked him to go on
    representing the Party in the International Bureau. To date the Central
    Committee of our Party has not made any such request. As we informed you a
    few days ago, this question has not yet been finally decided, although it
    stands on the order of the day. 9) Comrade Plekhanov thinks that it is not
    difficult for him to be impartial in the question of our differences. After
    what has been set forth above, however, we believe that he finds it quite
    difficult, and at the present moment, at any rate, next to
    impossible.[3]


II. I pass on to Comrade Bebel’s proposal on the subject of our affairs.


Here I must make the following observations: 1) 1 am only one
of the members of the Central Committee and the responsible editor of
Proletary, the Party’s Central Organ. I can act for the whole of the
Central Committee only in regard to our affairs abroad and certain other matters
specially entrusted to me. In any case, all my decisions may be an nulled by a
general meeting of the Central Committee. There fore, I cannot decide on the
question of the Bureau’s intervention in the affairs of our Party. However, I
immediately forwarded your letter, as well as the letters of Comrades Bebel and
Plekhanov, to Russia, to all the members of the Central Committee. 2) In order
to speed up the Central Committee’s reply it would be very useful to obtain
certain necessary.explanations from the Bureau: a) should the term

    

"intervention” be taken to mean only conciliatory mediation, and
advice having merely moral, and not binding, force; b) or does the Bureau have
in view a binding ruling by a court of arbitration; c) does the Bureau’s
Executive Committee propose to submit our differences to the general meeting of
the International Socialist Bureau for final decision, without right of appeal?
3) On my part I consider it my duty to inform the Bureau that shortly before the
Third Congress Comrade Bebel made a similar proposal to me and to those who
share my views offering his services or the services of the entire Executive
Committee of the German Party (Parteivorstand), as arbitrator in the
dispute between the Majority and the Minority in our Party.


I replied that the Party Congress would take place soon and that I personally
could not decide for the Party or in its name.


The Bureau of Majority Committees rejected Bebel’s offer. The Third Congress
passed no decision on this offer, and thereby tacitly endorsed the reply given
by the Bureau of Majority Committees. 4) Since the International Bureau
considers it proper to obtain its information from “certain German
newspapers”, I am compelled to state that nearly all German socialist
papers, especially Die Neue Zeit and Leipziger
Volkszeitung,[4]

are entirely on the side of the
“Minority”, and present our affairs in a very one-sided and
inaccurate way. Kautsky, for instance, also calls himself impartial, and yet, in
actual fact, he went so far as to refuse to publish in the Neue Zeit a
refutation of an article by Rosa Luxemburg, in which she defended disruption in
the Party.[5]

In Leipziger Volkszeitang Kautsky even urged
that the German pamphlet with the translation of the resolutions of the Third
Congress should not be circulated!! After this it is easy to understand why many
comrades in Russia are inclined to regard the German Social-Democratic Party as
partial and extremely prejudiced in the question of the split in the ranks of
Russian Social-Democracy.


Accept, dear comrades, our fraternal greeting.

VI. Ulyanov (N. Lenin)
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Bureau of Majority Committees—the Bolsheviks’
organisational centre, was formed on Lenin’s initiative to prepare for
the R.S.D.L.P.’s Third Congress. It was elected at the close of 1904 at three
regional conferences—the Southern, the Caucasian, and
the Northern.





[2]

The conciliator members of the Central Committee who were arrested at its
session on February 9 (22), 1905 in Moscow were:

Ma—V. A. Noskov;

Bem—M. A. Silvin;

Vladimir—L. Y. Karpov;

Innokenty—I. F. Dubrovinsky;

Andrei—A. A. Kvyatkovsky;

Voron—L. Y. Galperin.





[3]

On May 7 (20), 1905 the Central Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P. appointed Plekhanov its representative in the International Socialist
Bureau (the executive body of the Second International), on the condition that
he recognise the decisions of the R.S.D.L.P.’s Third Congress as
binding. Plekhanov did not accept this condition, upon which his appointment
was cancelled. In October 1905 the Central Committee appointed Lenin its
representative in the International Socialist Bureau. Regarding the R.S.D.L.P.’s
representation in the Bureau see also this volume, pp. 332-34.





[4]

The Leipsiger Volkszeitung—organ of the Left
wing of German
 Social-Democracy, was founded in 1894.





[5]

" Lenin is referring to the article by Rosa Luxemburg
Organisantionsfragen der Russischen Sozialdemokratie, written by her at
the request of the Mensheviks, and published in July 1904 in the Menshevik
Iskra and in Die Neue Zeit. A refutal of this article was
contained in One Step Forward, Two Steps Back. Reply by N. Lenin to Rosa
Luxemburg (see present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 474-85) which was sent to
Die Neue Zeit. Kautsky, who supported the Mensheviks, refused to
publish the reply.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Revolution Teaches









Lenin: Revolution Teaches







V. I.  

      Lenin
Revolution Teaches




Published:
Proletary, No. 9, July 26 (13), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 146-155.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Differences within or between political parties are usually resolved not only by
polemics over principles, but also by the course of political developments. In
particular, differences on a party’s tactics, i.e., its political conduct, are
often resolved by those with incorrect opinions going over in fact to the
correct path of struggle, under the pressure of the course of developments that
simply brush aside erroneous opinions, making them pointless and devoid of any
interest. This, of course, does not mean that fundamental differences on
questions of tactics do not call for explanations of principles, explanations
which alone can keep the Party equal to its theoretical convictions. No. This
means only that decisions made with regard to tactics must be verified
as often as possible in the light of new political events. Such verification is
necessary from the standpoint of both theory and practice: from the standpoint
of theory in order to ascertain in fact whether the decisions taken have been
correct, and what amendments to these decisions subsequent political events make
necessary; from the standpoint of practice, in order to learn how to use the
decisions as a proper guide, to learn to consider them as directives for
practical application.


A revolutionary period, more than any other, provides material for such
verification, thanks to the tremendous speed of political development and the
sharpness of political clashes. In a revolutionary period the old
“superstructure” falls apart, and, in full view of everyone, a new
one is created by the independent action of the most diverse social forces,
which reveal their true nature in practice.

 

Thus, the Russian revolution, too, provides us almost weekly with an amazing
wealth of political material for verifying previously-made tactical decisions,
and for drawing most instructive lessons with regard to our entire practical
activities. Take the Odessa events. An attempt at insurrection has failed. A
bitter reverse, a severe defeat. But what a world of difference there is between
this set-back in the struggle and the set-backs in the efforts made by the
Shipovs, Trubetskois, Petrunkeviches, Struves, and all such bourgeois flunkeys
of the tsar, to strike a deal! Engels once said that defeated armies learn their
lessons well. These splendid words apply in far greater measure to
revolutionary armies, whose replacements come from the progressive
classes. Until the old, corrupt superstructure, whose putrefaction infects the
whole people, is swept away, each new defeat will produce ever new armies of
fighters. Of course, there also exists mankind’s far wider collective
experience, which has left its impress upon the history of international
democracy and of international Social-Democracy, and has been systematised by
the foremost representatives of revolutionary thought. Our Party draws on that
experience for material to be used in its everyday propaganda and agitation. But
while society is based on the oppression and exploitation of millions of working
people, only the few can learn directly from that experience. The masses have to
learn mostly from their own experience, paying dearly for every lesson. The
lesson of January 9 was a hard one, but it revolutionised the temper of the
entire proletariat of the whole of Russia. The lesson of the Odessa uprising is
a hard one, but, with sentiments already revolutionised, it will now teach the
revolutionary proletariat not only how to fight but also how to win. Regarding
the Odessa events we say: the revolutionary army has been defeated— long
live the revolutionary army!


We have already stated in No. 7 of our paper that the Odessa uprising has shed
new light on our slogans calling for a revolutionary army and a revolutionary

     government.[1]

In the preceding number we spoke about the military lessons

    

of the uprising (Comrade

V.S. ’s 

article). In this issue we dwell once more on
      some of its political lessons (the article “Urban Revolution”). We
      must now deal with the verification of our recent tactical decisions in
      the double aspect of theoretical correctness and practical expediency we
      have spoken of above.


Insurrection and a revolutionary government are the most vital political
questions of the present time. These are questions that Social-Democrats have
most of all discussed and argued about among themselves. It was to
these questions that the main resolutions of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. and of
the Conference of the break-away section of the Party were devoted. It may now
be asked: in what light do these differences appear alter the Odessa
uprising? Anyone who will now go to the trouble of re-reading, on the one hand,
the statements and articles on this uprising, and, on the other, the four
resolutions on issues of insurrection and of a provisional government adopted
by the Party Congress and by the new-Iskrists’ Conference will at once notice
how, under the influence of events, the latter have in actual fact begun
to side with their opponents, i.e., to act not according to their own
resolutions, but according to those of the Third Congress. There is no better
critic of an erroneous doctrine than the course of revolutionary events.


Under the influence of these events Iskra’s Editorial Board has issued
a leaflet entitled “The First Victory of the Revolution”, addressed
to “Russian citizens, workers, and peasants”. Here is the most
important passage in the leaflet:



"The time has come to act boldly and to support the soldiers’ bold
rebellion with all our might. It is boldness that will now win the day!


"Therefore, call open meetings of the people and bring them tidings of the
collapse of tsarism’s military prop! Wherever possible seize municipal
institutions and make them the bulwark o? the people s revolutionary government!
Oust the tsarist officials and appoint general elections to bodies of
revolutionary government, to which you will entrust the provisional
administration of public affairs pending the final victory over the tsar’s
government and the establishment of a new political regime. Seize the branches
of the State Bank and the arsenals and arm the people! Establish contacts
between the cities, between town and countryside, and let armed citizens hasten
to each other’s assistance wherever aid is needed! Take the prisons and free the
champions of our cause imprisoned there—they will swell your ranks!
Proclaim everywhere the overthrow of the tsarist

    

monarchy and its replacement by a free democratic republic! Arise citizens! The
hour of liberation has struck! Long live the revolution! Long live the
democratic republic! Long live the revolutionary army! Down with the autocracy!”



Thus, we have before us a determined, open, and clear call for an armed uprising
of the whole people. We also have here an equally determined call—though,
regrettably, inexplicit and incompletely worded—to form a provisional
revolutionary government. Let us first consider the question of an uprising.


Is there any difference in principle between the way this question was handled
by the Third Congress and by the Conference? Undoubtedly there is. We have
already dealt with this in Proletary, No. 6 (“A Third
Step

Back”[2]

)

and we shall now refer, furthermore, to the instructive testimony of
Osvobozhdeniye. In ·No. 72 of the magazine we read that the
“Majority” is lapsing into “abstract revolutionism,
rebelliousness, an eagerness to stir up insurrection among the popular masses by
any and every means, and to immediately seize power on their
behalf”. “On the contrary, the Minority, while steadfastly adhering
to the dogma of Marxism, at the same time preserves the realistic elements of
the Marxist world outlook.” This opinion of liberals who have gone through the
preparatory school of Marxism and through Bernsteinism is extremely
valuable. The liberal bourgeois have always reproached the revolutionary wing of
Social- Democracy with “abstract revolutionism and rebelliousness and
have always praised the opportunist wing for its “realism” in
stating the question. Iskra itself has had to admit (see No. 73, note
referring to Mr. Struve’s approval of the “realism” of Comrade
Akimov’s pamphlet) that, when spoken by the Osvobozhdeniye League
members, “realist”
means “opportunist”. The
Osvobozhdeniye League members know only pedestrian realism; the
revolutionary dialectics of Marxist realism, which emphasises the urgent tasks
of the advanced class, and discovers in the existing state of things those
elements that will lead to its overthrow, are absolutely alien to
them. Therefore, Osvobozhdeniye’s characterisation of the two trends in
Social-Democracy once

    

more confirms a fact proved by our literature, namely, that the
      “Majority” is the revolutionary wing of Russian
      Social-Democracy, and the “Minority” its opportunist
      wing.


Osvobozhdeniye definitely admits that, compared with the
 Congress, “the Conference of the Minority regards insurrection
 in a quite different way”. Indeed, the Conference resolution in
 the first place defeats its own purpose by now denying the
 possibility of a planned uprising (Clause 1), now admitting it
 (par. d), and, in the second place, confines itself to a mere
 enumeration of the general conditions for “preparing
 an uprising” such as: a) extending agitation; b) strengthening
 the ties with the mass movement; c) promoting a revolutionary
 consciousness; d) establishing connections between the various
 localities; e) winning over non-proletarian groups to support the
 proletariat. The Congress resolution, on the contrary, outspokenly
 proclaims positive slogans, recognises that the movement has
 already made insurrection imperative, and calls for the
 organisation of the proletariat for the immediate struggle, for the
 adoption of the most energetic measures to arm it, for the
 explanation through propaganda and agitation “not only of the
 political significance” of the uprising (in essence, the
 resolution of the Conference confines itself to this), but also its
 practical and organisational aspect.


 For a clearer understanding of the difference between the two
      solutions of the problem let us recall the evolution of
      Social-Democratic views on insurrection since the very inception
      of the mass working-class movement. The first stage: 1897. In
      his Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats Lenin states
      that “to decide at the present time the question of what
      methods the Social-Democracy will resort to for the direct
      overthrow of the autocracy, whether it will choose an uprising,
      or a widespread political strike, or some other form of attack,
      would be akin to generals calling a council of war before they
      have mustered an army” (p.

 18).[3]

Here, as we see, there is not the slightest reference to preparations
for an uprising; what is spoken of is merely the mustering of an army,
i.e., propaganda, agitation, and organisation in general.

 

The second stage: 1902. In Lenin’s What Is To Be Done? we read:


"...Picture to yourselves a popular uprising. Probably everyone
will now (February
1902) agree that we must think of this and prepare for it. But how?
Surely the Central Committee cannot appoint agents to all localities for the
purpose of preparing the uprising! Even if we had a Central Committee it could
achieve absolutely nothing by such appointments under present-day Russian
conditions. But a network of agents that would form in the course of
establishing and distributing the common newspaper would not have to “sit
about and wait” for the call for an uprising, but could carry on the
regular activity that would guarantee the highest probability of success in the
event of an uprising. Such activity would strengthen our contacts with the
broadest strata of the working masses and with all social strata that are
discontented with the autocracy, which is of such importance for an
uprising. Precisely such activity would serve to cultivate the ability to
estimate correctly the general political situation and, consequently, the
ability to select the proper moment for an uprising. Precisely such activity
would train all local organisations to respond simultaneously to the
same political questions, incidents, and events that agitate the whole of Russia
and to react to such ’incidents’ in the most vigorous, uniform, and expedient
manner possible; for an uprising is in essence the most vigorous, most uniform,
and most expedient ’answer’ of the entire people to the government. Lastly, it
is precisely such activity that would train all revolutionary organisations
throughout Russia to maintain the most continuous, and at the same time the most
secret, contacts with one another, thus creating real Party unity; for
without such contacts it will be impossible collectively to discuss the plan for
the uprising and to take the necessary preparatory measures on its eve, measures
that must be kept in the strictest secrecy” (pp.

136-37[4]

).



What points does this reasoning bring out with regard to the question of an
uprising? 1) The absurdity of the idea of “preparing” an uprising by
appointing special agents

    

who would “sit around and wait” for the call. 2) The necessity of
      contacts established in the course

ol 

work done in common between
    people and organisations engaged in the regular work. 3) The necessity of
    strengthening the ties between the proletarian (workers) and the
    non-proletarian (all the discontented) sections of the population in the
    course of such work. 4) The necessity of jointly cultivating the ability to
    appraise correctly the political situation and to “react” to
    political events in the most expedient manner. 5) The need for actual
    unification of all local revolutionary organisations.


Consequently, the slogan of preparations for an uprising is already
plainly advanced, but as yet there is no direct call to rise, no recognition
that the movement “has already led up to” the necessity for an
uprising, that it is necessary to arm immediately, to organise ourselves in
combat squads, etc. Before us is an analysis of those very conditions for
preparing an uprising which are repeated almost literally in the
Conference resolution (in 1905!!).


The third stage: 1905. A further step forward is made in the newspaper
Vperyod and later on in the resolution of the Third
Congress. Besides general political preparations for an uprising, a
direct slogan is issued, namely, that we should immediately organise
and arm for an uprising, and that special (combat) squads should be formed, as
the movement “has already led to the necessity of an armed uprising”
(Clause 2 of the Congress resolution).


This piece of historical information leads us to three indubitable conclusions:
1) The assertion of the liberal bourgeoisie, the Osvobozhdeniye
League, that we are lapsing into “abstract revolutionism and
rebelliousness” is a downright lie. We have always raised, and are now
raising, this question not in an “abstract” way, but on a
concrete basis, answering it differently in 1897, in 1902, and in
1905. The accusation of rebelliousness is an opportunist phrase of the liberal
bourgeois gentry, who are preparing to betray the interests of the revolution
and to play it false at a time of decisive conflict with the autocracy. 2) The
Conference of the new-Iskrists stopped short at the second stage in the
evolution of the question of insurrection.. In 1905 it merely reiterated what
had been enough in 1902.

    

It lagged some three years behind revolutionary
developments. 3) Under the influence of the lessons of life, namely, the Odessa
uprising, the new-Iskrists have in fact acknowledged the necessity of acting
according to the Congress resolution and not according to their own, i.e., they
have recognised that the task of an insurrection is an urgent one, that a direct
call must be made forthwith for the immediate organisation of an uprising and
for the arming of the people.


The revolution has dislodged a backward Social-Democratic doctrine at one
stroke. Another obstacle to practical unity in work in common with the
new-Iskrists has been removed, which, of course, does not yet mean that
differences on principles have been entirely eliminated. We cannot be content to
have our tactical slogans limp behind events and to their being adapted to
events after their occurrence. We must have slogans that lead us forward, light
up the path before us, and raise us above the immediate tasks of the moment. To
wage a consistent and sustained struggle the party of the proletariat cannot
determine its tactics from occasion to occasion. In its tactical decisions it
must combine fidelity to the principles of Marxism with due regard for the
progressive tasks of the revolutionary class.


Take another urgent political question, that of a provisional revolutionary
government. Here we see, perhaps, even more clearly that in its leaflet the
Iskra Editorial Board has in fact abandoned the slogans of the
Conference and has accepted the tactical slogans of the Third Congress. The
absurd theory of “not setting ourselves the aim of seizing” (for a
democratic revolution) “or sharing power in a provisional
government” has gone by the board, for the leaflet makes a direct appeal
for the “seizure of municipal institutions” and the organisation of
a “provisional administration of public affairs”. The absurd slogan
of “remaining a party of extreme revolutionary opposition” (absurd
in a period of revolution, although quite appropriate in a period of
parliamentary struggle alone) has in fact been shelved, for the Odessa events
have forced Iskra to realise that during an insurrection it is
ridiculous to confine one self to this slogan, that it is necessary to call
energetically for an uprising, for its vigorous prosecution and for the

    

use of revolutionary power. The absurd slogan of “revolutionary
      communes” has also been discarded, for the events in Odessa have
      forced Iskra to realise that this slogan merely serves to confuse
    the democratic revolution with the socialist. To confuse these two very
    different things would be slicer adventurism, testifying to
      complete
      obscurity in theoretical thinking, and capable of hampering implementation of
    essential practical measures facilitating the working-class struggle for
    socialism in a democratic republic.


Call to mind the polemic between the new Iskra and Vperyod,
the former’s tactics of action “only from below”, as opposed to the
Vperyod tactics of action “both from below and from above”,
and you will see that Iskra has accepted our solution of the question
by now itself calling for action from above. Remember Iskra’s
apprehensions that we might discredit ourselves by assuming responsibility for
the treasury, finances, etc.—and you will see that, though our arguments
failed to convince Iskra, the events did convince it of the correctness
of those arguments, for in the leaflet quoted above Iskra clearly
recommends “seizure of branches of the State Bank”. The absurd
theory that a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the
peasantry, their joint participation in a provisional revolutionary
government constitutes “treason to the proletariat” or “vulgar
Jaurèsism (Millerandism)” has simply been forgotten by the new-Iskrists, who
are themselves now calling upon the workers and peasants to seize municipal
institutions, branches of the State Bank and arsenals “to arm the whole
people” (apparently, this time meaning to arm with weapons and
not merely with a “burning desire to arm
themselves”),
to proclaim the
overthrow of the tsarist monarchy, etc.—in a word, to act wholly in
accordance with the programme provided in the resolution of the Third Congress,
to act precisely as is indicated by the slogan calling for a
revolutionary-democratic dictatorship and a provisional revolutionary
government.


True Iskra mentions neither of these slogans in its leaflet. It
enumerates and describes actions whose sum is characteristic of a provisional
revolutionary government, but avoids mentioning the term. That is to be
regretted. In

    

actual fact it accepts this slogan, but the absence of a clear term can only
create vacillation and uncertainty, and sow confusion in fighters’ minds. Fear
of the words revolutionary government” and “revolutionary
power” is a purely anarchist fear, and unworthy of a Marxist. To
“seize” institutions and banks, “appoint elections”,
establish “provisional administration”, and “proclaim the over
throw of the monarchy”—for all this the first and absolutely necessary
step is the proclamation of a provisional revolutionary government to unite all
the military and political activities of the revolutionary people and direct
these activities towards a single aim. Unless there is such unity, unless the
provisional government is universally recognised by the revolutionary people,
unless it assumes all power, any “seizure” of institutions and any
“proclamation” of a republic will remain merely an outburst of
senseless rebelliousness. Unless it is concentrated by the revolutionary
government the people’s revolutionary energy will merely dissipate after the
first success of the uprising, squander itself on trifles, and lose its national
scope. It will be unable to cope with the task of keeping what has been seized,
or of giving effect to what has been proclaimed.


We repeat: Social-Democrats who do not recognise the decisions of the Third
Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. have been in actual fact forced by the course of
events to act in full accordance with the slogans proclaimed by the Congress and
to throw the Conference’s slogans by the board. Revolution teaches. It is our
duty to make the most of the lessons it provides, frame our tactical slogans in
conformity with our conduct and our immediate aims, give the masses a proper
understanding of those immediate aims, and start most extensively organising the
workers everywhere to fight in an uprising, create a revolutionary army, and
form a provisional revolutionary government!

 

Notes
 

[1]

“The Revolutionary Army and the Revolutionary Government”, 1905. See
present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 559-67.—Ed.

[2]

First published in 1905. See present edition, Vol. 8,
pp. 544-54.—Ed.

[3]

First published in pamphlet form in Geneva, 1898. See present edition,
Vol. 2, p. 342.—Ed.

[4]

First published in Iskra, 1902. See present edition, Vol. 5,
pp. 515-16.—Ed.
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Wrathful Impotence









Lenin: Wrathful Impotence







V. I.  

      Lenin
Wrathful Impotence




Published:
Proletary, No. 9, July 26 (13), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 156-160.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

No. 104 of Iskra carries a retort to our feuilleton

“A Third Step Back”* 

(Proletary, No. 6), which spoke quite calmly
of the new-Iskra group having made use of a printing-press,
supplies, and funds in the name of the Party, but having refused to return
Party property. The state Iskra has been reduced to by its
irritation over this statement is to he seen in the language it has been
using, which is reminiscent of the Bund’s inimitable brand of
vituperation. Iskra has courteously applied to us such terms as
“filthy swab”, “slanderous cowards”, and so on and so forth. All this
reminds one of the way Engels once characterised the polemic waged by a
certain variety of émigrés:

"Each word is like a chamber-pot, and not an empty one at that”
(Jedes Wort—etn Nachttopj und kein leerer).[1]

We have, of course, not forgotten the French saying, “Abuse is
the argument of those who are wrong”. We shall ask the unbiased reader
calmly to pass judgement on the cause of all this fuss. The new-Iskrists have
made no reply to a letter from the Central Committee asking them, after the
Third Congress, to return Party property. They do not recognise the Third
Congress or the Central Committee’s turn towards the Bolsheviks. That is all
so. However, the only conclusion to be drawn from such non-recognition is that,
as the new-Iskrists see it, they should return not all Party property, but only
part of it. This is so obvious that in its retort Iskra itself now
speaks of “the possibility of dividing up all Party property”. If
that is the case, our dear opponents,

    

why could you not have replied to the Central Committee’s letter in that
vein? Otherwise, it is beyond doubt that, however energetic the expressions you
have used, the Majority has rendered a full account of all its affairs by
publishing the minutes of the Third Congress, while you have rendered no account
to anybody concerning the use of Party property, have published no minutes at
all, but have only used bad language. Consider in a moment of calm the
impression such behaviour must produce on all thinking people.


Further, the Central Committee’s turn towards the Congress is displeasing to
Iskra. That is natural. But this turn is not the first to have taken
place. A year ago, in August 1904, the Central Committee sided with the
Minority. A year ago we stated in print and publicly that we did not recognise
the legality of the Central Committee’s actions. It may be asked: How did we
then behave with respect to Party property? We handed over the
printing-press, stores, and funds to the Mensheviks. Iskra may hurl as much
abuse as it likes, but facts are facts. We rendered due account and turned the
property over to our opponents wishing to fight in the Party spirit and to get a
congress called. Our opponents have been steering clear of a congress and have
rendered no account to anybody (except their own adherents, and even to them in
private, for no minutes of the “Conference” were kept, in the first
place, and in the second, nothing is known either of its agenda or of the scope
of its powers, i.e., the degree in which its decisions are binding upon the
Mensheviks themselves).


The struggle within our Party has ended in a split; it is now merely a struggle
between two parties, one of which is in the throes of
organisation-as-process. Today, looking back at the history of the struggle
prior to the split, anybody (of course of those who study the history
of their Party using the documents, and do not merely give ear to old wives’
tales, in the way practised by many who come here from Russia)—anybody can
clearly see the general nature of the struggle. The Majority, which has been
accused of “formalism”, bureaucratism, and so on, has surrendered
all its formal privileges and bureaucratic institutions to
its opponents—first the Central Organ’s Editorial Board, then the

    

Party Council, and finally the Central Committee. The Congress is the only
      thing it has refused to give up. The out come has been that the Bolsheviks
      have restored the Party (or rather, as the new-Iskrists naturally think,
      have created their own Party), founding all their Party
    institutions wholly on the voluntary consent of Party workers—first
    the Bureau of Majority Committees, then Vperyod, and, finally, the
    Third Party Congress. Our opponents, on the contrary, are holding on to
    their formal privileges and bureaucratic institutions given to them out of
    commiseration. Consider the following fact: have not Lenin and Plekhanov
    made them the gift of the Central Organ’s Editorial Board? When it calls
    itself the Central Organ of the Party, Proletary bases its claim on
    the Third Congress decisions which are not recognised by the Mensheviks, but
    have been clearly, precisely, and definitely recognised by the Party
    Majority whose composition is known to all. For its part, Iskra,
    which styles itself “Central Organ of the Party”, bases that
    claim on the decisions of the Second Congress, which today are recognised
    neither by the Bolsheviks (we have replaced them by the decisions of the
    Third Congress), nor by the Mensheviks!! That is the gist of the
    whole matter! After all, it was the Menshevik Conference that revoked the
    Rules of the Second Congress. It is the new-Iskra group that is
      now clinging to a heading rejected by its own adherents!


Even Plekhanov himself, who could never see eye to eye with the new-Iskrists in
matters of principle, but has made countless personal concessions to them,
launched more than his share of attacks against the Bolsheviks, for which the
new-Iskrists have been bowing and scraping to him— even Plekhanov has
declared that the Conference has dealt a death blow at the central institutions,
and has preferred to wash his hands of the matter. As for the
new-Iskra people, they go on calling themselves the
“Central
Organ”, and rail against those who tell them that their Party stand is not
merely wrong but downright indecent. The abusive language that has provided the
occasion for this writing is the psychologically inevitable consequence of a dim
realisation of that indecency. We shall remind the reader that even Mr. Struve,
who has often voiced sympathy in principle with

    

Trotsky, Starover, Akimov, and Martynov, and with the new-Iskra trends
in general and the new-Iskra Conference in particular—even
Mr. Struve was in his time obliged to acknowledge that their stand is not quite
a correct one, or rather quite an incorrect one (see Osvobozhdeniye,
No. 57).


We are well aware that the mass of Social-Democrats, especially the workers, are
most dissatisfied with the split (but then, who can be pleased with it?), and
are ready to look for a solution “wherever possible”. We
fully understand this frame of mind and have every respect for it, but we would
warn all and sundry that a frame of mind is not enough. The formula
“wherever possible” is worthless, for it lacks the chief
thing—an understanding of the means of putting an end to the
split. Bitter words, attempts to create a “third something”, neither
Bolshevik nor Menshevik, will not help matters, but will only introduce greater
con fusion. The example provided over the last two years by so powerful a
personality as Plekhanov is a practical illustration of this. Let bitter words
be resorted to by German Social-Democrats, who, like Karl Kautsky, have, in the
main, learnt of the split in the Party from biased sources. Their ignorance may
be pardoned, though their claims to judge things they know nothing of are, of
course, unpardonable. Russian Social-Democrats must at last learn to despise
those whose only recourse is to bitter words, who chop and change, hold forth on
the subject of “peace”, but reveal their impotence when it comes to
doing something real for the cause of peace. The real path to peace and unity in
the Party does not lie through hasty agreements, which will lead to new
conflicts and to new and worse con fusion, but through thorough and factual
ascertainment of the tactical and organisational tendencies of both
sides. In this respect we are most satisfied with the new-Iskra
Conference, which has revealed the irreparable disintegration of the
new-Iskra trend. Their tail-ism in questions of tactics has been
smashed by the revolution, and their “organisation-as-process” has
become a laughing-stock. They have been left, on the one hand, by Plekhanov, who
has evidently been “enlightened” by the Conference not only with
regard to its organisational significance but also with regard to adherence to
principle on the part of the new-Iskrists.

    

 On the other hand, they have been abandoned by Akimov, who has called the
 promises or “principles” of the St. Petersburg Mensheviks “a
 hollow phrase” (Posledniye Izvestia,[2]

No. 235). The
 Party’s Third Congress has rallied the ranks of one of the sides. The other
 side has been smashed by the Conference itself. It remains for us only to
 advise the “conciliators” to study the history of the split,
 examine the causes of the failure of Plekhanov’s conciliation, and refrain from
 putting new wine into old bottles.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

See F. Engels, “Flüchtlingsliteratur. II. Programm
der blanquistischen Kommuneflüchtlinge”, Internationales aus dem
Volksstaat, Berlin 1957, 5. 50,





[2]

Posledniye Izvestia (News)—a periodical
published abroad by the
    Bund from 1901 till 1906. It expressed the Bundists’
    bourgeois-nationalist views.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Original Variant of the Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party









Lenin: Original Variant of the Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
Original Variant of the Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party[1]




Written: Written in July 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1926 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 161-162.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

COVER: The Voice of the Workers and the Split in the Party


Published by the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.


Contents:


I. Preface by the Editorial Board of Proletary.


II. Letter from an Odessa Worker.


III. Reply to a Letter from a Worker. By Abramov.


IV. Open Letter from the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. to the Organising
Committee.

PREFACE

In No. 8 of Proletary we mentioned the forthcoming publication of a
letter from an Odessa worker, who, in our opinion, has expressed the temper of a
fairly large number of workers. In reply to this letter we are publishing, in
the first place, an article by Comrade Abramov of the Proletary staff
“Reply to a Letter from a Worker”, and in the second place,
“An Open Letter to the Organising Committee” from the Central
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.,[2]

which was recently released in Russia and
featured in No. 10 of Proletary.


As for us, we would emphasise only one thing—unification is
essential. “Worker” is quite right in insisting on this. However,
insistence is not sufficient; what is needed is the ability to bring about
unification, the strength to achieve unification. It is not hard to stand aside
and form a third

    

party or neutral group. That will not bring unification closer, but will only
      defer it; it will not simplify the present confused state of affairs, but
      will only make it more con fused. The decisions made at the Conference of
      the Minority or new-Iskrists give no direct or clear answer to the
      question of precisely how unification can and should be
    achieved. The decisions of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. provide that
    answer in the shape of the Party Rules, which fully guarantee the Minority’s
    rights. It would be ridiculous to consider that answer infallible or
    ideal. But anyone who would not merely talk of unification but really work
    for its achievement through effective measures and proposals should not
    limit himself to reproaches and reproofs, should not in crease the split by
    forming a third party, but should set about preparing his answer to the
    question of the conditions and forms of unification. That is a far more
    difficult matter than the preaching of peace and love, but then it is far
    more useful.


Editorial Board of “Proletary”

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

This document is the original draft of Lenin’s introduction to the pamphlet
Workers on the Split in the Party, which was published in Geneva in
August 1905. One of the variants of the title of the pamphlet was The Voice
of the Workers and the Split in the Party. The title of the document has
been provided by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism, Central Committee,
C.P.S.U.

.




[2]

An Open Letter to the Mensheviks’ Organising Committee from the
R.S.D.L.P.’s Central Committee was to have been published in No. 10 of
Proletary, but was actually published in No. 11, August 9 (July 27),
1905. The letter proposed negotiations on problems of uniting the Party on the
basis of the Programme and Rules adopted by the Third Congress. The first and
second conferences of representatives of the Central Committee and the
Organising Committee took place in July, and the third in September 1905. The
conferences showed that by their schismatic action the Mensheviks were wrecking
unification of the Party.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party









Lenin: Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
Preface to the Pamphlet Workers on the Split in the Party




Published:

      First published in 1905 in a pamphlet issued by the central committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party.

      Published according to the text of the pamphlet.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 163-168.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

When, in Proletary (No. 8), we promised to publish in full a letter
signed “A Worker, One of Many”, we had no idea who he was. We do
know that the ideas expressed by him are really shared by many workers, and this
was sufficient reason for us to decide to publish his letter. Now we learn from
Iskra, No. 105 that the author of the letter “formerly considered
himself one of the Minority”, that “he had for a long time past been
a bitter enemy of the so-called Majority”. So much the better. So much
more valuable to us is this former Menshevik’s admission that
well-meant intentions as to “proletarian initiative” were
just so many “fine
words”; so much more precious is his outright condemnation of the
intellectual’s “Manilovism”.[2]

This is an indubitable
sign that the Mensheviks’ demagogy, their indiscriminate promises of boons of
every description—autonomy, initiative, democracy, etc.—are, as
should have been expected, beginning to weary class-conscious workers and evoke
their legitimate distrust and criticism.


Another highly characteristic fact, and one which we are sure will turn many
more Menshevik workers into “former Mensheviks”, is that
Iskra has seen in this letter from “Worker” a “fist
from below”! This is a fact that is very much worth considering.


What has a “fist” to do with it anyway? Does this “dreadful
word”, which the Mensheviks have worked almost to death, denote certain
definite organisational concepts, or does it simply express the intellectual’s
annoyance at, or outburst against, any strong organisation which would hold
intellectual caprices in check?

 

What does the author of the letter want? He wants the split to be closed. Does
Iskra sympathise with this aim? Yes, it states so plainly. Does it
    consider that this can be achieved right now? Yes, it does, for it declares:
    “Differences (in tactics) are not so great as to justify a split.”


That being the case, why does Iskra again bring up the tactical
differences in its reply to “Worker”, mentioning even the
“Plan of the Zemstvo Campaign” which was buried in the
Iskra bulletins published “for Party members only” and in
Plekhanov’s “confidential” pamphlet? What is the point of this?
“Worker” does not deny the necessity of polemics and disputes, nor
do the Bolsheviks deny it! And the Party Rules adopted at the Third Congress
clearly establish the right of every committee to publish literature. After all,
the question revolves around what should be done for tactical disagreements not
to lead to a split, i.e., to a break in the organisational ties. Why then does
Iskra evade this clearly presented question, by dragging in irrelevant
arguments about tactical differences? Is it not, perhaps, because
“Worker” would rule out any irrelevant chatter that they speak of
his “fist”?


A mere desire to put an end to the split is not sufficient to end it. It is
necessary to know how to do it. Putting an end to the split means
merging in a single organisation. And whoever really wants to bring the
split speedily to an end must not confine himself to complaints,
reproaches, recriminations, exclamations, and declamations about the
split (as is done by
“Worker” and also by Plekhanov, for instance, since he has found
himself in the Marsh)—he must immediately start developing the
type of that common and united organisation.


The weak point in the letter from “Worker” is that the author merely
bewails the split, but makes no definite proposals for
specific organisational measures to close it. In stead of remedying
this defect, Iskra aggravates it by yelling in “panic”:
“A fist I”, at the mere idea voiced by “Worker”
concerning obligatory recognition of common organisational rules!! The split is
not justified by the differences, says “Worker”. That is true,
Iskra agrees. This, “Worker” continues, means that it is
now necessary to spin a rope so strong (fie, for shame! What grossly mechanical
terms I am using!

    

What a “fistic” idea! But bear up a moment, comrades of
Iskra, don’t fall into a swoon at the idea of “nooses” and other such
horrors!) that it would firmly bind both sections and keep them tied together
despite tactical differences.


In reply to this Iskra has another fit of hysterics, and screams:
“A fist !"


We, on our part, say in reply: You are right, Comrade Worker! You reason in a
business-like way. A new, strong rope is needed. But go further, take the next
step: begin to consider what sort of rope this should be, what
exactly this common organisation, which is to be obligatory (help!
the “fist” again!) upon both sections, should be like.


Comrade Worker did not go far enough in specifying his
organisational proposals (because the question of closing the split is
an exclusively organisational question, provided both sides acknowledge
that tactical differences do not justify a split!); Iskra, however,
finds that he went too far, so far, indeed, that it has again raised the cry
about a fist!!


Once more we ask our readers: In point of fact, what is the real meaning of this
notorious “fist”, which, one might say, is scaring the new
Iskra out of its wits? Does this fist express any definite
organisational ideas, or is it merely the intellectual’s blind and ridiculous
fear of any kind of “ties” imposed by any organisation that
is obligatory upon all members of the Party?


We leave it to the class-conscious workers to decide this question for
themselves, and shall proceed.


The real difficulty in a merger, assuming both sides sincerely desire it, is the
following. In the first place, organisational standards, Party Rules absolutely
binding on all, should be laid down; secondly, all parallel, competing local and
central Party organisations and institutions should be merged.


So far only the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. has attempted to solve
the first of these problems, by establishing rules providing constitutional
guarantees for the rights of any minority. The Third Congress has, so to say,
provided a place in the Party for every minority that accepts the Party
programme, tactics, and discipline of organisation. The Bolsheviks have taken
care to provide the Mensheviks as well with a definite place in a united
Party. We cannot say

    

the same of the Mensheviks: their rules provide for no constitutional
      guarantees whatever of the rights of any minority in the Party.


It goes without saying that no Bolshevik regards the Rules adopted by the Third
Congress as ideal or infallible. Whoever thinks the Rules have to be changed
should come forward with a draft of clear-cut amendments—this would be a
practical step towards closing the split; it would be some thing more
than mere complaints and recriminations.


We may, perhaps, be asked, why we have not ourselves started doing this with
regard to the Rules adopted by the “Conference”. Our answer is that
we have started to do so:


see Proletary, No. 6, “A Third Step

       Back”.[1]

We are
prepared to repeat the fundamental principles of
organisation, recognition of which is, in our opinion, necessary
for a merger:

1) Submission of the minority to the majority (not to be confused with the
   “Minority” and the “Majority” in quotation marks!
   Here we deal with the principle of Party organisation in general, not with
   the fusion of the “Minority” with the “Majority”,
   which we shall speak of later. It is possible, speaking in the abstract, to
   visualise the merger between an equal number of both “Mensheviks”
   and “Bolsheviks”, but even such a merger is impossible
   unless the submission of the minority to the majority is recognised in
   principle and as obligatory).

2) The congress, i.e.,an assembly of elected
   delegates from all duly authorised organisations must be the Party’s supreme
   organ; moreover, any decision by these elected delegates must be final (this
   is the principle of democratic representation, as opposed to the principle of
   consultative conferences whose decisions are submitted to the organisations
   for endorsement, i.e., a plebiscite).

3) Elections to the Party’s central
   body (or bodies) must be by direct vote and must be held at a
   congress. Elections out side a congress, two-stage elections, etc., are
   impermissible.

4) All Party publications, both local and central, must be completely
   subordinate to both the Party Congress and the relevant central or local
   organisation of the Party. Existence of Party publications organisationally
   unconnected with the Party is impermissible.

5) There must be an

    

absolutely clear definition of what membership of the Party implies.

6) In like
manner, the rights of any Party minority must also be clearly defined in the
Party Rules.


Such, in our opinion, are the absolutely indispensable organisational
principles, without recognition of which no merger is possible. We should like to
hear the opinion of “A Worker, One of Many” in the matter, and, in
general, of all in favour of fusion.


We may be asked: What about the question of the committees’ attitude towards
provincial organisations? What about the elective principle? Our reply is that
no fundamental principles of organisation are involved in this matter, once the
absolute application of the elective principle is not suggested. That is
something the Mensheviks have not suggested. In conditions of political liberty
the elective principle will be necessary, but, for the present, even the Rules
adopted by the “Conference” have not introduced it for the
committees. One definition or another of the rights and powers of the provincial
organisations is not a question of principle (assuming, of course, that what is
said is actually carried out, that there is no indulgence in demagogy and merely
“fine words”). The Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. tried to give an exact
definition of what is meant by commit tees and provincial organisations, a
definition of the relations between them. Any proposals for certain changes,
amendments, or deletions would be quite calmly discussed by any Bolshevik. So
far as I am aware, there are no “intransigents” in our midst on any
point of the question, and the minutes of the Third Congress will bear out this
assertion.


The next and probably no less difficult question is how to merge all parallel
organisations. In conditions of political liberty this would be easy, since we
would have Party organisations with a certain number of definitely known
members. With a secret organisation it is different. Establishment of
membership is all the more difficult, the more lightly membership is sometimes
understood, and, the more often recourse is made to demagogy, to fictitious
enrolment in the Party of people who are not class-conscious. We think that the
comrades working on the spot and well acquainted with the state of affairs
should have the final say on how these difficulties are to be overcome. The
temporary

    

absence of members of organisations, who are “on holiday” in prison,
      are in exile, or abroad, is another impediment that should be taken into
      account. Then there is, of course, the considerable difficulty of merging
      the central bodies. Without a single guiding centre, without a single
      central press organ, real unity of the Party is impossible. In this
      respect the question stands as follows: either the class-conscious
      workers, ignoring all plaints about fists, will succeed in forcing the
      actual minority in the Party to advocate their views, without
      disorganising the work, in the various bodies of the local committees, at
      conferences, congresses, meetings, etc.; or the class-conscious
      Social-Democratic workers will not be able to cope with this task at
      present (generally speaking, they will undoubtedly and inevitably manage
      to cope with it: this is vouched for by the entire labour movement of
      Russia)—and in that event only agreements, and not fusion, will be
      possible between rival centres and rival organs.


In conclusion, we shall repeat: it is not by means of complaints and
accusations, not by forming new, third parties or groups, circles, etc. (similar
to the one Plekhanov has now founded with his new Party publishing
organisation[3]

outside the Party), that Comrade Worker and those who
share his views must strive to achieve their aims. The formation of a third
party or new groups will only complicate and con fuse matters. Preparation of
concrete terms of fusion must be started: when all Party groups and
organisations, all class-conscious workers, set about this, they will
undoubtedly
be able to work out reasonable terms, and not only work them out, but force
the Party leaders (disregarding all plaints about fists) to submit to these
terms.


In addition to Comrade Worker’s letter we are publishing an Open Letter from the
Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. to the Organising Committee, as a first step
towards a practical solution of the problem of a possible closing of the split.


Editorial Board of “Proletary”


July 1905

 

Notes
 

[1]

See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 544-54.—Ed.
 



[2]

Manilovism—from Manilov, a character in
Gogol’s Dead Souls, whose name has come to typify smug complacency,
empty and
 saccharine prattle, and pipe-dreaming.





[3]

Lenin is referring to Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata (Diary of
a Social Democrat)—a non-periodical organ published by
Plekhanov in Geneva from March 1905 till April 1912. In all, sixteen issues were
brought out, at considerable intervals. Publication was resumed in Petrograd in
1916, but only one issue appeared.


In the first eight issues (1905-06) Plekhanov advocated extremely Right-wing,
Menshevik and opportunist views, defended a bloc between Social-Democracy and
the liberal bourgeoisie, rejected the alliance of the proletariat and the
peasantry, and condemned the December insurrection.


In Nos. 9-16 (1909-12) he came out against the Menshevik liquidators, who wanted
to disband underground party organisations. In the basic questions of
tactics, however, he remained on a Menshevik platform. In No. 1 for 1916,
Plekhanov’s social-chauvinist views found full expression.


Plekhanov’s opportunism and departure from revolutionary Marxism were roundly
criticised by Lenin.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## While the Proletariat is Doing the Fighting the Bourgeoisie is Stealing Towards Power









Lenin: While the Proletariat is Doing the Fighting the Bourgeoisie is Stealing Towards Power







V. I.  

      Lenin
While the Proletariat is Doing the Fighting the Bourgeoisie is Stealing Towards Power




Published:
Proletary, No. 10, August 2 (July 20), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 169-178.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In war-time the diplomats stand idle, but when hostilities are over they are
very much in the picture, casting up the results, making out the bills, and
acting the honest broker.


Something of the kind is under way in the Russian revolution as well. During
the armed clashes between the people and the forces of autocracy, the liberal
bourgeois lie low; they are against violence either from above or from below,
and are opposed both to the authorities’ acts of despotism and to mob
anarchy. It is only when the fighting is over that they appear on the scene,
their political decisions clearly reflecting the change in the political
situation brought about by the fighting. After January 9 the liberal bourgeoisie
turned “pink”; it has now begun to go “red” following the
Odessa events, which (in connection with events in the Caucasus, Poland, etc.)
point to a steep rise in the people’s insurrection against the autocracy during
six months of revolution.


Highly instructive in this respect are three recent liberal congresses. The most
conservative of them was that of the merchants and manufacturers, who are most
trusted by the autocracy and are undisturbed by the police. They criticise and
condemn the Bulygin scheme and demand a constitution, but, as far as we can
judge from the incomplete information available, they do not even raise the
question of boycotting the Bulygin elections. The most radical of the three was
a delegate Congress of the Union of Unions[2]
    

held in secret within a stone’s throw of St. Petersburg, but on non-Russian
      soil—in Finland. Congress members are said to have taken the
      precaution of concealing their papers, police searches at the border
      yielding no results. By a majority vote (though there seems to have been a
      sizable minority) this Congress approved a thorough and determined boycott
      of the Bulygin elections and called for a widespread campaign for
      universal suffrage.


In the middle stood the most “influential”, fanfared, and vociferous
of the three, the Zemstvo and Municipal Congress, which enjoyed almost legal
status. The police drew up a protocol just as a matter of form, their demand
that the Congress break up merely evoking smiles. But newspapers that began to
report the Congress were either suspended (Slovo)[3]

or
cautioned (Russkiye Vedomosti). According to Mr. Pyotr Dolgorukov’s
concluding address as reported in The Times, the Congress was attended
by 216 delegates. Reports on its proceedings were cabled to all parts of the
world by foreign correspondents. No opinion whatever was expressed on the main
political issue—a boycott of the Bulygin
“constitution”. According to British newspapers, the
majority stood for a boycott,
but the Organising Committee was against it. A compromise was reached, leaving
the question open pending publication of the Bulygin scheme, after which a new
congress was to be convened by telegraph. Naturally, the Bulygin scheme was
strongly condemned by the Congress, which adopted the Osvobozhdeniye
draft constitution (providing for a monarchy and a two-chamber system),
rejected an appeal to the tsar, and decided to “appeal to the
people”.


We are not yet in possession of the latter appeal. According to the foreign
press, it amounts to a survey, couched in moderate terms, of events since the
November Zemstvo Congress, as well as a list of facts revealing the government’s
unconscionable procrastination, its broken promises, and cynical flouting of the
demands of public opinion. Besides an appeal to the people, an almost unanimous
resolution was passed calling for resistance to the government’s unjust and
arbitrary acts. “In view of the arbitrary acts of the Administration and
the constant violation of the rights of the public,” the resolution declares,
“the Congress deems it incumbent upon all to defend the natural rights of
man by

    

peaceful means, including resistance to the acts of the authorities violating
these rights, although such acts may be based on the letter of the law.” (We
quote from The Times.)


So our liberal bourgeoisie has beyond doubt taken a step to the left. The
revolution marches on—the bourgeois democrats hobble along in the
rear. The true nature of this democracy, as bourgeois democracy,
representing the propertied classes’ interests and inconsistently and
self-interestedly defending the cause of freedom, is being revealed
ever more
clearly, even though bourgeois democracy is going “red” and
sometimes attempts to use “almost revolutionary” language.


Indeed, postponement of a decision on the boycott of the Bulygin constitution
can denote nothing but a desire to go on haggling with the autocracy, a lack of
self-confidence within the majority which seemed to emerge in favour of a
boycott, and a tacit admission that, while asking for nothing short of a
constitution, the landowners and the merchants would, probably, agree to
something less. Even if a congress of liberal bourgeois does not venture to
break at once with the autocracy and the Bulygin farce, what can be expected of
that congress of all and sundry bourgeois which is to be styled the Bulygin
“Duma” and will be elected (if ever elected it will be!) under every
kind of pressure from the autocratic government?


That is exactly how the autocratic government looks upon this act of the
liberals, which it considers merely an episode in the bourgeoisie’s
chaffering. On the one hand, the autocracy, in view of the liberals’ discontent,
is “adding to” its promises—the Bulygin scheme, according to
reports in the foreign press, is to include a number of new
“liberal” changes. On the other hand, the autocracy is replying to
Zemstvo discontent with a new threat: characteristic in this respect is a
Times report, which says that Bulygin and Goremykin propose, as a
measure against Zemstvo “radicalism”, to stir up the peasants
against “the quality” by promising them extra land in the name of
the tsar, and holding a “people’s” plebiscite (with the aid of the
Rural Superintendents[4]),

on the question of whether or not the elections
should be held on a social-estate basis. This report is, of course, just a
rumour set afloat, probably with a definite purpose,

    

but there can be no doubt that the government is not afraid to resort to
the grossest, most brutal, and most unbridled demagogy; nor is it afraid of
an uprising by “masses on the rampage” and the dregs of society, while
the liberals are afraid of the people rising up against their oppressors,
against the- heroes of plunder, looting, and bashi-bazouk atrocities. The
government has long been shedding blood in a way and on a scale that have
no precedent, yet the liberals respond by saying they want to prevent
bloodshed! After a reply of this kind, is not any hired thug entitled to
despise them as bourgeois hagglers? After this, is it not ridiculous to
adopt a resolution calling for an appeal to the people and recognising
“peaceful resistance” to violence and arbitrary acts? The government is
distributing arms right and left, and bribing all comers to beat up and
massacre Jews, “democrats”, Armenians, Poles, and so on. But our
“democrats” still think that campaigning for “peaceful resistance” is a
revolutionary” step!  

In No. 73 of Osvobozhdeniye, which we have just received, Mr. Struve is
ireful against Mr. Suvorin[5]

for the latter’s condescendingly patting
Mr. Ivan Petrunkevich on the back and suggesting that such liberals should be
mollified with posts in ministries and government departments. Mr. Struve is
indignant, for it is precisely Mr. Petrunkevich and his Zemstvo supporters
(“who, before history and the nation, have committed themselves to a
programme”—What kind of programme? Where did they commit themselves?) that
he has designated for ministerial posts in some future Cabinet to be formed by
the Constitutional-Democratic Party. We, however, hold that the way in which the
Petrunkeviches behaved both at their reception by the tsar and at the Zemstvo
Congress of July 6 (19) has given even the Suvorins good reason to despise such
“democrats”. “Every sincere and thinking liberal in Russia
demands a revolution,” Mr. Struve writes. For our part we shall add that if in
July 1905 this “demand for a revolution” is voiced in a resolution
on peaceable methods of resistance then the Suvorins have every right to despise
and sneer at such a “demand” and at such “revolutionaries


Mr. Struve will, probably, retort that events which have until now swung our
liberals to the left will in due course

    

carry them farther still. Here is what he has written in the selfsame No. 73:


“Conditions for the army’s physical intervention in the political struggle
will actually be provided only when the autocratic monarchy clashes with a
nation organised through popular representation. The army will then have to
choose between the government and the nation, and the choice will not be
difficult or mistaken.”


This peaceful idyll looks very much like putting revolution off until
the Greek calends.[6]

Who is to organise the nation in a popular representation?
The autocracy? But the latter consents to organise only the Bulygin Duma, which
you yourselves are protesting against and refuse to recognise as popular
representation! Or, perhaps, the “nation” will itself organise
representation of the people? If so, why is it that the liberals are dead set
against a provisional revolutionary government, which can rely only on a
revolutionary army? Why is it that, while at their congress they spoke in the
name of the people, the liberals are taking no step that would signify the
nation being organised in a popular representation? If, gentlemen, you really
represent the people and not the bourgeoisie which betrays the interests of the
people in the revolution, why don’t you appeal to the army? Why don’t you
announce a break with the autocratic monarchy? Why do you shut your eyes to the
inevitability of a decisive struggle between the army of revolution and the army
of tsarism?


The reason is that you are afraid of the revolutionary people; you address them
in trite words, while in actual fact you reckon and haggle with the
autocracy. Additional proof of that is provided by the talks held by
Mr. Golovin, Chair man of the Zemstvo Congress’s Organising Committee, with
Kozlov, Governor General of Moscow. Mr. Golovin assured Kozlov that rumours of
any intent to turn the Congress into a constituent assembly were absurd. What
does that mean? It means in effect that a representative of organised bourgeois
democracy gave his pledge to a representative of the autocracy that bourgeois
democracy has no intention of breaking with the autocracy! Only political tyros
will fail to realise that an undertaking not to declare the Congress a
constituent assembly was tantamount to promising to refrain

    

from all genuinely revolutionary measures: Kozlov, of course, shied not at the
      words “constituent assembly” but at acts that could
    exacerbate the conflict and lead to the people and the army beginning a
    determined struggle against tsarism. Is it not political hypocrisy for you
    to call your selves revolutionaries, talk of appealing to the people and
    placing no more reliance in the tsar, while in actual fact you reassure the
    tsar’s servants as to your intentions?


Oh, those florid liberal phrases! How many were uttered at the Congress by
Mr. Petrunkevich, leader of the “Constitutional-Democratic” Party!
Let us see what commitments to “history and the nation” he has
assumed. The source is The Times.


Mr. de Roberti spoke in favour of petitioning the tsar. This was opposed by
Petrunkevich, Novosiltsev, Shakhovskoi, and Rodichev. A ballot produced only six
votes for a petition. Mr. Petrunkevich had said that “when they went to
Peterhof on June 6(19), they still hoped the tsar would under stand the terrible
dangers of the situation and do something to avert them. All hope in that
direction must be abandoned. There remained only one issue. Till now they had
hoped for reform from above, but henceforth their only hope was in the
people. (Loud applause.) They must tell them the truth in plain and
homely words. The inability and impotence of the government had promoted
revolution. That was a fact which they all had to recognise. Their duty was to
use every effort to prevent the accompaniment of bloodshed. Many of them had
devoted long years to the service of their countrymen; they must go boldly to
the people, no longer to the tsar.” On the following day Mr. Petrunkevich
continued:

"We must break out of the narrow confines of our activities and go to the
peasant. Till now we hoped for reforms from above, but, while we waited, time
was doing its work. Expedited by the government revolution has overtaken
us. Yesterday two of our members were so much frightened by the word revolution
that they left the Congress, but we must face the situation manfully. We cannot
wait with folded arms. The objection has been raised that any appeal to the
nation by the Zemstvos and Municipal Councils will amount to agitation that
stirs up unrest. But does calm reign in the villages? No, unrest already exists
there, and of the worst kind.

    

We cannot keep the storm in check, but we must at least try to avert too much
turmoil. We must tell the people that it is useless to destroy factories and
estates. We cannot regard such destruction as mere vandalism: it is the
peasants’ blind and ignorant way of remedying an evil which they instinctively
feel but are unable to understand. The authorities may reply with the knout. It
is nevertheless our duty to go to the people. We should have done that
earlier. The Zemstvos have been in existence for forty years without coming into
close and intimate contact with the peasants. Let us lose no time in rectifying
this error. We must tell the peasant that we stand with him.”


Excellent, Mr. Petrunkevich! You stand with the peas ants, with the people; you
recognise the revolution as a fact, and have abandoned all hope in the
tsar.... Good luck to you, gentlemen! Only... only, what exactly do you mean?
You say you are not with the tsar, but with the people, so therefore
you promise Governor General Kozlov that the Congress will not act as a
constituent assembly, i.e., as a body that is genuinely and actually
representative of the people. You recognise the revolution, so
therefore you reply with peaceful methods of resistance to the atrocities,
killings, and pillage perpetrated by the government’s servants. You go to the
peasant and stand with the peasant, so therefore you confine yourselves
to a most vague programme, whose only promise is that the peasants may buy
back land, given the landlords’ consent. You are not with the tsar, but
with the people, so therefore you accept a draft constitution which, in
the first place, provides for a monarchy and the tsar’s control of the army and
the bureaucracy, and, in the second place, guarantees in advance the political
supremacy of the landlords and the big bourgeoisie through an upper

       chamber.[1]


The liberal bourgeoisie is turning to the people. That is true. It has been
forced to do so, for without the people it is powerless to fight the
autocracy. But it is also afraid of the revolutionary people; it does not turn
to the latter as a representative of their interests, or as a new and ardent

    

comrade-in-arms, but as a chafferer, a stockjobber, who dashes from one
      belligerent to the other. Today it is with the tsar and implores him on
      behalf of the “people” to grant a monarchist constitution, at
      the same time cravenly renouncing the people, “unrest”,
      “sedition”, and revolution. On the morrow it threatens the
      tsar at its congress, threatens him with a monarchist constitution, and
      with peaceable resistance to his bayonets. And yet, gentlemen, you are
      surprised that the tsar’s servants have taken the measure of your craven,
      petty, double-dealing souls. You are afraid to remain without a tsar, but
      the tsar is not afraid to remain without you. You are afraid of a decisive
      struggle; the tsar is not afraid of that, but wants it; he is himself
      provoking and commencing the struggle; he wants a test of strength before
      he yields. It is quite natural for the tsar to despise you. It is quite
      natural for his contempt to be conveyed to you by his lackeys, the
      Suvorins, who patronisingly pat your Mr. Petrunkevich on the back. You
      deserve this contempt, for you are not fighting on the people’s side, but
      are only stealing towards power behind the backs of the revolutionary
      people.


On occasions foreign correspondents and bourgeois publicists grasp the gist of
the matter very aptly, although their rendering is somewhat peculiar. M. Gaston
Leroux has undertaken to present the Zemstvo views in
Matin[7]:

“There is disorder above and disorder below; we alone are people
of order,” he writes. That, indeed, is what the Zemstvos think. Translated into
plain Russian that means: Both above and below, there are people ready to do the
fighting, but as for us, we are honest brokers—we are stealing towards
power. We are waiting in the hope that our March 18 will also come round, that
the people will at least once defeat the government in street fighting, and
that, like the German liberal bourgeoisie, we shall get an opportunity to take
over power, following the first victory of the people. Then, after becoming a
force against the autocracy, we shall turn against the revolutionary people and
strike a deal with the tsar, against the people. Our draft constitution is a
ready-made programme of such a deal.


Quite a skilful calculation! One has sometimes to say of the revolutionary
people that which the Romans said of

    

Hannibal: “You know how to win victories, but you don’t know how to profit
by them.” A victorious rising will not yet be a victory of the people unless it
leads to a revolutionary upheaval, to the complete overthrow of the autocracy,
to the ousting of the inconsistent and selfish bourgeoisie, and to a
revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry.


Le Temps, organ of the French conservative bourgeoisie, has
straightforwardly advised the Zemstvos to put a speedy end to the conflict by
coming to terms with the tsar (editorial of July 24, New
Style). Reforms, it says, are impossible without a union of moral force and
material force. Only the government has material force. The Zemstvos are a moral
force.


This is an excellent rendering of bourgeois views—and excellent
confirmation of our analysis of Zemstvo policy. The bourgeois has forgotten a
petty detail, the people, the scores of millions of workers and peasants, whose
labour creates all the bourgeoisie’s wealth, and who are fighting for the
liberty they need as they do light or air. The bourgeois has been entitled to
forget them, inasmuch as they have not yet proved their “material
force” by defeating the government. No major historical issue has ever
been decided otherwise than by “material force”, and the tsarist
autocracy, we repeat, is itself starting the struggle by challenging the people
to a test of strength.


The French bourgeoisie is advising the Russian bourgeoisie to come speedily to
terms with the tsar. It is afraid, albeit vicariously, of a decisive
struggle. If the people are victorious it remains to be seen whether they will
allow the Petrunkeviches to take power, although the latter are stealing towards
it. It cannot be gauged in advance how decisive the victory will be and what
consequences it will have—and this fully accounts for the bourgeoisie’s
timidity.


All over Russia the proletariat is preparing for the decisive struggle. It is
marshalling its forces; it learns and gains strength after each new clash; past
encounters have all ended in failure, but have invariably led to fresh and
stronger attacks. The proletariat is marching to victory and rousing the
peasantry to follow its leadership. Relying on the peasantry it will paralyse
the instability and

    

treachery of the bourgeoisie, brush aside bourgeois bidders for power, crush the
      autocracy by force, and eradicate from Russian life all traces of the
      accursed system of serf- ownership. When that time comes we shall win for
      the people not a monarchist constitution, which secures
      political privileges for the bourgeoisie—no, we shall win
      for Russia a republic,
      with full liberty for all oppressed nationalities, for the peasants and
      the workers. We shall then use all the revolutionary energy of the
      proletariat for the boldest and most far-reaching struggle for socialism,
      for the complete emancipation of all toilers from exploitation of any
      kind.

 

Notes
 

[1]

See the leaflet “Three Constitutions” published by our
newspaper. (See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 557-58.—Ed.)—Lenin
 



[2]

The Union of Unions—a political
organisation of liberal bourgeois intellectuals, founded in May 1905 at the
first congress of representatives of 14 unions, such as lawyers, writers,
medical men, engineers, teachers, and the like. In 1905 the Union favoured a
boycott of the Bulygin Duma, but soon changed its stand, deciding to take part
in the Duma elections. It fell apart towards the close of 1906.



Regarding the attitude of Social-Democracy towards the liberal unions see
pp. 281-82 in this volume.





[3]

Slovo (The Word)—a bourgeois daily published
in St. Petersburg
from 1903 till 1909. Originally a Right-wing Zemstvo organ, it became the
mouthpiece of the Octobrist Party from November 1905 till July 1906, when it
ceased publication. Publication was resumed on November 19 (December 2), 1906,
when the paper became the organ of the constitutional monarchist party of
“Peaceful Renovation”, which in essence in no way differed from the
 Octobrists.





[4]

Rural Superintendent (Zemsky Nachalnik) —an
administrative post
instituted in 1889 by the tsarist government with the aim of strengthening the
landlords’ authority over the peasants. Rural Superintendents were selected from
among the local landed nobility, and were given very great powers not only of an
administrative character, but also judicial, which included the right to arrest
peasants and administer corporal punishment.





[5]

Suvorin, A. S.—editor of the
reactionary newspaper Novoye
 Vremya from 1876 till 1912.





[6]

 Until the Greek calends— a translation of the Latin ad
calendas graecas. The calends was the name given in the Roman
calendar to the first day of each month. The Greek calendar had no calends, so
the expression means “never”.





[7]

Le Matin—the name of a French bourgeois
daily paper that
 was founded in 1884.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Boycott of the Bulygin Duma, and Insurrection









Lenin: The Boycott of the Bulygin Duma, and Insurrection







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Boycott of the Bulygin Duma, and Insurrection




Published:
Proletary, No. 12, August 16 (3), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 179-187.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

At present the political situation in Russia is as follows:
the Bulygin Duma may soon be convened—a consultative assembly of
representatives of the landlords and the big bourgeoisie, elected under the
supervision and with the assistance of the autocratic government’s servants on
the basis of an electoral system so indirect, so blatantly based on property and
social-estate qualifications, that it is sheer mockery of the idea of popular
representation. What should our attitude towards this Duma be? The liberal
democrats give two replies to this question. The Left wing, represented by the
“Union of Unions”—mostly representatives of the bourgeois
intelligentsia—is in favour of boycotting this Duma, of abstaining from
participation in the elections, and of taking advantage of the opportunity for
increased agitation for a democratic constitution on the basis of universal
suffrage. The Right wing, as represented by the Zemstvo and Municipal Congress
of July, or, to be more correct, by a certain section of that Congress, is
opposed to a boycott and favours participation in the elections and getting as
many of its candidates as possible elected to the Duma. True, the Congress has
not yet passed any resolution on this question and has postponed the matter
until the next Congress which is to be convened by telegraph following
promulgation of the Bulygin “constitution”. However, the opinion of
liberal democracy’s Right wing has already taken shape.


Revolutionary democracy, i.e., in the main, the proletariat, and
Social-Democracy, the vehicle of its conscious expression, is, by and large,
fully in favour of insurrection.

    

This difference in tactics has been correctly appraised by
    Osvobozhdeniye, organ of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie. Its
    latest issue (No. 74), on the one hand roundly condemns “open advocacy
    of insurrection” as “insane and criminal”; on the other
    hand it criticises the idea of a boycott as “fruitless for practical
    purposes” and expresses the conviction that not only the Zemstvo
    section of the Constitutional-“Democratic” (read: Monarchist)
    Party but the Union of Unions, too, will “pass their state
    examination”, i.e., abandon the idea of a boycott.


The question arises: what attitude should the party of the class-conscious
proletariat take towards the idea of a boycott, and what tactical slogan should
it bring into the foreground for the masses of the people? For a reply to this
question we must first of all call to mind the essence and radical significance
of the Bulygin “constitution”. It is, in fact, tsarism’s deal with
the landlords and big bourgeoisie, who, in return for innocent,
pseudo-constitutional
sops that are quite innocuous to the autocracy, are to be gradually
drawn away from the revolutions i.e., from the fighting people, and reconciled
with the autocracy. The possibility of such a deal cannot be doubted, since all
our Constitutional-“Democratic” Party is eager to preserve the monarchy
and the upper chamber (i.e., in advance to secure for the moneyed “upper
ten thousand” political privileges and political domination in the
country’s system of state). Moreover, such a deal is sooner or later inevitable
in one form or another, at least with a section of the bourgeoisie, for it is
prescribed by the very class position of the bourgeoisie in the capitalist
system. The only question is when and how this deal will take place. The task
confronting the party of the proletariat is to delay conclusion of this deal for
as long as possible, to split up the bourgeoisie as much as possible, to derive
from the bourgeoisie’s temporary appeals to the people the greatest possible
advantage for the revolution, and meanwhile to prepare the forces of the
revolutionary people (the proletariat and the peasantry) for the forcible
overthrow of the autocracy and for the alienation, the neutralisation of the
treacherous bourgeoisie.


In fact, the gist of the bourgeoisie’s political position is, as we have
frequently pointed out, that it stands between

    

the tsar and the people, and would play the part of the “honest
broker” and steal into power behind the back of the militant people. That
is why the bourgeoisie appeals to the tsar one day, and to the people the next,
making “serious” and “business-like” proposals for a
political deal to the former, and addressing empty phrases about liberty
(Mr. I. Petrunkevich’s speeches at the July Congress) to the latter. It is to
our advantage that the bourgeoisie should appeal to the people, for by doing so
it provides material that will help to rouse and enlighten politically those
huge backward masses of people to reach whom through Social- Democratic
agitation would be sheer utopianism for the time being Let the bourgeoisie stir
up those that are most backward; let it break the soil here and there; we shall
untiringly sow the seeds of Social-Democracy in that soil. Everywhere in the
West, in its struggle against autocracy the bourgeoisie was compelled to rouse
the people’s political consciousness, while at the same time striving to sow the
seeds of bourgeois theories among the working class. It is for us to take
advantage of the bourgeoisie’s work of destroying the autocracy and
systematically enlighten the working class concerning its socialist aims and the
irreconcilable antagonism between its interests and those of the bourgeoisie.


Hence it is clear that our tactics at present should first of all consist in
support for the idea of a boycott. The very question of a boycott lies within
the bounds of bourgeois democracy. The working class is not directly interested
in it, but it is definitely interested in supporting that section of bourgeois
democracy which is more revolutionary; it is interested in extending and
intensifying political agitation. A boycott of the Duma means a more vigorous
appeal to the people by the bourgeoisie, a development of its agitation, a
greater number of opportunities for our agitation, and a more intense political
crisis, which is the source of the revolutionary movement. The participation of
the liberal bourgeoisie in the Duma means a slackening in its agitation at the
present time, its appealing more to the tsar than to the people, and the
approach of a counter-revolutionary deal between the tsar and the bourgeoisie.


Even if it is not prevented from meeting, the Bulygin Duma must of necessity
give rise to political conflicts that

    

the proletariat should not fail to take advantage of—but that is a matter
      for the future. It would be ridiculous to renounce utilising this
      bourgeois-bureaucratic Duma for purposes of agitation and struggle, but
      at the moment that is not the point. At present the Left wing of bourgeois
      democracy itself has raised the issue of waging a direct and immediate
      struggle against the Duma by means of a boycott, and we must exert all our
      efforts to support this more deter mined onslaught. We must take the
      bourgeois democrats, the Osvobozhdeniye people, at their word,
    give the widest publicity to their “Petrunkevich-like” phrases
    about an appeal to the people, expose them to the people, and show that the
    first and least real test of these phrases was the question of whether we
    should boycott the Duma (i.e., turn in protest to the people) or accept the
    Duma (i.e. abstain from protesting, go once more to the tsar, and accept
    this travesty of popular representation).


Secondly, we must exert every effort to make the boycott of real use in
extending and intensifying agitation, so that it shall not be reduced to mere
passive abstention from voting. If we are not mistaken this idea is already
fairly widespread among the comrades working in Russia, who express it in the
words: an active boycott. As distinct from passive abstention, an
active boycott should imply in creasing agitation tenfold, organising meetings
everywhere, taking advantage of election meetings, even if we have to force our
way into them, holding demonstrations, political strikes, and so on and so
forth. It goes without saying that to further agitation and struggle in this
connection, temporary agreements with various groups of revolutionary
bourgeois democrats, generally permitted by a number of our Party resolutions, are
especially expedient. But here we must, on the one hand, steadfastly preserve
the class individuality of the party of the proletariat, and must not for a
single moment abandon our Social-Democratic criticism of our bourgeois allies;
on the other hand, we should be failing in our duty as the party of the advanced
class if in our agitation we failed to produce an advanced revolutionary slogan
at the present stage of the democratic revolution.


That is our third direct and immediate political task. As we have already said,
“an active boycott” means agitation,

    

recruiting, organising revolutionary forces on a larger scale, with redoubled
energy, and bringing redoubled pressure to bear. Such work, however, is
unthinkable without a clear, precise, and immediate slogan. Only an armed
uprising can be that slogan. The government’s convocation of a crudely faked
“popular” representative body provides excellent opportunities for
agitation for a truly popular representative body, for making the broadest
masses of the people understand that at present (after the tsar’s frauds and his
mockery of the people) only a provisional revolutionary government can convene
a truly representative body, and that to establish such a government the victory
of an insurrection and the actual overthrow of tsarist rule are necessary. It
would be hard to imagine a better time for widespread agitation for an uprising
and in order to conduct that agitation full clarity regarding the programme of a
provisional revolutionary government is also necessary. This programme should
consist of the six points which we have indicated previously
(see Proletary, No.7, “The Revolutionary Army and the
Revolutionary

     Government”[1]

):

1) convocation of a popular constituent assembly;

2) arming of the people;

3) political freedom—the immediate repeal of all laws that
contradict it;

4) complete cultural and political freedom for all oppressed and
disfranchised nationalities—the Russian people cannot win
liberty for themselves without fighting for the liberty of the other
nationalities;

5) an eight-hour working day;

6) the establishment of peasant committees for the support and
implementation of all democratic reforms, among them agrarian reforms,
up to and including the confiscation of the landlords’ land.



To sum up: the most energetic support for the idea of a boycott; exposure of the
Right wing of bourgeois democracy, which rejects the boycott, as traitors;
making the boycott an active one, i.e., building up a most widespread agitation;
advocating an insurrection and calling for the immediate organisation of combat
squads and contingents of a revolutionary army for the overthrow of the
autocracy and the establishment of a provisional revolutionary government;
spreading and popularising the fundamental and absolutely

    

obligatory programme of this provisional revolutionary government, a programme
      which is to serve as the banner of the uprising and as a model for all
      future repetitions of the Odessa events.


Such should be the tactics of the party of the class- conscious proletariat. In
order to make this tactics perfectly clear and to achieve unity we must also
deal with Iskra’s tactics. It is set forth in No. 106 of that paper in
an article entitled “Defence or Attack”. We shall not take up the
minor and partial differences, which will dissolve at the first attempts to take
action; we shall deal only with the fundamental difference. While quite
correctly condemning a passive boycott, the Iskra contraposes to it the
idea of the immediate “organisation of revolutionary self-government
bodies”, as a “possible prologue to an uprising”. In
Iskra’s opinion we must “seize the right to carry on agitation in
the election campaign by establishing workers’ agitation
committees”. These committees “must set themselves the aim of
organising popular elections of revolutionary deputies by going outside the
’legal’ limits which will be established by Ministerial Bills”, we must
“cover the country with a network of revolutionary self-government
bodies”.


Such a slogan is absolutely useless. Viewed in the light of the political tasks
in general it is a jumble, while in the light of the immediate political
situation it brings grist to the mill of the Osvobozhdeniye trend. The
organisation of revolutionary self-government, the election of their own
deputies by the people is not the prologue to an uprising, but its
epilogue. To attempt to bring about this organisation now, before an
uprising and apart from an uprising, means setting oneself absurd aims and
causing confusion in the minds of the revolutionary proletariat. It is first of
all necessary to win the victory in an uprising (if only in a single city) and
to establish a provisional revolutionary government, so that the latter, as the
organ of the uprising and the recognised leader of the revolutionary people,
should be able to get down to the organisation of revolutionary
self- government. To obscure the slogan of insurrection or relegate it into the
background by proposing a slogan demanding the organisation of a revolutionary
self-government is some thing like giving advice that the fly should first be
caught and

    

then stuck on the fly-paper. If during the celebrated Odessa events our Odessa
comrades had been advised to organise not a revolutionary army, but the election
of deputies by the people of Odessa as a prologue to an uprising, those comrades
would undoubtedly have laughed such advice to scorn. Iskra is repeating
the mistake made by the Economists, who wished to see in the “struggle
for rights” a prologue to the struggle against the
autocracy. Iskra is reverting to the misadventure of the unfortunate
“plan of the Zemstvo campaign”, which obscured the slogan of
insurrection with the theory of a “higher type of .demonstration”.


This is not the place to dwell on the origin of Iskra’s tactical
blunder. We shall refer the interested reader to
N. Lenin’s pamphlet Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic
Revolution. It is more important here to point out how the slogan of the
new Iskra lapses into that of Osvobozhdeniye. In actual
practice attempts to organise popular elections of deputies before the uprising
is victorious would only play into the hands of the Osvobozhdeniye
people with the result that the Social-Democrats would be trailing behind
them. Until replaced by a provisional revolutionary government the autocracy
will not permit the workers and the people to conduct any elections that can in
any way be called popular (and Social-Democrats will not agree to a travesty of
“popular” elections under the autocracy); but the
Osvobozhdeniye League, Zemstvo members and the municipal councillors
will conduct elections and blatantly pass them off as “popular”, and
as an expression of “revolutionary self-government”. The line now
taken by the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie consists in trying to avert an
uprising, compel the autocracy to recognise the Zemstvo elections as popular
elections without the people’s victory over tsarism.and convert the Zemstvo and
municipal self-government bodies into organs of “revolutionary” (in
the Petrunkevich sense) “self-government”, without a real
revolution. An excellent expression of this line is to be found in No. 74 of
Osvobozhdeniye. It would be hard to imagine anything more disgusting
than this ideologist of the cowardly bourgeoisie, who asserts that advocacy of
insurrection “demoralises” both the army and the people! And this
is said at

    

a time when even the blind can see that it is only through an uprising that the
      ordinary Russian citizen and soldier can save himself from utter
      demoralisation and vindicate his right to citizenship! The bourgeois
      Manilov pictures to himself an Arcadian idyll in which the mere pressure
      of “public opinion” alone “will compel the government to
      make concession after concession, until finally it can go no further and
      will have to hand over the power to a constituent assembly elected on the
      basis of universal and equal suffrage, direct elections, and a secret
      ballot, as is demanded by society ..." (! with an upper
      chamber?). “There is nothing at all improbable in this peaceful [!!
      I transition of power from the present government to a national
      constituent assembly, which will organise state and governmental power on
      a new basis.” And this masterly philosophy of the cringing bourgeoisie is
      rounded off with the advice that the army, particularly the officers,
      should be won over; that a people’s militia be established “without
      official authorisation”, and that local self-government bodies
      (read: of land lords and capitalists) should be set up as “elements
      of a future provisional government”.


There is method in this muddle. What the bourgeoisie wants is to be
given power “peacefully”, without a popular uprising, which
may prove victorious, win a republic and genuine liberty, arm the proletariat,
and rouse millions of peasants. To obscure the slogan of insurrection, to
abandon it and make others follow suit, to advise the immediate establishment,
by way of a “prologue”, of popular self-government (to which only
the Trubetskois, Petrunkeviches, Fyodorovs, and the like will be
admitted)—that is what the bourgeoisie needs in order to betray the
revolution and strike a bargain with the tsar (a monarchy with an upper chamber)
against the “mob”. Liberal Manilovism, there fore, voices
the innermost thoughts of the money-bags, their most profound interests.


Iskra’s Social-Democratic Manilovism expressed merely the
thoughtlessness of a section of the Social-Democrats, their departure from the
proletariat’s only revolutionary tactics, viz., ruthless exposure of the
bourgeois-opportunist illusions that peaceful concessions from tsarism are
possible, that popular self-government can be instituted without

    

the autocracy being overthrown, and that election of deputies by the people is
possible as a prologue to an uprising. No, we must clearly and resolutely show
the necessity of an insurrection in the present state of affairs; we must issue
a direct call for an uprising (without, of course, fixing the date beforehand)
and call for the immediate organisation of a revolutionary army. Only the
boldest and most widespread organisation of such an army can be the prologue to
an uprising. Only an uprising can actually guarantee the victory of the
revolution; of course, those who know the local conditions will always caution
against attempts at a premature uprising. The real organisation of real people’s
self-government can take place only as the epilogue of a victorious uprising.

 

Notes
 

[1]

See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 565-66.—Ed.
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Note on a Resolution of the Conference of R.S.D.L.P. Organisations Abroad









Lenin: Note on a Resolution of the Conference of R.S.D.L.P. Organisations Abroad







V. I.  

      Lenin
Note on a Resolution of the Conference of R.S.D.L.P. Organisations Abroad[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 12, August 16 (3), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 188.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

From the Editors. The measure in which the Central Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P. is working energetically for unity is to be seen in its Open Letter
to the Organising Committee, which is published in the present issue. We would
only like to remind the reader that for unification a common ground of
organisation is needed. The only such ground we are aware of to date is the
Rules of the R.S.D.L.P., which were adopted at the Party’s Third Congress, and
fully guarantee the legitimate rights of a minority.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The conference of R.S.D.L.P. organisations abroad (of
Bolshevik and Menshevik representatives) was held in the summer of
1905. Party branches in South Germany were represented at the
conference, whose resolution spoke of the need for a unity congress of
the Party to be called, so as to resolve the problem of unification
with the seceding section of the R.S.D.L.P. (the Mensheviks). The
resolution was published in No. 12 of Proletary, with a note
“from the Editors” written by Lenin.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Note on M. N. Pokrovsky's Article “The Professional Intelligentsia and the Social-Democrats”









Lenin: Note on M. N. Pokrovsky's Article 'The Professional Intelligentsia and the Social-Democrats'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Note on M. N. Pokrovsky’s Article “The Professional Intelligentsia and the Social-Democrats”




Published:
Proletary, No. 13, August 22 (9), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 189.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It seems to us that the differences between the author of the article entitled
“The Osvobozhdeniye People at Work” and Comrade
“Uchitel”[1]

are not as great as the latter
thinks. Anybody of long standing in the revolutionary movement becomes
accustomed to the political struggle between various trends, acquires definite
views of his own, and is, naturally, inclined to presuppose equally definite
views in others, whom he classes as members of this or that “party”
because of some opinion—or lack of opinion—of theirs on a
particular question.
It stands to reason that an agitator at public meetings would do
well to take into account not only the “political”, but also the
“pedagogical” point of view, place himself in the position of his
audience, explain more than “decry”, etc. Extremes are bad
everywhere, but if the choice lay with us, we would prefer narrow and intolerant
concision to mild and limp diffuseness. It is only flabby and weak-kneed
characters who will be frightened away from us by fear of
“tyranny”. Anyone who has the least “go” in him will
soon see for himself, and be shown by events, that clear- cut and sharply
expressed political opinions concerning a “mythical
Osvobozhdeniye member” are fully justified and that he himself
considered this typical Osvobozhdeniye member “mythical”
only because of lack of political experience. Comrade
“Uchitel”, whose suggestions are very helpful in view of
his knowledge of the environment, himself speaks of the rapidity with which
“bitter truths are assimilated”.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Uchitel (Teacher) was the pseudonym used by M. N. Pokrovsky. The
article “The Osvobozhdeniye People at Work” was written
 by V. D. Bonch-Bruyevich.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Reply from the Proletary Editorial Board to Questions Put by Comrade “Worker”









Lenin: Reply from the Proletary Editorial Board to Questions Put by Comrade 'Worker'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Reply from the Proletary Editorial Board to Questions Put by Comrade “Worker”[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 13, August 22 (9), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 190.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

From the Editors. We reply to the comrade’s questions:

1) yes, it will both lead and govern, pending convocation of a
popular constituent assembly;

2) in circumstances in which this participation
will ensure the possibility of “a relentless struggle against all
counter-revolutionary attempts, and also of defence of the independent
interests of the working class” (from the resolution of the Third
Congress);

3) the Third Congress resolution on insurrection speaks clearly of the
necessity “to explain to the proletariat by means of propaganda
and agitation not only the political significance
but the practical-organisational aspect of the impending
armed uprising”. This means that the political consciousness of
the masses must be developed, and the political significance of the
uprising must be made clear to them. That, however, is not enough. The
masses must be called upon to begin an armed struggle and at once to
arm and organise in contingents of the revolutionary army. Further, we
must tell the author of the letter that an explanation of the
resolutions of the Congress and the Conference regarding a provisional
revolutionary government is given in a pamphlet by N. Lenin, Two
Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution.
Finally, we can say with reference to the split that the author’s
indignation is perfectly justified. We advise him to work for general
recognition of single rules for Party organisations, and to do that
regardless of all intellectualist plaints of both the fist from above
and the fist from below, work towards that end not secretly, not
through intrigues, or by founding new groups or a new party, but
openly, directly, within the framework of any
R.S.D.L.P. organisation.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The present article is a reply to a letter from A Worker
from Dvinsk. The writer posed the following questions to the Editorial
Board of Proletary, with reference to the decisions of the
R.S.D.L.P.’s Third Congress:

1) “What role will be played by a provisional
government; will it guide or rule the country, or do neither?

2) Under what
circumstances is participation of proletarians in a provisional government
possible?

3) What is all this agitation and propaganda about an insurrection?”










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “Oneness of the Tsar and the People, and of the People and the Tsar”









Lenin: 'Oneness of the Tsar and the People, and of the People and the Tsar'







V. I.  

      Lenin
“Oneness of the Tsar and the People, and of the People and the Tsar”




Published:
Proletary, No. 14, August 29 (16), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 191-199.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In Proletary, No. 12, which appeared on August 3(16), we spoke
of the possibility of the Bulygin Duma being convened in the near future, and
analysed the tactics of Social- Democracy towards

 it.[1]

The Bulygin
scheme has now become law and the Manifesto of August 6 (19) has proclaimed that
a “State Duma” will be called “no later than mid-January
1906”.


It is on the anniversary of January 9, when the St. Peters burg workers placed
the seal of their blood on the beginning of the revolution in Russia and showed
their determination to fight desperately for its victory—it is on the
anniversary of that great day that the tsar proposes to convene this grossly
faked, police-sifted assembly of landowners, capitalists, and a negligible
number of rich peasants who cringe to the authorities. The tsar intends to
consult this assembly as one consisting of representatives of the
people”. But the entire working class, all the millions of toilers and
those who are not householders are completely barred from the elections of the
“people’s representatives”. We shall wait and see whether the tsar
is right in banking thus on the impotence of the working class....


Until the revolutionary proletariat has armed itself and defeated the autocratic
government nothing more could have been expected than this sop to the big
bourgeoisie, one that costs the tsar nothing and commits him to nothing. Even
this sop would, probably, not have been given at this time, if the ominous
question of war or peace had not loomed large. Without consulting the landlords
and capitalists, the autocratic government does not venture either to impose on
the people the burden of the senseless continuation of

    

the war, or to work out measures to shift the entire burden of paying for the
      war from the shoulders of the rich to the shoulders of the workers and
      peasants.


As for the provisions of the State Duma Act, they fully confirm our worst
expectations. It is not known as yet whether this Duma will actually be
convened. Such doles can easily be taken away again, and the autocratic monarchs
of every country have made and broken similar promises by the score. It is not
yet known to what extent this future Duma, if it meets at all and is not
wrecked, will be able to become the centre of really far-reaching political
agitation among the masses of the people, against the autocracy. But there can
be no doubt that the very provisions of the new State Duma Act furnish us with a
wealth of material with which to conduct agitation, explain the nature of the
autocracy, disclose its class basis, reveal the irreconcilability of its
interests with those of the people, and spread and popularise our
revolutionary-democratic demands. It may be stated without exaggeration that the
Manifesto and Act of August 6 (19) ought now to become a vademecum to
every political agitator, every class-conscious worker, for it
faithfully reflects all the infamy, viciousness, Asiatic barbarity,
violence, and exploitation that pervade the whole social and political system of
Russia. Practically every sentence in the Manifesto and the Act provides
excellent basis for the most comprehensive and convincing political
commentaries, which will stimulate democratic thought and revolutionary
consciousness.


As the Russian saying runs: “Leave it alone and it won’t stink.” When one
reads the Manifesto and the State Duma Act one feels as though a mass of sewage
that has been accumulating since time immemorial were being stirred up under
one’s very nose.


Centuries of oppression of the working people, the ignorance and downtrodden
state of the people, and the stagnation in economic life and all fields of
culture have enabled the autocracy to maintain its position. This formed the
background for the untrammelled development and hypocritical dissemination of
the doctrine of “the indissoluble oneness of the tsar and the people and
the oneness of the people and the tsar”, the doctrine that the tsar’s
autocratic

    

power stands above all social estates and classes of the nation, above the
division of the people into rich and poor, and expresses the general interests
of the entire nation. What we now have before us is a practical attempt
to display this “oneness” in the most diffident and embryonic
fashion, through simple consultation with the “elected
representatives of the whole of Russia”. And what do we see? We at once
see that “the oneness of the tsar and the people” is possible only
through the medium of an army of bureaucrats and policemen who see to it that
the muzzle put on the people is kept firmly in place. This “oneness” requires
that the people should not dare to open their mouths. By “people” is
meant only the landlords and capitalists, who are allowed to take part in the
two-stage elections (voting first for electors, by rural districts or city
wards, and these electors in their turn elect the members of the State
Duma). Peasant householders are classed among the people only after
having been sifted through four-stage elections, under the supervision
and with the assistance and instruction of the Marshals of the
Nobility,[3]

the Rural Superintendents, and police officials. First the householders
elect members of the volost assembly; then the volost assemblies elect delegates
from the volosts, two from each assembly; then these volost delegates elect the
gubernia electors. Finally, the gubernia electors of the peasants, together with
the gubernia electors of the landlords and (urban) capitalists elect the members
of the State Duma! Almost everywhere the peasants constitute a
minority of the
gubernia electors. They are guaranteed the election of only one member of the
State Duma from each gubernia, who has to be a peasant, i.e., 51 seats out of
412 (in the 51 gubernias of European Russia).


The entire urban working class, all the village poor, agricultural
labourers, and peasants who are not householders, take no part whatever in any
elections.


The oneness of the tsar and the people is in effect the oneness of the tsar and
the landlords and capitalists, with a handful of rich peasants thrown in, and
with all elections placed under the strictest police control. Freedom of speech,
of the press, of assembly, and,of association, without which elections are a
mere farce, are not even mentioned.


The State Duma has no rights whatever, for none of its

    

decisions are binding, being merely of an advisory nature. All its decisions are
      submitted for consideration and approval to the Council of State, i. e.,
      again to the bureaucrats. It is only a flimsy annexe to the bureaucratic
      and police edifice. The public are not admitted to sittings of the State
      Duma. Reports on the proceedings of the State Duma may be published in the
      press only when its sittings are not held in camera; any session
    may be closed, however, by an official order, which means that the Minister
    has merely to qualify the matter under consideration as a state secret.


The new State Duma is the same old Russian police station, only on a larger
scale. The rich landlord and capitalist manufacturer (on rare occasions, a rich
peasant) are admitted for “consultation” to the “open”
Sittings of the police station (or the Rural Superintendent, or factory
inspector, etc.); they always have the right to submit their opinion for the
“gracious attention” of the Emperor... I mean, the police
inspector. As for “the common people”, the city workers and the
rural poor, it goes without saying that they are never admitted to any kind of
“consultation” whatever.


The only difference is that there are many police stations and everything in
them is kept out of sight, whereas there is only one State Duma, and it has now
become necessary to publish the rules governing its election and the extent of
its rights. Publication of this is, we repeat, in itself an excellent exposure
of the utter viciousness of the tsarist autocracy.


From the standpoint of the people’s interests the State Duma is the most
barefaced mockery of “popular representation”. And, as if to
emphasise this mockery we have, on top of this, such facts as Mr. Durnovo’s
speech, the arrest of Mr. Milyukov and Co., the scandalous statement made by
Mr. Sharapov. In his speech Mr. Durnovo, the new Governor General of Moscow, who
is being rapturously hailed by the reactionary press, blurted out the real plans
of the government, which, besides the August 6 Manifesto and the State Duma
Act, issued an ukase on the same day, revoking the “ukase to the
Senate” of February 18, 1905. The ukase of February 18 permitted private
individuals to work out projects and propositions designed to improve
organisation of the state. Zemstvo members and representatives of the

    

intelligentsia appealed to this ukase whenever they held meetings, conferences,
and congresses tolerated by the police. Now this ukase has been revoked, and all
“projects and propositions designed to improve organisation of the
state” must be “submitted” to the autocratic government
“according to the procedure provided for in establishing the State Duma”!
This means the end of agitation, the end of meetings, and congresses. There is a
State Duma; and there is nothing more to discuss. This is just what
Mr. Durnovo stated when he declared that they would no longer tolerate Zemstvo
congresses of any kind.


The liberals of our “Constitutional-Democratic” (read: Monarchist)
Party find themselves duped again. They counted on a constitution, and now they
are forbidden to carry on any agitation for a constitution on the occasion of
the “granting” of an institution which makes a mockery of
constitution!


Mr. Sharapov has blurted out still more. In his government-subsidised paper
(Russkoye Dyelo) he suggests nothing less than the stationing of
Cossacks in the palace where the Duma is to sit ... to provide against
the contingency of “unseemly” behaviour on the part of the Duma. The
oneness of the tsar and the people requires that the latter’s representatives
should speak and act as the tsar wishes. Otherwise the Cossacks will disperse
the Duma. Otherwise the members of the Duma may be arrested, even without the
assistance of the Cossacks, before they ever get into the Duma. The Manifesto on
the oneness of the tsar with the people appeared on Saturday, August 6. On
Sunday, August 7, Mr. Milyukov, one of the leaders of the moderate wing
of the Osvobozhdeniye League or the
“Constitutional-Democratic” (read: Monarchist) Party, was arrested
near St. Petersburg, together with some ten of his political colleagues. They
are to be prosecuted for membership of the Union of Unions. In all probability
they will soon be released, but it will be an easy matter to shut the doors of
the Duma against them:


all that is needed is to announce that they are “under court
investigation”...!


The Russian people are getting their first little lessons in
constitutionalism. All these laws on the elections of popular representatives
are not worth a brass farthing until the sovereignty of the people has
actually been won and

    

there is complete freedom of speech, the press, assembly, and association, until
      citizens are armed and are able to safeguard the inviolability of the
      person. We have said above that the State Duma is a mockery of popular
      representation. That is undoubtedly so from the standpoint of the theory
      of the sovereignty of the people. But this theory is recognised
    neither by the autocratic government nor by the monarchist-liberal
    bourgeoisie (the Osvobozhdeniye League or the
    Constitutional-Monarchist Party). In present-day Russia we have before us
    three political theories, of whose significance we shall yet speak
    on more than one occasion. These are: 1) The theory of the tsar’s
    consultation with the people (or “the oneness of the tsar and
    the people, and of the people and the tsar”, as it is put in the
    Manifesto of August 6). 2) The theory of an agreement between the
    tsar and the people (the programme of the Osvobozhdeniye League and
    the Zemstvo Congress). 3) The theory of the sovereignty of the
      people (the programme of Social-Democracy, as well as of
    revolutionary democracy in general).


From the standpoint of the consultation theory it is quite natural that
the tsar should consult only those he wishes to, and only by the methods he
wishes. The State Duma is a splendid object lesson showing whom the tsar wants
to consult and how. From the standpoint of the theory of an agreement,
the tsar is not subject to the will of the people; he must only take it into
account. But how he is to take it into account and to what extent, cannot be
gathered from the Osvobozhdeniye theory of “agreement”, and
whilst power is in the tsar’s hands the Osvobozhdeniye bourgeoisie is
inevitably condemned to the wretched position of a cadger, or a go-between, who
would use the people’s victories against the people. From the angle of the
sovereignty of the people full freedom of agitation and election should
first be secured in practice, and then a really popular constituent assembly
convened, i.e., an assembly elected by universal and equal suffrage, direct
elections, and secret ballot, and endowed with complete power—full,
integral, and indivisible power— an assembly which will actually express
the sovereignty of the people.


This brings us to our slogan of agitation (the slogan of the R.S.D.L.P.) on the
State Duma. Who can really guarantee

    

freedom of elections and full power to a constituent assembly? Only the
armed people, organised in a revolutionary army, which has won over to
its side all decent and honest elements in the tsar’s army, has overcome the
tsar’s forces and substituted a provisional revolutionary government
for the tsar’s autocratic government. The setting up of the State Duma, which,
on the one hand, “lures” the people with the idea of a
representative form of government, and, on the other hand, is the crudest
counterfeit of popular representation, will prove an inexhaustible source of the
most widespread revolutionary agitation among the masses, will serve as an
excellent occasion for meetings, demonstrations, political strikes, etc. The
slogan for all this agitation will be: insurrection, the immediate formation of
combat squads and contingents of a revolutionary army, the overthrow of tsarist
rule, and the establishment of a provisional revolutionary government which is
to convene a popular constituent assembly. The timing of the uprising will
depend, of course, on local conditions. We can only state that, generally
speaking, it is now in the interests of t he revolutionary proletariat to put
off somewhat the timing of an uprising: the workers are being armed gradually,
the troops are becoming more and more unreliable, the war crisis is reaching its
climax (war or an onerous peace), and in such conditions premature attempts at
insurrection may cause enormous harm.


In conclusion, it remains for us to draw a comparison between the tactical
slogan briefly outlined above, and other slogans. As we have already stated in
Proletary, No. 12, our slogan coincides with what the majority of the
comrades working in Russia understand by the term “active
boycott”. The tactics of Iskra, which in its No. 106 recommended
the immediate setting up of revolutionary self-government bodies and election by
the people of their own representatives as a possible prologue to an uprising,
is absolutely erroneous. So long as the forces for an armed uprising and its
victory are still lacking, it is ridiculous even to speak of revolutionary
people’s self-government. That is not the prologue to an uprising, but its
epilogue. Such erroneous tactics would merely play into the hands of the
Osvobozhdeniye bourgeoisie, in the first place by obscuring or shelving
the

    

slogan of an uprising, and replacing it with the slogan of the organisation of
      revolutionary self-government. In the second place, it would make it
      easier for the liberal bourgeois to represent their (Zemstvo and
    municipal) elections as popular elections, since there can be no popular
    elections so long as the tsar retains power, and the liberals may yet
    succeed in carrying out Zemstvo and municipal elections despite
    Mr. Durnovo’s threats.


The proletariat has been barred from the Duma elections. Actually, the
proletariat has no need to boycott the Duma, since by its very institution this
tsarist Duma is itself boycotting the proletariat. It is to the proletariat’s
advantage, however, to support that section of the bourgeois democrats which is
inclined to prefer revolutionary action to haggling, and which favours
boycotting the Duma and more intensive agitation among the people for a protest
against this Duma. The proletariat must not pass over in silence this first
betrayal or inconsistency on the part of the bourgeois democrats, which is
expressed in the fact that their representatives talk of boycotting the Duma (at
the July Zemstvo Congress the first voting even showed a majority in
favour of a boycott), utter pompous phrases about appealing to the people and
not to the tsar (Mr. I. Petrunkevich at that same Congress), whereas in reality
they are prepared to over look this new flouting of the people’s demands,
without making a protest in the real sense of the word or giving it wide
publicity, and to abandon the idea of a boycott and enter the Duma. The
proletariat cannot but refute. the false phrases that are now so much in vogue
in articles published in the legal liberal press (see, for instance,
Rus of August 7), which has entered the fray against the idea of a
boycott. The gentlemen of the liberal press are corrupting the people with their
assurances that the peaceful path, a “peaceful clash of opinions”
is possible (why is it that Milyukov could not struggle “peacefully”
against Sharapov, gentlemen, why?). The gentlemen of the liberal press are
deceiving the people when they declare that the Zemstvos “can to a certain
extent [I] paralyse [!! I the pressure which will, undoubtedly, be brought to
bear on the peasant electors by the Rural Superintendents and by the local
authorities in general”. (Rus, loc. cit.) The liberal journalists
are wholly

    

distorting the role of the State Duma in the Russian revolution, when they
compare it with the Prussian. Chamber of the period of the budget conflict with
Bismarck (1863). Actually, if one is to make a comparison at all, one must take
as an example not a constitutional period but a period of struggle for a
constitution, a period of incipient revolution. To do otherwise means to skip
directly from a period when the bourgeoisie is revolutionary into a period when
the bourgeoisie has made its peace with reaction. (cf. Proletary, No. 5
on the comparison drawn between our Messrs. Petrunkeviches and
Mr. Andrássy,
“once a revolutionary” and subsequently a

      Minister.[2]

)

The State
Duma brings to mind the Prussian “United Landtag” (Diet) established
on February 3, 1847, one year before the revolution. The Prussian
liberals of those days were also preparing—although they never
actually got round to it—to boycott this
consultative chamber of landlords, and were asking the people:
“Annehmen oder ablehnen?” (“Accept or
Decline?”—the title of a pamphlet by Heinrich Simon, a
bourgeois liberal, which was published in 1847.)  The Prussian United
Landtag met (the first session was opened on April 11, 1847, and
closed on June 26, 1847) and gave rise to a series of clashes between
the constitutionalists and the autocratic government; nevertheless it
remained a lifeless institution, until the revolutionary people,
headed by the proletariat of Berlin, defeated the royal army in
the uprising of March 18, 1848. Then the State Duma... I mean
the United Landtag—went up in smoke. An assembly of people’s
representatives was then convened (unfortunately not by a
revolutionary government but by the king, whom the heroic workers of
Berlin had “not finished off”) on the basis of universal
suffrage with relative freedom to carry on agitation.  

Let the bourgeois betrayers of the revolution enter this still-born State
Duma. The proletariat of Russia will intensify its agitation and its
preparations for our Russian March 18, 1848 (or better still, August 10, 1792).

 

Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 179-87 of this volume.—Ed.

[2]

See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 526-30.—Ed.
 



[3]

Marshal of the Nobility—the elected representative of the
nobility of a gubernia or uyezd, who was in charge of all the nobles’
    affairs in the area represented. He held a position of influence in the
    administration, and took the chair at Zemstvo meetings.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Black Hundreds and the Organisation of an Uprising









Lenin: The Black Hundreds and the Organisation of an Uprising







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Black Hundreds and the Organisation of an Uprising




Published:
Proletary, No. 14, August 29 (16), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 200-204.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The events in Nizhni-Novgorod and Balashov have attracted general attention. In
the previous issue we published a detailed account of the Nizhni-Novgorod
massacre; in this issue we are giving an account of the massacre in
Balashov. The misdeeds of the Black Hundreds are on the increase, and
Social-Democrats would do well to turn their attention to this phenomenon and
its significance in the general course of revolutionary development. As a
supplement to the correspondence from Samara, the following leaflet, issued by
the Borisoglebsk group of the R.S.D.L.P., is of interest:



"Workers and inhabitants of the town of Borisoglebsk! The Balashov and
Nizhni-Novgorod events, in which the police have proved their ability to
organise a massacre of all who hold dissenting views, have shown you the gravity
of the situation the revolution is confronting us with. The time for words and
platonic criticism has passed. By force of circumstances, the government drives
us from words to deeds. It sees that the revolutionary movement has advanced
beyond the point where it could be fought against, as has been the
case  hitherto, by the police and the gendarmerie alone. It realises
that in the struggle against the ’internal foe’ the regular armed
forces of the Ministry of the Interior will not be sufficient. The
entire population of the Russian Empire has become an ’internal foe’
and ’rebellious’, and the government is obliged to enlist volunteers
for the regular army. But in this wholesale enlistment into
’government service of tramps, rowdies, hawkers, and similar
disreputable characters, who recognise no bureaucratic restrictions
whatever, our government has at the same time been forced to change
its time-honoured methods of influencing the masses and the
time-honoured secret methods of the immediate struggle against the
revolution. What’s sauce for the goose is sauce for the
gander. Hitherto our government confined itself to waging a struggle
against the printed word. It now itself publishes proclamations in the
Moskovskiye Vedomosti, Russkoye Dyelo, Orezhdanin, Dyen, and
other official organs. Hitherto our government only

    

hunted down agitators. It now itself sends out prelates, generals, Sharapovs,
Gringmuts, and other agitators of its own to conduct agitation among the
people. Hitherto our government only throttled all organisation. It now itself
organises unions of the Russian people, leagues of patriots, and unions of
monarchists. Hitherto our government trembled at the mere thought of an
uprising. It now itself organises uprisings of the Black Hundreds, and hopes to
provoke a civil war. Terrified at the prospect of the impending revolution the
government has seized on such of the latter’s weapons as organisation,
propaganda, and agitation. With the aid of these double-edged weapons and with
the help of the Black Hundreds, the government is beginning to stage scenes of
popular indignation, of counter-revolution. After a ’try-out’ in the marginal
provinces it is now beginning a tour of the heart of Russia. We have recently
witnessed such scenes in Nizhni-Novgorod and in Balashov, and it cannot be said
that the autocracy met with no success there. ’Revolutionary’ methods of
struggle proved efficacious; many enemies of the autocracy were murdered or
manhandled and the population was terrorised by this legalised terrorism on the
part of our government.


“There can be no doubt that the experiment will be further extended. The
laurels won by some of the Black Hundreds will give the others no rest until
they too will have put their strength to the test. Where there is revolution
there is counter-revolution too, and, therefore, Borisoglebsk must also be
prepared to experience the organising skill of the eminent representatives of
the Black-Hundred trend. We have reason to expect also in Borisoglebsk pogroms
against the Jews, against the workers, and against the intellectuals; therefore,
in preparation for proper resistance to the ’illegal measures’ which the
government has adopted to suppress the revolutionary movement, the Borisoglebsk
group is starting a subscription for the organisation of armed self-defence, and
invites all those whose sympathies do not lie with the government and the Black
Hundreds to help in the organisation of self-defence groups with money and
arms.”



In fact, civil war is being forced on the population by the government
itself. It is a fact that “tramps, rowdies, and hawkers” are being
taken into government service. Under these circumstances bourgeois talk by the
Osvobozhdeniye League about the crime and folly of advocating
insurrection, about the harmfulness of organising self-defence
(Osvobozhdeniye, No. 74) is now not merely inordinate
political platitudinarianism, or justification of the autocracy and
(in actual fact) servility to Moskovskiye Vedomosti. But, in
addition to this, it is impotent peevishness on the part of the
Osvobozhdeniye dodderers whom the revolutionary movement has
relentlessly consigned to the scrap heap or some old curiosity
shop— the place most suitable for them. Theoretical discussions
on

    

the necessity of an uprising may and should be held, and the tactical
      resolutions on this question should be the outcome of careful thought and
      deliberation; meanwhile it should not be forgotten that spontaneous events
      take their own authoritative course regardless of all philosophising. It
      should not be forgotten that all the tremendous contradictions that have
      been piling up in Russian life for centuries are now developing with
      irresistible force bringing the masses to the fore and relegating outworn
      and dead teachings about, peaceful progress to the rubbish
      heap. Opportunists of all sorts like to tell us: learn from
      life. Unfortunately, what they mean by life is only the standing water of
      peaceful periods, of times of stagnation, when life makes scarcely any
      progress whatever. These blind people always lag behind the
    lessons of revolutionary life. Their dead doctrines always fall
    behind the stormy torrent of revolution, which expresses the most
    far-reaching demands of life, those involving the most vital interests of
    the masses.


See, for instance, how ridiculous, in face of these lessons given by life, are
the plaints being made by a certain section of Social-Democracy about the danger
of a conspiratorial view of the uprising, about a narrow “Jacobin”
approach to the question of its necessity, about exaggerating the importance and
role of material forces in the impending political events. These plaints started
on the eve of an insurrection becoming a most real and vital necessity to the
people, just when the masses, who stand farthest from all
“conspiracies”, began to be drawn into an insurrection be cause of
the misdeeds of the Black Hundreds. A bad doctrine is splendidly rectified
by a good revolution. In the new Iskra one can read feeble
witticisms (or are they sneers?) of a purely Burenin type[1]

about
the publication of a special military pamphlet discussing the military questions
of the revolution and even going into the question of day and night attacks,
about thought having to be given to the matter of headquarters for the uprising,
and of about having members of the organisation “on duty” to get
timely information of any pogrom, of any “enemy” action, and to give
proper and timely orders to our fighting forces, to the organised revolutionary
proletariat. And at the same time, as if in derision of the lifeless doctrine of
the Mensheviks abroad, we see the actions of the

    

Mensheviks in Russia. We read that in Ekaterinoslav (see Proletary,
No. 13) an agreement was concluded between the Bolsheviks, the Mensheviks, and
the Bund,[2]

in anticipation of violence (a pogrom by the Black
Hundreds was expected! Is there a city or village in Russia today that is not
expecting something of that kind?). “Joint collection of money for the
purchase of arms, a joint plan of action, etc.” What kind of plan this was is
evidenced by the fact that at the Bryansk Works, for instance, the
Social-Democrats, at a meeting of five hundred workers, called for the
organisation of resistance. “Then in the evening the organised
workers of the Bryansk Works were quartered in various houses; patrols
were stationed, a headquarters was appointed, etc. — in short,
we were in complete fighting trim” (incidentally, they let each
other know the “location of the headquarters of each
organisation” of the three mentioned above).  

It is at their own comrades, who are engaged in practical work, that the
new-Iskra journalists are sneering.


However much you may turn up your noses, gentlemen, at the question of night
attacks and similar purely tactical military questions, however much you may
pull wry faces about the “plan” of assigning secretaries of
organisations, or their members in general, to stand on duty to provide for any
military exigency—life goes its own way, revolution teaches, taking in
hand and shaking up the most inveterate pedants. During civil war military
questions must of necessity be studied down to the last detail, and
the interest the workers show in these questions is a most legitimate and
healthy phenomenon. Headquarters (or members of the organisations on duty) must
of necessity be organised. The stationing of patrols and the billeting
of squads are all purely military functions; they are all initial operations of
a revolutionary army and constitute the organisation of an
insurrection, the organisation of revolutionary rule, which matures and
becomes stronger through these small preparations, through these minor clashes,
testing its own strength, learning to fight, training itself for victory—a
victory that will come the sooner and the more probably, the more pro found the
general political crisis becomes, the stronger the discontent, disaffection, and
vacillation within the ranks of the tsarist army.

 

Social-Democratic comrades all over Russia must and will follow on an ever wider
      scale the example set by the comrades of Ekaterinoslav and
      Borisoglebsk. The appeal for aid in money and arms is most timely. There
      are ever increasing numbers of people to whom all “plans”. and
      even revolutionary ideas of any sort are quite alien, but who nevertheless
    see and feel the necessity for an armed struggle when they
    witness the atrocities perpetrated by the police, the Cossacks, and the
    Black Hundreds against unarmed citizens. There is no choice, all other ways
    are blocked. One cannot help being agitated by what is taking
      place in Russia at the present time; one cannot help thinking of
      war and of revolution,
    and whoever is agitated, whoever thinks, who ever takes an interest, is
    obliged to join one armed camp or the other. You may be beaten up,
    maimed, or murdered no matter in what supremely peaceful and scrupulously
    lawful way you behave. Revolution does not recognise neutrals. The struggle
    has already flared up. It is a life-and-death struggle between the old
    Russia, the Russia of slavery, serfdom, and autocracy, and the new, young,
    people’s Russia, the Russia of the toiling masses, who are reaching out to
    wards light and freedom, in order afterwards to start once again a struggle
    for the complete emancipation of mankind from all oppression and all
    exploitation.


May the day of the insurrection of the people come soon!

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Burenin, V. P., worked on the staff of the
reactionary news paper Novoye Vremya, engaged in libelling and
besmearing representatives of all progressive public and political
trends. Lenin uses his name as a synonym for dishonest methods of conducting
 polemics.





[2]

The Bund (The General Jewish Workers’ Union of
Lithuania, Poland, and Russia) came into being in 1897 at the founding Congress
of Jewish Social-Democratic groups in Vilna. In the main, it comprised
semi-proletarian Jewish artisans in the west of Russia. At the First Congress of
the R.S.D.L.P. in 1898, the Bund joined the latter “as an autonomous
organisation, independent only in respect of questions affecting the Jewish
proletariat specifically”. (The C.P.S.U. in Resolutions and Decisions
of Its Congresses, Conferences and Plenary Meetings of the Central
Committee, Russ. ed., Moscow 1954, Part 1, p. 14.)


The Bund was an expression of nationalism and separatism in the Russian
working-class movement. In April 1901 the Bund’s Fourth Congress decided to
alter the organisational ties with the R.S.D.L.P., as established by the
latter’s First Congress. In its resolution, the Bund Congress declared that It
regarded the R.S.D.L.P. as a federation of national, organisations, and that the
Bund should enter the R.S.D.L.P. as a federal section. After the Second Congress
of the R.S.D.L.P. turned down the. Bund’s demand that it should be recognised
the sole representative of the Jewish proletariat, the Bund left the Party, but
rejoined it in 1906 on the basis of a decision of the Fourth (Unity) Congress.


Within the R.S.D.L.P. the Bund constantly supported the Party’s opportunist wing
(the Economists, Mensheviks, and Liquidators), and waged a struggle against
Bolshevism and the Bolsheviks. To the latter’s programmatic demand for the right
of nations to self-determination the Bund contraposed the demand for autonomy of
national culture. While the Stolypin reaction was raging, the Bund took a
liquidationist stand, and was active in the formation of the August anti-Party
bloc. During the First World War the Bundists held a social-chauvinist stand,
and in 1917 they supported the counter-revolutionary Provisional Government and
sided with the enemies of the Great October Socialist Revolution. During the
foreign military intervention and the Civil War the Bund’s leaders made common
cause with the forces of counter-revolution. Meanwhile there was a turn among
the Bund’s rank and file for collaboration with the Soviets. In March 1921 the
Bund decided to dissolve itself, part of the membership joined the Russian
Communist Party (Bolsheviks) on the basis of the general rules of admission,










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Editorial Epilogue to the Article “The Third Congress on Trial Before the Caucasian Mensheviks”









Lenin: Editorial Epilogue to the Article 'The Third Congress on Trial Before the Caucasian Mensheviks'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Editorial Epilogue to the Article “The Third Congress on Trial Before the Caucasian Mensheviks”




Published:
Proletary, No. 14, August 29 (16), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 205.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In reproducing this article from the organ of the Caucasian League of the
R.S.D.L.P. (Borba Proletariata,[1]

No. I 

in Russian; No. 6 has appeared in the Armenian language, and No. 9 in
Georgian) we shall for our part add that the Caucasian Mensheviks were
practically the first to come out in the press not merely with
groundless abuse against the Congress (in the new-Iskra
spirit), but with an attempt to question the representation of
absolutely definite Party committees. In its organ the Caucasian Union
has calmly and with close reasoning refuted the Mensheviks’ arguments
and splendidly proved the complete validity of the Third Congress of
the R.S.D.L.P., even if the five mandates disputed by the Mensheviks
were considered non-valid.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Proletariatis Brdzola (The Struggle of the Proletariat)—an
illegal Bolshevik newspaper, organ of the Caucasian League of the R.S.D.L.P. It
was published between April-May 1903 and October 1905, twelve issues coming out
in all. The paper was published in Georgian, Armenian and Russian. The editorial
board was in close touch with Lenin and the Bolshevik centre abroad, and
systematically published reprints of articles by Lenin, and material from the
Leninist Iskra, and later from Vperyod and
 Proletary.









Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Are the Zemstvo “Liberals” Already Turning Back?









Lenin: Are the Zemstvo 'Liberals' Already Turning Back?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Are the Zemstvo “Liberals” Already Turning Back?




Published:
Proletary, No. 14, August 29 (16), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 206.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We have just read a message from the St. Petersburg correspondent of the liberal
bourgeois Frankfurter Zeitung dated August 8 (21) to the effect that
the Congress of Zemstvo and municipal leaders, which by decision of the July
Congress was to have met immediately after publication of the Bulygin scheme and
was already fixed for the end of August, will not take place. What
would you think the reason is? It is because on August 6 the tsar withdrew his
ukase to the Senate, dated February 18, 1905! The correspondent goes on to say:
“This absolutely inexplicable [??—Editorial Board of
“Proletary”] cowardice on the part of the Zemstvo representatives
has aroused
general amazement in political quarters here, since at a moment like the present
nobody was inclined to expect such flabbiness in the Zemstvos. That is why the
news I have sent has not yet been given full credence, and people are cautious
in their attitude towards it.” We long ago foretold that the government would
not find it hard to win the liberal bourgeois over to its side and make them
“recoil from the revolution”.

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Working Class and Revolution









Lenin: The Working Class and Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Working Class and Revolution




Written: Written in August 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1926 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 207-208.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

1. The democratic and the socialist revolution.


2. The bourgeois nature of the democratic revolution. (“Bourgeois and
socialist revolution.”)


3. The tasks of Social-Democracy as an independent class party of the
   proletariat.


4. The role of the peasantry in the democratic revolution.


5. Insurrection and the revolutionary army.


6. The revolutionary government. Its tasks.


7. The revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the
   peasantry.


1. α) The aims of the working class.

β)

 

Social-Democracy.

 

Our programme.

γ)The

 

maximum

 

and

δ) the

 

minimum

 

programme.

{A description of
it (compare 6

points[1]

)}



ε) The democratic and the socialist revolution.


2.

 

The bourgeois and the socialist revolution.

 

Why is the democratic
revolution bourgeois in nature?

α) Commodity and capitalist production.

β) The
economic essence.

γ) The Constitutional-Democratic Party, its
programme, and its class essence.

 

A class party.

 

Zemstvo
congresses. Unions of intellectuals. The legal press.


b) Bourgeois advice to the proletariat: the trade union struggle, etc.


3. Conclusions from the above.

 

An
independent
class
party.

 

Organisation—trade union and Party, agitational, and
military. Marxism: “a doctrine”.


4. The peasantry’s special interests. Remnants of serf-ownership. Why is the
role of the peasantry in the democratic revolution of particular importance?
The

    

"general redistribution” and its significance. The peasants are the
      workers’ natural allies. The peasantry’s petty-bourgeois nature.


5. The uprising. Moral and material force.


Arming of the people.

 

Military

 

organisation (military problems,
etc.). The revolutionary army. (Example:
Nizhni-Novgorod and Ekaterinoslav) ((bombs, arms)).


6. The revolutionary government, the

 

organ

 

of uprising. The
   significance of a revolutionary government and revolutionary

 

power.

 

Participation in a revolutionary government. The programme of a
revolutionary government: 6

 

points.
Get
Europe
moving.



7. What is dictatorship? Dictatorship of a

 

class

 

and dictatorship
   of an individual. Democratic dictatorship. Classes.

 

Notes
 

[1]

See p. 183 of this volume.—Ed.
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Preface to the Third Edition of the Pamphlet The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats









Lenin: Preface to the Third Edition of the Pamphlet The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
Preface to the Third Edition of the Pamphlet The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats




Published:

      First published in the autumn of 1905 in a pamphlet issued by the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.

      Published according to the text of the pamphlet.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 209-210.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The third edition of this pamphlet appears at a moment in the development of the
revolution in Russia which differs considerably from 1897, when it was written,
and from 1902, when its second edition appeared. It need hardly be said that the
pamphlet gives only a general outline of the tasks of Social-Democracy as a
whole, and not a concrete exposition of the present-day tasks that stem from
the present state of the working-class and revolutionary movements, and also
from the state of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. The present-day
tasks of our Party are dealt with in my pamphlet Two Tactics of
Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution (Geneva, 1905). A comparison
of the two pamphlets will enable the reader to judge whether the author’s views
on the general tasks of Social-Democracy and the special tasks of the given
moment have been developing with consistency. That such a comparison is not
useless is shown, incidentally, by the recent crude sally made by Mr. Struve,
leader of our liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, who in Osvobozhdeniye
accuses revolutionary Social-Democracy (as represented by the Third Congress of
the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party) of presenting the question of an
insurrection in a manner befitting seditionists and revolutionaries in the
abstract. We have already stated in Proletary (No. 9, “Revolution
Teaches”) that a simple comparison of The Tasks of the Russian
Social-Democrats (1897), What Is To Be Done? (1902), and
Proletary (1905) will refute the accusation of the
Osvobozhdeniye gentry, and will

    

show the connection between the development of Social-Democratic views on an
      insurrection and the development of the revolutionary movement in
      Russia. The Osvobozhdeniye accusation is merely a crude
    opportunist sally on the part of the supporters of a liberal monarchy, who
    are trying to cover up their betrayal of the revolution, their betrayal of
    the people’s interests, and their desire to strike a bargain with the
    tsarist government.

N. Lenin
August 1905
 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Note on P. Nikolayev's Pamphlet The Revolution in Russia









Lenin: Note on P. Nikolayev's Pamphlet The Revolution in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Note on P. Nikolayev’s Pamphlet The Revolution in Russia[1]




Published:

      First published in the autumn of 1905.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 211.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

This pamphlet was written before August 6. The State Duma has now been set
up. The working class and all the poor have no right at all to elect Duma
members. The rich landlords and the merchants elect Duma members through
gubernia electors. The peasants elect even gubernia electors not directly, but
through uyezd delegates elected at volost meetings. Freedom of election, of the
press, and of assembly is non-existent. The police retain full power. The Duma
makes decisions that are not binding on the government, but are merely advisory,
i.e., the Duma has no power at all.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

P. Nikolayev’s pamphlet The Revolution in Russia was published by the
Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1905 in Geneva. Lenin wrote the present
note on the Bulygin Duma while he was amending the manuscript of the
pamphlet. The note refers to the passage that reads, “Minister for the
Interior Bulygin intends to set up a State Duma... etc.” Also extant is the
manuscript, written in Lenin’s hand, of the title page of the pamphlet, with the
inscription, “P. Nikolaew, Die Revolution in Russland. Workers of
All Countries, Unite! Published by the Central Committee” (Lenin
Miscellany XXVI, p. 345).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## In the Wake of the Monarchist Bourgeoisie, or In the Van of the Revolutionary Proletariat and Peasantry?









Lenin: In the Wake of the Monarchist Bourgeoisie, or In the Van of the Revolutionary Proletariat and Peasantry?







V. I.  

      Lenin
In the Wake of the Monarchist Bourgeoisie, or In the Van of the Revolutionary Proletariat and Peasantry?




Published:
Proletary, No. 15, September 5 (August 23), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 212-223.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Social-Democracy’s tactics towards the State Duma still heads all the questions
of the revolutionary struggle on the agenda of the day. The differences which
have arisen between the opportunist (Iskra) and the revolutionary
(Proletary) wings of the R.S.D.L.P. on the score of these tactics
must be analysed most painstakingly not for the sake of captious polemising
(which sometimes degenerates into a squabble), but for the purpose of thoroughly
elucidating the question and assisting the comrades on the spot to work out the
most exact, definite, and uniform slogans possible.


First of all, a few words on the origin of these differences. Even before the
State Duma Act had been promulgated, we set forth in Proletary, No. 12
the fundamentals of our tactics and of our differences with Iskra. We
demanded:

1) support for the idea of a boycott, in the sense of increased agitation and an
   appeal to the people, in the sense of the proletariat’s support for the Left
   wing of bourgeois democracy, and constant exposure of the treachery of its
   Right wing;

2) an active boycott at all costs, and not “passive
   abstention”, i.e., “increasing agitation tenfold”, going so
   far as “to force our way into election meetings”, and, finally,

3) “a clear, precise, and immediate agitational slogan”, namely,
   for an armed uprising, a revolutionary army, and a provisional revolutionary
   government. We categorically rejected the slogan of Iskra (No. 106)
   for “organisation of a revolutionary self-government”, as
   confusing and as playing into the hands of the Osvobozhdeniye
   League, i.e.,

    

the monarchist bourgeoisie. At the same time, anticipating, as it were, that
Iskra would once more “beget” more differences we
immediately added that we agreed with Iskra’s condemnation of the idea
of a passive boycott.


So if Iskra, No. 108, now drops sundry hints about a theory of
“non-interference”, “absenteeism”,
“abstention”, “folded arms”, and the like, we must first
of all brush aside “objections” of this sort, since this is not
polemising, but merely an attempt to “get under the opponent’s
skin”. By such methods of “polemising”, culminating in the
aspersion that some of the leaders would like to get into a provisional
government themselves, the new Iskra has long evoked a very definite
attitude towards itself among the widest circles of Social-Democrats.


Thus, the essence of the differences is that Iskra does not accept our
slogan of agitation, which we consider the main slogan (for an armed uprising, a
revolutionary army, and a provisional revolutionary
government). Proletary, on the other hand, considers it absolutely
impermissible “to obscure or relegate into the background the slogan of
insurrection by bringing forward the slogan of revolutionary self-
government” (Proletary, No. 12). All the other points of
disagreement are relatively less important. On the contrary, what is especially
important is that (as has been the case on more than one occasion) in No. 108
Iskra begins to back out, to twist and turn; to the slogan of
revolutionary self-government it adds the slogan of “active militant
action by the masses of the people” (wherein this differs from an armed
uprising God only knows). Iskra goes even so far as to say that the
“organisation of a revolutionary self-government is the only means of
really ’organising’ an uprising of the whole people”. Iskra,
No. 108, is dated August 13 (26); and on August 24 (N. S.) the Vienna
Arbeiter Zeitung carried an article by Comrade Martov setting
forth Iskra ’s “plan” wholly in the spirit of
No. 106, and not in the spirit of the “amendments” in
No. 108. We are giving

below[1]

a
translation of the most important parts of this invaluable article by Comrade
Martov, as a specimen of “Social Democratic Manilovism”.

 

Let us try to unravel this tangle.


To make matters clear it is necessary first of all to realise what forces are at
present “making history” for the Russian revolution, and just how
they are doing it. The autocracy has adopted the theory of
“consultation” between the tsar and the people. Desirous of
consulting with a police-screened handful of persons elected by the landowners
and shop keepers, the autocracy is beginning with desperate ferocity to suppress
the revolution. Broader circles of the monarchist bourgeoisie are in favour of
the theory of compromise between the tsar and the people (the
Osvobozhdeniye League, or the Constitutional-“Democratic”
Party). By this theory the bourgeoisie is showing its treachery to the
revolution, its readiness first to support it and then to unite with the
reactionaries against it. The revolutionary proletariat, inasmuch as it is led
by Social-Democracy, demands the sovereignty of the people, i.e., the
complete destruction of the forces of reaction, and, above all, the actual
overthrow of the tsarist government and its replacement by a provisional
revolutionary government. The proletariat strives (often without being aware of
it, but unswervingly and energetically) to win over the peasantry, and with the
latter’s assistance to carry forward the revolution to complete victory,
despite the bourgeoisie’s instability and treachery.


The State Duma is undoubtedly a concession to the revolution, but a concession
made (and this is still more indubitable) so as to suppress the revolution and
withhold a constitution. The bourgeois “compromisers” want to
achieve a constitution so as to suppress the revolution; this desire of the
liberal bourgeoisie, which is an inevitable result of its class position, has
been most clearly expressed by Mr. Vinogradov (in Russkiye Vedomosti).


The question now arises: under such circumstances, what is the significance of
the decision to boycott the Duma, passed by the Union of Unions (see
Proletary, No. 14), i.e., by the most comprehensive organisation of the
bourgeois intelligentsia? By and large, the bourgeois intelligentsia also wants
“a compromise”. That is why, as Proletary has repeatedly
pointed out, it too vacillates between reaction and revolution, between haggling
and fighting, between a deal with the tsar and an uprising against him. Nor can

    

it be otherwise, in view of the class position of the bourgeois
intelligentsia. However, it would be a mistake to forget that this
intelligentsia is more capable of expressing the essential interests of the
bourgeois class as a whole, in their broadest implications, as distinct from the
temporary and narrow interests of the bourgeoisie’s “upper
crust”. The intelligentsia is more capable of expressing the interests of
the masses of the petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry. With all its
vacillations, it is therefore more capable of waging a revolutionary struggle
against the autocracy, and, provided it draws closer to the people, it
could become an important force in this struggle. Powerless by itself, it could
nevertheless give quite considerable sections of the petty bourgeoisie and the
peasantry just what they lack— knowledge, programme, guidance, and
organisation.


Thus, the essence of the “boycott” idea, as it first arose in the
Union of Unions, is that the big bourgeoisie’s first step towards
consultation, towards compromise with the tsar has inevitably led to the
petty-bourgeois intelligentsia’s first step towards drawing close .to the
revolutionary people. The landlords and capitalists have swung to the
right, while the bourgeois intelligentsia, representing the petty bourgeoisie,
has swung to the left. The former are going to the tsar, although they have by
no means given up their intention of threatening him again and again with the
might of the people. The bourgeois intelligentsia is considering whether it
should not rather go to the people, without as yet finally breaking with the
theory of “compromise”, and without fully taking the
revolutionary path.


Such is the essence of the boycott idea, which, as we have pointed out in
Proletary, No. 12, arose among the bourgeois democrats. Only very
short-sighted and superficial people could discern in this idea
non-interference, absenteeism, abstention, and so on. The bourgeois
intelligentsia need not abstain, since the high property qualification
actually keeps it out of the State Duma. In its resolution on
the boycott the bourgeois intelligentsia makes “the mobilisation
of all the democratic elements of the country” its most
important point. The bourgeois intelligentsia is the most active,
resolute, and militant element of the Osvobozhdeniye League,
the Constitutional-“Democratic” Party. To accuse

    

this intelligentsia of abstention, etc., because of its boycott idea, or even to
      refuse to support its idea and to develop it means to display
    short-sightedness and thus play into the hands of the monarchist big
    bourgeoisie, whose organ, Osvobozhdeniye, has good reason to
    combat the idea of a boycott.


Besides the general and basic considerations, the correctness of the view just
outlined is supported by the valuable admissions of
Mr. S.S.[2]

in
Osvobozhdeniye, No. 75. It is highly significant that Mr. S.S.
describes advocates of the boycott idea as the “radical” group, and
opponents of that idea as the “moderate” group. He accuses the
former of a “Narodnaya Volya attitude”, of repeating the mistakes of
the “active revolutionary groups” (an accusation doing honour to
those it is levelled against by Osvobozhdeniye); about the latter he
states flatly that they stand “between two fires”, between the
autocracy and the “social [sic!] revolution”, poor Mr. S.S. being
so terrified that he has very nearly mistaken the democratic republic for a
social revolution! But the most valuable admission by Mr. S. S. is the
following: for the radicals—he says, comparing the Congress of
the Union of
Unions with the Zemstvo Congress—“every thing undoubtedly centred [mark
this!] around the demand to amend the electoral system, whereas for the more
moderate group the main interest lay in extending the rights of the
Duma”.


This sums up matters in a nutshell! Mr. S. S. has blurted out the innermost
“thoughts” of the landlords and capitalists, which we have laid
bare hundreds of times. Their “main interest” lies not in getting
the people to take part in the elections (they are afraid of that), but in
extending the rights of the Duma, i.e., in converting the assembly of the big
bourgeoisie from a consultative into a legislative body. That is the crux of the
matter. The big bourgeoisie will never be satisfied with a
“consultative” Duma. Hence, the inevitability of constitutional
conflicts in the State Duma. But the big bourgeoisie can never become a true and
depend able supporter of people’s sovereignty. It will always be taking the
constitution (for itself) with one hand, and taking away the rights of the
people, or opposing the extension of popular rights, with the other. The big
bourgeoisie cannot

    

but strive for a constitution that secures privileges for the big
bourgeoisie. The radical intelligentsia cannot but strive to express the
interests of the broader strata of the petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry. Once
it got the bird in the hand the Right wing of bourgeois democracy immediately
began to see reason, and, as we have seen, is already renouncing
“illegal” congresses. The Left wing saw itself without even a bird
in the hand; it saw that the landlords and capitalists, having taken advantage
of the services of the “third element”[3]

(agitation,
propaganda, organisation of the press, etc.), are now prepared to betray it,
directing their efforts in the State Duma not towards securing the people’s
rights but towards securing their own rights, which militate against those of
the people. And now sensing incipient treachery the bourgeois intelligentsia
brands the State Duma as an “audacious challenge” made by the
government to all the peoples of Russia, declares a boycott, and counsels
“the mobilisation of the democratic elements”.


Under such conditions the Social-Democrats would be playing the part of
political simpletons if they were to attack the idea of a boycott. The
revolutionary proletariat’s unerring class instinct has prompted most of the
comrades in Russia to adopt the idea of an active boycott. This means
supporting the Left wing and drawing it closer to us, means
endeavouring to single out the elements of revolutionary democracy, so
as to strike at the autocracy together with them. The radical intelligentsia has
held out a finger to us—we must catch it by the hand! If the boycott is
not mere bragging, if mobilisation is more than a word, if indignation at the
audacious challenge is not just mummery, then you must break with the
“compromisers”, come over to the theory of the sovereignty of the
people, and adopt, adopt in deed, the only consistent and integral
slogans of revolutionary democracy—an armed uprising, a revolutionary
army, and a provisional revolutionary government. To make all those who indeed
accept these slogans join us, and to pillory all who remain on the side of the
“compromisers — such is the only correct tactics of the
revolutionary proletariat.


Our new-Iskrists have failed to see both the class origin and the real political
significance of the boycott idea, and

    

have opened fire ... into the air. Comrade Cherevanin writes in No. 108:
      “As is evident from the bulletins of the Don Committee and the
      St. Petersburg group, both these organisations [N. B.: Menshevik
    organisations. Note by the Proletary Editorial Board I have
    declared for the boycott. They consider participation in elections to such
    a Duma a disgrace, treason to the cause of the revolution, and they condemn
    in advance those liberals who will take part in the elections. Thus, the
      very possibility of making the State Duma a weapon of the democratic
      revolution is precluded, and agitation directed towards that end is
      evidently rejected.” The words we have italicised reveal the mistake
    indicated just now. Those who rant against “non-intervention”
    are only obscuring the really important question of the
    methods of intervention. There are two methods of intervention, two
    types of slogans. The first method is: “increasing agitation tenfold,
    organising meetings everywhere, taking advantage of election meetings, even
    if we have to force our way into them, holding demonstrations, political
    strikes, and so on and so forth”. (Proletary, No. 12.) We
    have already explained the slogans of this campaign of
    agitation. The other method is:
to demand “a revolutionary pledge to enter the State Duma for the purpose
of bringing about its transformation into a revolutionary assembly which will
depose the autocracy and convene a constituent assembly” (Comrade
Cherevanin in Iskra, No. 108), or “to bring pressure to bear on
the electors so that only resolute advocates of democratic and free
representation should be elected to the Duma” (Comrade Martov in the
Vienna Arbeiter Zeitung).


It is just this difference in methods that reflects the difference in the
“two tactics” of Social-Democracy. The opportunist wing of
Social-Democracy is always inclined to “bring pressure to bear” on
bourgeois democracy by demanding pledges from it. The revolutionary
wing of Social-Democracy “brings pressure to bear” on bourgeois
democracy and impels it to the left by condemning it for its shifts to the
right, by spreading among the masses the slogan of a determined
revolution. The theory of “demanding pledges”, this famous Starover
litmus-test theory, is sheer naïveté and can only serve to sow
confusion among the proletariat and corrupt it. Whom will Comrade Cherevanin
hold responsible for the

    

carrying out of the “pledges” he has received? Perhaps God Almighty?
Can it be that Comrade Cherevanin does not know that under the pressure of
material class interests all pledges will go by the board? Is it not
childishness on the part of the selfsame Comrade Cherevanin to think that the
bourgeois deputies to the State Duma can be bound to the revolutionary
proletariat by means of “binding instructions”? And if Comrade Martov
were to begin actually to carry out his plan he would have to
announce to the working class that certain members of the given
assembly of landlords are “resolute advocates of free and democratic
representation!” To make such announcements would mean sowing the greatest
political corruption!


And now note another thing: all these “revolutionary pledges” on the
part of the Petrunkeviches, Rodichevs, and tutti quanti, all these
“binding instructions”, all these pledges “resolutely to
support democratic and free representation” (could anyone have picked a
more general, vague, and nebulous phrase?) would be demanded and given in
the name of Social-Democracy and behind the proletariat’s back. After all,
this cannot be done openly, for even in free countries, where agitation is
carried on openly, political figures are bound not so much by private deals as
by party programmes; in our case we do not and shall not have
definite and established parties at the elections to the State Duma! Just see,
comrades of the new Iskra, what a mess you have again managed to get
into: you keep repeating “the masses”, “to the masses”,
“with the masses”, “the initiative of the masses”, but
in fact your “plan” boils down to secret deals obliging
Mr. Petrunkevich to be not a traitor to the revolution but its
“resolute” advocate!


The new-Iskrists have themselves reduced their position to absurdity. No one,
anywhere in Russia, even among their followers, would dream of concluding deals
on the basis of those absurd “revolutionary pledges”. No. This is
not the way to intervene. You must intervene by ruthlessly branding the
theory of compromise and the bourgeois compromisers, all those Petrunkeviches,
etc. Expose their bourgeois betrayal of the revolution and unite the
revolutionary forces for an uprising against the autocracy (and, to
be on the safe side, against the Duma as well)—that is the only

    

reliable method of really “bringing pressure to bear” on the Duma,
      of really paving the way for the victory of the revolution. It is only
      with such a slogan that we should intervene in the election campaign, not
      for electioneering purposes, deals, or pledges, but in order to preach
      insurrection. And it is only the real strength of the armed people that
      will enable us to take advantage of possible and probable future
      conflicts within the State Duma, or between the State Duma and the tsar,
      in the interests of the revolution (and not of a strictly bourgeois
      constitution). Less confidence in the State Duma, gentlemen, and more
      confidence in the forces of the proletariat which is now arming it self!


We have now come to the slogan of the organisation of revolutionary
self-government bodies. Let us examine it more closely.


In the first place it is wrong from a purely theoretical standpoint to give
pre-eminence to the slogan of revolutionary self-government instead of the
slogan of the people’s sovereignty. The former bears on the administration, the
second on the organisation of the state. The former is, there fore, compatible
with the treacherous bourgeois theory of “compromise” (a
self-governing people headed by the tsar, “who reigns but does not
govern”); the latter is wholly incompatible with it. The first is acceptable to
the Osvobozhdeniye League, the second is not.


In the second place, it is utterly absurd to identify the organisation of
revolutionary self-government with the organisation of a people’s uprising. An
uprising is civil war, and war requires an army, whereas self-government does
not in itself require an army. There are countries with a system of
self-government, but without an army. And revolutionary self-government does not
require a revolutionary army where a revolution takes place in the Norwegian
fashion: the king was “sacked” and a plebiscite held. But when the
people are oppressed by a despotic government which relies on an army and starts
civil war, then to identify revolutionary self-government with a revolutionary
army, to advocate the former and to maintain silence about the latter, is almost
indecent and signifies either betrayal of the revolution or the utmost
stupidity.

 

Thirdly, history also confirms the- truth (incidentally, a self-evident truth)
that only the complete and decisive victory of an uprising can make it fully
possible to establish genuine self-government. Would the municipal revolution in
France in July 1789 have been possible if on July 14 the people of Paris, who
had risen in arms, had not defeated the royal troops, taken the Bastille, and
completely smashed the resistance of the autocracy? Or will the new Iskrists,
perhaps, cite in this connection the example of the city of Montpellier, where
the municipal revolution, the establishment of revolutionary local
self-government took place peacefully, and a vote of thanks to the intendant was
even passed for the kindness with which he had assisted in his own deposition?
Does the new Iskra perhaps expect that during our Duma election
campaign we shall thank the governors for having eliminated themselves
before the capture of the Russian Bastilles? Is it not significant that
in the France of 1789 the period of the municipal revolution took place when the
emigration of reactionaries was under way, while in our country the
slogan of revolutionary self-government instead of the slogan of an
uprising is being advanced at a time when the emigration of
revolutionaries is still going on? When a certain Russian high
official was asked why an amnesty was not granted on August 6 he
replied: “Why should we set free 10,000 people whom it took us
considerable trouble to arrest and who tomorrow would start a
desperate struggle against us?” This dignitary reasoned intelligently,
whereas those who speak about “revolutionary
self—government” before the release of these 10,000 reason
unintelligently.  

Fourthly, present-day Russian life plainly shows the inadequacy of the slogan of
“revolutionary self-government” and the need for a direct and
definite slogan of insurrection. Consider what took place in Smolensk on August
2 (Old Style). The Municipal Council declared the billeting of the Cossacks
contrary to law, stopped all payments to them, organised a city militia to
protect the population, and appealed to the soldiers to refrain from violence
against citizens. We should like to know whether our good new Iskrists find this
adequate. Should not this militia be regarded as a revolutionary army,
as an organ of attack as well

    

as of defence?—and of attack not only against the Smolensk Cossack
      detachment, but against the autocratic government in general? Should not
      this idea of proclaiming a revolutionary army and its tasks be
      popularised? Can the administration of the city of Smolensk by genuine
      government of the people be considered secure until a
    revolutionary army has won a decisive victory over the tsarist army?


Fifthly, the facts prove incontrovertibly that the slogan of revolutionary
self-government instead of the slogan of insurrection, or as implying (?) the
slogan of insurrection, is not only “acceptable” to the
Osvobozhdeniye League, but has actually been accepted by it. Take
Osvobozhdeniye, No. 74. You will find there a sweeping condemnation
of the “senseless and criminal advocacy of insurrection” and at the
same time a plea for city militias and the establishment of local
self-government bodies as elements of a future provisional government
(cf. Proletary, No. 12).


No matter how one approaches the question, it will invariably turn out that the
new slogan of the new Iskra is an Osvobozhdeniye slogan. The
Social-Democrats who either relegate to the background or reject a slogan
calling for an armed uprising, a revolutionary army, and a provisional
government in favour of one demanding the organisation of revolutionary
self-government are trailing along in the wake of the monarchist bourgeoisie,
instead of marching in the van of the revolutionary proletariat and peasantry.


We are accused of stubbornly “hammering away” at the same
slogans. We think such an accusation a compliment. For it is plainly our task to
hammer away persistently at vital political slogans, while spreading the general
truths of the Social-Democratic programme. We succeded in giving the widest
publicity to the “quartet” formula so repugnant to the liberals
(universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and a secret ballot). We
acquainted the masses of the working people with the “sextet” of
political liberties (freedom of speech, conscience, the press, assembly,
association, and the right to strike). We must now repeat millions and billions
of times the “trio” of immediate revolutionary tasks (an armed
uprising, a revolutionary army, and a provisional revolutionary government). The
popular forces which will accomplish these tasks are shooting up

    

spontaneously, not only with every day but with every hour that
passes. Attempted uprisings are becoming more frequent, their organisation is
growing, and arming is proceeding apace. From the ranks of the workers and
peasants clad in rustic coats, city suits, and uniforms nameless heroes are
emerging, people fused with the mass and ever more deeply imbued with a noble
obsession to liberate the people. It is our business to see to it that all
these rivulets merge into a mighty torrent, that the light of a class-conscious,
direct, clear, and precise revolutionary programme of our immediate tasks be
thrown on the spontaneous movement, multiplying its strength tenfold.


To sum up. Our tactics with regard to the State Duma may be formulated in five
points: 1) intensified agitation in connection with the State Duma Act and the
elections to the Duma, the organisation of meetings, utilisation of the election
campaign, demonstrations, etc., etc.; 2) the centring of this entire agitational
campaign on slogans calling for an insurrection, a revolutionary army, and a
provisional revolutionary government; popularisation of the programme of this
provisional government; 3) gaining the adherence for the promotion of this
agitation and of the armed struggle of all revolutionary democratic elements,
and of such elements only, i.e., only those who accept the above-mentioned
slogans in deed; 4) support of the boycott idea, which arose among the Left-wing
bourgeois democrats, with the purpose of making it an active boycott in the
sense of the most wide spread agitation as described above; winning over the
Left-wing representatives of bourgeois democracy to the
revolutionary-democratic programme and to activities which will draw them
closer to the petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry; 5) ruthless exposure of the
bourgeois theory of “compromise” and the bourgeois
“compromisers”, and their denunciation to the broadest masses of
workers and peasants; making public and explaining every treacherous and
irresolute step they take, both before and after they enter the Duma; warning
the working class against these bourgeois betrayers of the revolution.

 

Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 224-26 of this volume.—Ed.
 



[2]

S. S.—the pseudonym of P. N. Milyukov, leader of the
Constitutional-Democratic Party.





[3]

The third element—an expression used to designate the Zemstvo
 democratic intelligentsia.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Most Lucid Exposition of a Most Confused Plan









Lenin: A Most Lucid Exposition of a Most Confused Plan







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Most Lucid Exposition of a Most Confused Plan




Published:
Proletary, No. 15, September 5 (August 23), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 224-226.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In a leading

       article[1]

we pointed out what a muddle the new-Iskra’s new
plan for a “Duma campaign” is. Here is a most lucid exposition of it
given by Martov himself in the Vienna Arbeiter Zeitung[2]

(of
August 24, New Style). (The italics everywhere are Martov’s own.)



"The plan is as follows,” says Comrade Martov, referring to its
“endorsement by many organisations in Russia”. “Working-class
organisations are to assume the initiative in establishing people’s
agitation committees, to be elected by all elements of the population that
are not satisfied with the tsar’s reform. The task of such commit tees consists
first of all in developing agitation for genuine popular representation
throughout the country. These committees are to be set up formally for the
purpose of enabling the mass of the population to take part in the forthcoming
elections. Since by virtue of the electoral law they are barred from
direct participation in the elections, the citizens may take part
indirectly by communicating their opinions and demands to the more exclusive
bodies of privileged voters. The committees bring pressure to bear on the
electoral body with the object of getting only resolute advocates 01
democratic and free representation elected to the Duma. At the same time
the committees strive to set up, apart from the ’legal’ representative body, an
illegal representative body which would be able at the right
moment to come forward as the country’s provisional organ of the
people’s will. The committees call on the population to elect
their representatives by universal suffrage; at a given moment these
representatives should gather in some one city and proclaim themselves a
constituent assembly. Such is, so to say, the ideal objective of this
campaign. Whether matters will get so far as this or not, a movement along these
lines will serve to organise revolutionary self-government, which will smash the
shackles of tsarist legality, and lay the foundation for the future triumph of
the revolution. Little by little the rudiments of

    

such revolutionary self-government are arising all over Russia, as, for
instance, has already happened at the present time in two Caucasian
gubernias where the official authorities are being boycotted by the entire
population, and the latter is being governed by its own elected authorities. (In
parentheses: the peasants of Guria demand that these authorities be
endorsed by our Committee.)


"The abolition of the autocracy, which does not wish to inaugurate a
constitutional era voluntarily, must proceed by way of setting up such publicly
functioning self-government bodies everywhere. It goes without saying that
opportunities for this are engendered by the increasing disorganisation of the
government apparatus and the growth o¶ an effective power (wirkenden
Kraft) among the people.”



We recommend this peerless plan to the comrades as the Ideal objective of
the monarchist (Osvobozhdeniye) bourgeoisie, as the ideal objective of
liquidating the Russian proletarian- peasant revolution by the liberal
landlords.


As we have pointed out hundreds of times, the Osvobozhdeniye League,
i.e., the monarchist bourgeoisie, wants just such a “liquidation” as
would bring about the transfer of power to the bourgeoisie without a popular
uprising, or, at any rate, without the complete victory of an uprising of the
people. Manilovist plans for “elections” while the autocracy remains
in power play entirely into the hands of the liberal bourgeoisie, which
alone is capable of producing anything at all resembling such elections.


We shall dwell on the details of this ridiculous plan only briefly. Is it not
naïve to forget that self-government in the Caucasus (not in two gubernias, but
in a few volosts) rests on an armed uprising? Is it not puerile to
imagine that what is possible in a few mountain villages in a remote frontier
district is possible in the heart of Russia without the people’s victory over
the autocracy? Is not this plan of multi-stage “elections” while
power remains in the hands of the autocratic government, a bit of superb
pedantry? “The dissatisfied elements of the population” (?)
elect people’s agitation committees (without a programme, without clear
slogans). The committees set up an “illegal representative body” (in
all probability, simply replacing the illegal organisation of the
Socialist Labour Party by an Osvobozhdeniye organisation!). It
is obvious that the substitution of the obscure term, “organ of the
people’s will”, for the clear revolutionary term, “a
provisional government as the organ of the uprising”, is

    

simply playing into the hands of the Zemstvo-bourgeois party. Universal
    elections to a constituent assembly on the initiative of
    “illegal” committees, while Trepov[3]

and Co. are left
    in power is an idea which is altogether infantile.


In disputes it is sometimes useful to have a “devil’s advocate”—one
who defends an absurd view which is rejected by everyone. Iskra has
now assumed this role. Its plan is most helpful for educational purposes in
refuting absurdities at meetings of study circles, extemporaneous meetings, mass
meetings, etc.; it is very helpful for the purpose of bringing out more
distinctly the contrast between the slogans of the revolutionary proletariat and
those of the monarchist liberal bourgeoisie.

 

Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 212-23 of this volume.—Ed.
 



[2]

The Vienna Arbeiter Zeitung—a daily
newspaper that was the central organ of Austrian Social-Democracy. It was
founded by V. Adler in Vienna in 1889.


In 1905 the paper reflected the militant temper of the workers and the toiling
masses of Austria-Hungary, who under the influence of the first Russian
revolution were fighting for the introduction of universal suffrage in their
country


During the First World War the paper took a social-chauvinist stand, for which
Lenin called it the newspaper of “The Viennese traitors to
socialism” (Collected Works, Vol. 29, “Heroes of the Berne
International”). Banned in 1934, the paper resumed publication in 1945 as the
central organ of the Socialist Party of
 Austria.





[3]

D. F. Trepov—Governor General of
St. Petersburg, who was active in the suppression of the first Russian
revolution.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Keeping International Social-Democracy Informed of our Party Affairs









Lenin: Keeping International Social-Democracy Informed of our Party Affairs







V. I.  

      Lenin
Keeping International Social-Democracy Informed of our Party Affairs




Published:
Proletary, No. 15, September 5 (August 23), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 227-228.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Keeping
international
Social-Democracy
informed

 

of our Party affairs is one of the most important duties of all
Social-Democrats. living
abroad. We remind the comrades of this and appeal for the most energetic
agitation in defence of the stand taken by the Third Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P. This agitation must be conducted indefatigably, on any pretext, on
any suitable occasion, and in positively all study circles of workers abroad, as
well as with individual members of foreign Social-Democratic parties. This
agitation must be conducted in ways that are worthy of conscious
Social-Democrats and members of a workers’ party. It must be based on the
principle of lull information concerning the documentary
aspect of the matter. Priority should be given to the circulation of the Third
Congress resolutions published in the French language (the supplement
to the newspaper Le Socialiste of June 25, 1905. Address of Le
Socialiste, central organ of the French socialists: Rue de la Corderie
16, Paris) as well as in the German language (the pamphlet
Bericht über den 3. Parteitag; publisher’s address: Birk et Co.,
Buchdruckerei und Verlagsanstalt, München, Vittelsbacherplatz 2. Preis 20
pf.). Both the French and the German translations are also available from
the Party office.


In addition to this basic material, the most important documents and articles
from our literature should also be translated. In doing so we must constantly
expose the in decency of the Khlestakov-like new Iskra. The latter has
not published, either in French or in German, the full text of its Conference
resolutions (which reveals its usurping

    

arrogation of the title of Central Organ). Iskra has published in the
    European Social-Democratic press such “statistics” about
    organised labour that evoke nothing but laughter (suffice it to say that the
    new Iskra has not yet made so bold as to make these
    “statistics” public in Russian, for fear of disgracing itself,
    but we have printed these statistics in full in No. 9 of
    Proletary).[1]
Iskra is now circulating among all
    colonies abroad a letter over the Editorial Board’s signature containing the
    same brand of amusing Khlestakovian claims regarding the Minority’s forces,
    claims which have been shamefacedly withheld from Russian readers of our
    Social-Democratic newspapers. Publicity-mongers should be fought against to
    the utmost, but that struggle should be conducted in a dignified way, so as
    to get the public fully informed, and make matters as clear as
    possible, without the least boasting and literary bombast, without falling
    into gossip and private allusions which cannot stand the light of publicity.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The reference is to an item “Our Khlestakovs” by
Lenin, published in No. 9 of Proletary, July 26 (13), 1905, which
quoted a message sent by the Menshevik Iskra to a French socialist news
paper, containing exaggerated and false figures about the number of its
adherents among the organised workers (see Lenin Miscellany
 XVI, pp. 128-29).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Note to the Article “Russia's Finances and the Revolution”









Lenin: Note to the Article 'Russia's Finances and the Revolution'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Note to the Article “Russia’s Finances and the Revolution”




Published:
Proletary, No. 15, September 5 (August 23), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 229.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

From the Editorial Board. Rudolf Martin’s book The
Future of Russia and Japan, which recently appeared in Berlin, is
splendid confirmation of the conclusions drawn by the author of this article. We
have as yet had no opportunity to examine this book, and shall, therefore,
merely take note of its main arguments as reported in the foreign press. The
author’s approach to the matter is one of pure scholarship and devoid of any
political sympathies. A statistician by profession, he has made a thorough
study of Russia’s financial standing and arrives at the conclusion that a
declaration of insolvency is inevitable, whether the war goes on or whether
peace is concluded. Russian agriculture is in a state of complete decline, a
capital of 50 thou sand million rubles being required to put it on its feet
again. Over the next ten years the budget deficit will amount to at least 300
million rubles annually. Russia’s national debt, estimated by the author at
approximately eight thousand million rubles today, will reach 12 thousand
million rubles in five years’ time. There is nothing with which to pay the
interest on the loans because nobody will now give Russia any money. The
parallel between the Russia of 1905 and the France of Louis XVI is simply
amazing. Rudolf Martin strongly advises Germany to get all Russian loans off her
hands at the earliest opportunity (in America, if possible)—loans in which
1,500 million rubles’ worth of German money has been invested. The
European
bourgeoisie is hurrying to escape, foreseeing the inevitability of a
Russian collapse.

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Social-Democracy's Attitude Towards the Peasant Movement









Lenin: Social-Democracy's Attitude Towards the Peasant Movement







V. I.  

      Lenin
Social-Democracy’s Attitude Towards the Peasant Movement




Published:
Proletary, No. 16, September 14 (1), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 230-239.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The tremendous importance of the peasant movement in the democratic
revolution Russia is now passing through has been repeatedly explained in the
entire Social-Democratic press. As is well known, the Third Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P. passed a special resolution on this question in order to define more
exactly and to co-ordinate the activities of the whole party of the
class-conscious proletariat with regard to. the peasant movement of
today. Although the resolution was drawn up in advance (the first draft was
published in Vperyod, No. 11, March 1O[23],

 1905[1]

),

and although it was carefully gone over at the Party Congress, which
took pains to formulate the views already established throughout the Russian
Social-Democratic movement— the resolution has nevertheless perplexed a
number of comrades working in Russia. The Saratov Committee has unanimously
declared this resolution unacceptable (see Proletary,
No. 1O).[3]

It is
to be regretted that an explanation of this verdict, as requested by us at the
time, has not yet been forthcoming. We only know that the Saratov

Commit tee 

has declared also unacceptable the agrarian resolution passed by the
new-Iskra Conference—consequently they are dissatisfied
by what is common to both resolutions, not by what distinguishes them.


New material on this question is provided by a letter we have received from a
Moscow comrade (issued in the form of a hectographed leaflet). We print this
letter in full:

    

AN OPEN LETTER TO THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE AND TO THE COMRADES
WORKING IN THE RURAL DISTRICTS


Comrades,


The regional organisation of the Moscow Committee has taken up work among the
peasants. The lack of experience in organising such work, the special conditions
prevailing in the rural districts of Central Russia, and also the lack of
clarity in the directives contained in the resolutions of the Third Congress on
this question, and the almost complete absence of material in the periodical and
other press on work among the peasantry, compel us to appeal to the Central
Committee, to send us detailed directives, covering both the theoretical aspect
and the practical questions involved, while we ask comrades who are doing
similar work to acquaint us with the practical knowledge your experience has
given you.


We consider it necessary to inform you about the misgivings that have arisen
among us after reading the resolution of the Third Congress “on the
attitude towards the peasant movement”, and about the organisational plan
which we are already beginning to apply in our work in the rural districts.


"§ a) To carry on propaganda among the mass of the
people, explaining that Social-Democracy aims at giving the most energetic
support to all revolutionary measures taken by the peasantry and likely to
improve their condition, measures including confiscation of land belonging to
the landlords, the state, the church, the monasteries, and the imperial
family” (from the resolution of the Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.).


First of all, this paragraph does not clarify how Party organisations will, or
should, carry on their propaganda. Propaganda requires, first and foremost, an
organisation standing very close to those who are to be propagandised. Whether
this organisation should consist of committees of the rural proletariat, or
whether other organisational forms of oral and printed propaganda are
possible—this question remains unanswered.


The same applies to the promise to give energetic support. To give support, and
energetic support at that, is also possible only if local organisations
exist. To us the question of “energetic support” seems in general
very vague. Can Social-Democracy support the expropriation of landlords’ estates
that are farmed most intensively, with the use of machinery, cultivating
high-grade crops, etc.? The transfer of such estates to petty-bourgeois
proprietors, however important improvement of their condition may be, would be
a step back from the standpoint of the capitalist development of the given
estate. In our opinion we as Social-Democrats should have made a reservation on
this matter of “support”: “provided the expropriation of this
land and its transfer to peasant (petty-bourgeois) ownership results in a higher
form of economic development on these estates.”




Further:


"§ d) To strive for the independent organisation of the
rural proletariat, for its fusion with the urban proletariat under the
banner of

    

the Social-Democratic Party, and for the inclusion of its representatives in
the peasant committees.”


· Doubts arise with regard to the latter part of this paragraph. The fact
is that bourgeois-democratic organisations such as the Peasant Union, and
reactionary-utopian organisations such as the Socialist- Revolutionaries
organise under their banner both bourgeois and proletarian elements of the
peasantry. By bringing into such “peasant” committees our
representatives from rural proletarian organisations we shall be contradicting
ourselves, our stand regarding a bloc, etc.


Here, too, we believe, amendments, and very serious ones, are needed.


These are a few general remarks on the resolutions of the Third Congress. These
should be analysed as soon and in as great detail as possible.


As regards the plan for a “rural” organisation in our Regional
Organisation, we must say that we have to work under conditions which are not
even mentioned in the resolutions of the Third Congress. First of all, it should
be noted that the territory we cover—Moscow Gubernia and the adjoining
uyezds of neighbouring gubernias—is mainly an industrial area with a
relatively low level of handicraft industry and with a very small section of the
population engaged exclusively in agriculture. Huge textile mills, each
employing 10,000 to f 5,000 workers, alternate with small factories, employing
500 to 1,000 workers and scattered in out-of-the-way hamlets and villages. One
would think that in such conditions Social-Democracy would find here a most
favourable field for its activities, but facts have proved that so superficial
an assumption does not hold water. Although some of the factories have been in
existence for 40 or 50 years, the overwhelming majority of our
“proletariat” have not yet become divorced from the land. The
“village” has such a strong hold over them, that none of the
psychological and other characteristics acquired by a “pure”
proletarian in the course of collective work develops among our
proletarians. The farming carried on by our “proletarians” is of a
peculiarly linsey-woolsey type. A weaver employed in a mill hires a labourer to
till his patch of land. His wife (if she is not working at the mill), his
children, and the aged and invalid members of the family work on this same piece
of land, and he himself will work on it when he becomes old or maimed, or is
discharged for violent or suspicious behaviour. Such “proletarians”
can hardly be called proletarians. Their economic status is that of paupers;
their ideology Is that of petty bourgeois. They are ignorant and
conservative. It is from such that Black-Hundred elements are
recruited. However, even among these people class-consciousness has begun to
awaken of late. Through the agency of “pure” proletarians we are
endeavouring to rouse these ignorant masses from their age-old slumber, and not
without success. Our contacts are increasing in number, and in places our
foothold is becoming firmer, the paupers are coming under our influence,
beginning to adopt our ideology, both in the factory and in the village. And we
believe that it will not be unorthodox to form organisations in an environment
that is not “purely” proletarian. We have no other environment, and
were we to insist on orthodoxy

    

and organise only the rural “proletariat”, we would have to disband
our organisation and those in the neighbouring districts. We know we shall have
difficulties in struggling against the urge to expropriate the arable and other
land neglected by the landlords, or those lands which the holy fathers in cowl
and cassock have not been able to farm properly. We know that bourgeois
democracy, from the “democratic” monarchist faction (such a faction
exists in Ruza Uyezd) down to the “Peasant” Union, will fight us for
influence among the “paupers”, but we shall arm the latter to oppose
the former. We shall make use of all Social-Democratic forces in the region,
both intellectual and proletarian, to set up and consolidate our
Social-Democratic commit tees of “paupers”. And we shall do this in
accordance with the following plan. In each uyezd town, or big industrial centre
we shall set up uyezd committees of groups coming under the Regional
Organisation. In addition to setting up factory committees in its
district the uyezd committee will also set up “peasant”
committees. For reasons of secrecy these committees should not have
many people on them and should be made up of the most revolutionary
and capable pauperised peasants. Wherever there are both factories and
peasants, workers an d peasants should be organised in a single
subgroup committee.  

In the first place, such committees should have a clear and exact idea of local
conditions: A) Agrarian relationships: I) peasant allotments, leases, form of
tenure (communal, by households, etc.); 2) the neighbouring land: a) to whom it
belongs; b) the amount of land; c) what relation the peasants have to this land;
d) on what terms the land is held: 1) labour rent, 2) excessive rent for
“cut-off lands”, etc.; e) indebtedness to kulaks, landlords, etc. B)
Imposts, taxes, the rate of assessment of peasant and landlord lands
respectively. C) Migratory labour and handicraft industries, passports, whether
there is winter hiring,[4]

etc. D) Local factories and plants: the working
conditions there: 1) wages, 2) working hours, 3) the attitude of the management,
4) housing conditions, etc. E) The administration: the Rural Superintendents,
the volost headman, the clerk, the volost judges, constables, the priest. F) The
Zemstvo: councillors representing the peasants, Zemstvo employees: the teacher,
the doctor, libraries, schools, tea-rooms. G) Volost assemblies: their
composition and procedure. H) Organisations: the Peasant Union,
Socialist-Revolutionaries, Social-Democrats.


After familiarising itself with all these data the Peasant Social-Democratic
Committee is obliged to get such decisions passed by the assemblies as may be
necessitated by any abnormal state of affairs. This committee should
simultaneously carry on among the masses intense propaganda and agitation for
the Ideas of Social-Democracy, organise study circles, impromptu meetings, mass
meetings, distribute leaflets and other literature, collect funds for the
Party, and keep in touch with the Regional Organisation through the uyezd group.


If we succeed in setting up a number of such committees the success of
Social-Democracy will be assured.


Regional Organiser


 

It goes without saying that we shall not undertake the task of working out the
      detailed practical directives to which the comrade refers: this is a
      matter for the comrades on the spot and for the central body in Russia
      which is guiding the practical work. We propose to take the opportunity
      presented by our Moscow comrade’s interesting letter to explain the
      resolution of the Third Congress and the urgent tasks of the Party in
      general. It is obvious from the letter that the misunderstandings caused
      by the resolution of the Third Congress are only partly due to doubts in
      the field of theory. Another source is the new question, which
    has not arisen before, about the relations between the “revolutionary
    peasant committees” and the “Social-Democratic
    Committees” which are working among the peasants. The
    very posing of

    this question testifies to the big step forward made in Social-Democratic
    work among the peasants. Questions of—relatively speaking—detail
    are now being brought into the foreground by the practical requirements of
    “rural” agitation, which is striking root and assuming stable
    and permanent forms. And the author of the letter keeps forgetting that when
    he blames the Congress resolution for lack of clarity, he is in fact seeking
    an answer to a question which the Congress of the Party did not raise and
    could not have raised.


For instance, the author is not quite right when he says that both propagation
of our ideas and support for the peas ant movement are possible
“only” if local organisations exist. Of course such organisations
are desirable, and as the work increases they will become necessary; but such
work is possible and necessary even where no such organisations exist. In all
our activities, even when carried on exclusively among the urban proletariat, we
must never lose sight of the peasant question and must disseminate the
declaration made by the entire party of the class-conscious proletariat
in the person of the Third Congress, namely, that we support a peasant
uprising. The peasants must learn this—from literature, from the workers,
from special organisations, etc. The peasants must learn that in giving this
support the Social-Democratic proletariat will not stop short of any
form of confiscation of the land (i.e., expropriation without compensation to
the owners).

 

A question of theory has in this connection been raised by the author of the
letter, whether the expropriation of the big estates and their transfer to
“peasant, petty-bourgeois ownership” should not be specifically
qualified. But by proposing such a reservation the author has arbitrarily
limited the purport of the resolution of the Third Congress. There is not a
word in the resolution about the Social-Democratic Party undertaking to
support transfer of the confiscated land to petty-bourgeois proprietors. The
resolution states: we support ... “up to and including
confiscation”, i.e., including expropriation without compensation; how
ever, the resolution does not in any way decide to whom the expropriated land is
to be given. It was not by chance that the question was left open: it is obvious
from the articles in Vperyod (Nos. 11, 12,

  15[2]

)

that it was deemed
unwise to decide this question in advance. It was stated there, for instance,
that under a democratic republic Social-Democracy cannot pledge itself and have
its hands tied with regard to nationalisation of the land.


Indeed, it is the revolutionary-democratic aspect of the peasant uprisings and a
particular organisation of the rural proletariat in a class party that at
present form the crux of the matter for us, as distinct from the
petty-bourgeois Socialist-Revolutionaries. It is not schemes of a “general
redistribution” or nationalisation that is the kernel of the question; the
essential thing is that the peasantry see the need for, and accomplish, the
revolutionary demolition of the old order. That is why the
Socialist-Revolutionaries are pressing for “socialisation”, etc.,
while we are pressing for revolutionary peasant committees: without the
latter, we say, all reforms amount to nothing. With them and supported by
them the victory of the peasant uprising is possible.


We must help the peasant uprising in every way, up to and including confiscation
of the land, but certainly not including all sorts of petty-bourgeois
schemes. We support the peasant movement to the extent that it is
revolutionary-democratic. We are making ready (doing so now, at once)

    

to fight it when, and to the extent that, it becomes reactionary and
      anti-proletarian. The essence of Marxism lies in that double task, which
      only those who do not understand Marxism can vulgarise or compress into a
      single and simple task.


Let us take a concrete instance. Let us assume that the peasant uprising has
been victorious. The revolutionary peasant committees and the provisional
revolutionary government (relying, in part, on these very committees) can
proceed to any confiscation of big property. We are in favour of confiscation,
as we have already declared. But to whom shall we recommend giving the
confiscated land? On this question we have not committed ourselves nor shall we
ever do so by declarations like those rashly proposed by the author of the
letter. The latter has forgotten that the same resolution of the Third Congress
speaks of “purging the revolutionary-democratic content of the peasant
movement of all reactionary admixtures”—that is one point—and,
secondly, of the need “in all cases and under all circumstances for
the independent organisation of the rural proletariat”. These are our
directives. There will always be reactionary admixtures in the peasant movement,
and we declare war on them in advance. Class antagonism between the rural
proletariat and the peasant bourgeoisie is unavoidable, and we disclose it in
advance, explain it, and prepare for the struggle on the basis of that
antagonism. One of the immediate causes of such a struggle may very likely
be provided by the question: to whom shall the confiscated land be given, and
how? We do not gloss over that question, nor do we promise equalitarian
distribution, “socialisation”, etc. What we do say is that this is a
question we shall fight out later on, fight again, on a new field and with other
allies. There, we shall certainly be with the rural proletariat, with the entire
working class, against the peasant bourgeoisie. In practice this may
mean the transfer of the land to the class of petty peasant
proprietors—wherever big estates based on bondage and feudal servitude
still prevail, and there are as yet no material conditions for large-scale
socialist production; it may mean nationalisation—given complete victory
of the democratic revolution—or the big capitalist estates being
transferred to workers’ associations, for from

    

the democratic revolution we shall at once, and precisely in accordance with the
measure of our strength, the strength of the class-conscious and organised
proletariat, begin to pass to the socialist revolution. We stand for
uninterrupted revolution. We shall not stop half-way. If we do not now and
immediately promise all sorts of “socialisation”, that is because we
know the actual conditions for that task to. be accomplished, and we do not
gloss over the new class struggle burgeoning within the peasantry, but reveal
that struggle.


At first we support the peasantry en masse against the landlords,
support it to the hilt and with all means, including confiscation, and then (it
would be better to say, at the same time) we support the proletariat against the
peasantry en masse. To try to calculate now what the
combination of forces will be within the peasantry “on the day
after”
the revolution (the democratic revolution) is empty utopianism. Without falling
into adventurism or going against our conscience in matters of science, without
striving for cheap popularity we can and do assert only one thing: we
shall bend every effort to help the entire peasantry achieve the democratic
revolution, in order thereby to make it easier for us, the party of the
proletariat, to pass on as quickly as possible to the new and higher
task—the socialist revolution. We promise no harmony, no equalitarianism
or “socialisation” following the victory of the present
peasant uprising, on the contrary, we “promise” a new struggle, new
inequality, the, new revolution we are striving for. Our doctrine is less
“sweet” than the legends of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, but let
those who want to be fed solely on sweets join the Socialist-Revolutionaries; we
shall say to such people: good riddance.


In our opinion this Marxist point of view settles also the question of the
committees. In our opinion there should be no Social-Democratic peasant
committees. If they are Social-Democratic, that means they are not purely
peasant committees; if they are peasant committees, that means they are not
purely proletarian, not Social-Democratic commit tees. There is a host of such
who would confuse the two, but we are not of their number. Wherever possible we
shall strive to set up our committees, committees of the Social-

    

Democratic Labour Party. They will consist of peasants, paupers,
    intellectuals, prostitutes (a worker recently asked us in a letter why not
    carry on agitation among the prostitutes), soldiers, teachers,
    workers—in short, all Social-Democrats, and none but
      Social-Democrats. These committees will conduct the whole of
    Social-Democratic work, in its full scope, striving, however, to organise
    the rural proletariat especially and particularly, since the Social-Democratic Party is the class party of the proletariat. To consider it
    “unorthodox” to organise a proletariat which has not entirely
    freed itself from various relics of the past is a tremendous
      delusion, and we would like to think that the relevant passages of
    the letter are due to a mere misunderstanding. The urban and industrial
    proletariat will inevitably be the nucleus of our Social-Democratic Labour
    Party, but we must attract to it, enlighten, and organise all who labour and
    are exploited, as stated in our programme—all without exception:
    handicraftsmen, paupers, beggars, servants, tramps, prostitutes—of
    course, subject to the necessary and obligatory condition that they join the
    Social-Democratic movement and not that the Social-Democratic movement join
    them, that they adopt the standpoint of the proletariat, and not that the
    proletariat adopt theirs.


The reader may ask—what is the point, then, of having revolutionary
peasant committees? Does this mean that they are not necessary? No, they are
necessary. Our ideal is purely Social-Democratic committees in all rural
districts, and then agreement between them and all revolutionary-democratic elements, groups, and circles of the peasantry for the purpose of
establishing revolutionary committees. There is a perfect analogy here to the
independence of the Social-Democratic Labour Party in the towns and its alliance with all the revolutionary democrats for the purpose of insurrection. We
are in favour of a peasant uprising. We are absolutely opposed to the mixing and
merging of heterogeneous class elements and heterogeneous parties. We hold that
for the purpose of insurrection Social-Democracy should give an impetus to
all revolutionary democracy, should help it all to organise,
should march shoulder to shoulder with it, but without merging with
it, to the barricades

    

in the cities, and against the landlords and the police in the villages.
 Long live the insurrection in town and country against the autocracy!
 Long live revolutionary Social-Democracy, the vanguard of all
 revolutionary democracy in the present revolution!

 

Notes
 

[1]

“The Proletariat and the Peasantry” 1905. See present edition,
Vol. 8, pp. 235-36.—Ed.

[2]

“The Proletariat and the Peasantry”, 19O5; “On Our Agrarian
Programme”, 1905; “The Agrarian Programme of the Liberals”, 1905. See
present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 231-36, 246-51, 315-22.—Ed.
 



[3]

Issue No. 10 of Proletary, August 2 (July 20), 1905, published a
    resolution of the Saratov Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., which held a
    conciliatory stand; the resolution had been adopted on a report on the Third
    Congress of the Party and the Mensheviks’ Conference. Proletary
    published the resolution with an epilogue by Lenin (see Lenin Miscellany
      XVI, p. 130).





[4]

Winter hiring—the hiring of peasants for summer work, practised
by the landlords and kulaks during the winter, when the peasants were
particularly in need of cash, and would agree to
extortionate terms.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## What Our Liberal Bourgeois Want, and What They Fear









Lenin: What Our Liberal Bourgeois Want, and What They Fear







V. I.  

      Lenin
What Our Liberal Bourgeois Want, and What They Fear




Published:
Proletary, No. 16, September 14 (1), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 240-245.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In Russia political education of the people and the intelligentsia
hardly exists as yet. Clear political convictions and firm party opinions have
as yet scarcely developed in our country. People in Russia are too ready to give
credence to any protest against the autocracy and frown upon. any criticism of
the character and substance of that protest, regarding such criticism as
something that maliciously disunites the movement for emancipation. It is not
surprising, therefore, that under this general flag of emancipation the

       Osvobozhdeniye[1]

too, which is published under the editorship of
Mr. Struve, has a wide circulation among all and sundry free-thinking
intellectuals who resent any analysis of the class content of
Osvobozhdeniye liberalism.


And yet, Osvobozhdeniye liberalism is merely a more systematic,
uncensored expression of the fundamental features of Russian liberalism as a
whole. The farther the revolution advances, the more that liberalism exposes
itself, and the more unpardonable is the fear of looking the truth full in the
face and understanding the real essence of that liberalism. The “Political
Letters” of the well-known historian Mr. Pavel Vinogradov, published in
Russkiye Vedomosti (August 5), the well-known liberal organ, are highly
characteristic in this respect. No less characteristic is the fact that other
liberal newspapers, like Nasha Zhizn, quoted excerpts from this
admirable piece of writing, without a single word of indignation or
protest. Mr. Pavel

    

Vinogradov has expressed in bold relief, in a way rarely to be met, the
      interests, tactics, and psychology of. the self- seeking bourgeoisie; his
      outspokenness might, perhaps, be considered inappropriate by certain of
      the shrewder liberals, but then that makes it all the more valuable to
      class-conscious workers. Here are the concluding words of
      Mr. Vinogradov’s article, which express its very quintessence:



"I do not know whether Russia will succeed in reaching the new
system along a road close to that taken by Germany in 1848, but I
have no doubt that every effort must be exerted to enter upon this
road, and not upon the one chosen by France in 1789.


"Along the latter path Russian society—raw, poorly organised, and
torn by internecine strife—will encounter tremendous dangers, if not its
doom. To wait until we get object lessons on the subject of power, order,
national unity, and social organisation is undesirable the more so since these
object lessons will be given either by the police sergeant, who will have gained
new strength, or by the German corporal, whom anarchy in Russia will provide
with a providential mission



That is what the Russian bourgeois is thinking of most of all: the tremendous
dangers of the “road” of 1789! The bourgeois has no objection to the
path taken by Germany in 1848, but he will exert “every effort” to
avoid the path taken by France. An instructive pronouncement, one
which provides much food for thought.


What is the radical difference between the two roads? It is that the
bourgeois-democratic revolution carried out by France in 1789, and by Germany in
1848, was brought to its consummation in the first case, but not in the
second. The first ended in a republic and complete liberty, whereas the second
stopped short without smashing the monarchy and reaction. The second proceeded
under the leadership mainly of the liberal bourgeoisie, which took the
unsufficiently mature working class in tow, whereas the first was carried out,
at least to a certain extent, by the revolutionarily active mass of the people,
the workers and peasants, who, for a time at least, pushed the respectable and
moderate bourgeoisie aside. The second led rapidly to the
“pacification” of the country, i.e., the suppression of the
revolutionary people and the triumph of “the police sergeant and the
corporal”; whereas for a certain period the first placed power in the
hands of the revolutionary people

    

which crushed the resistance of “the police sergeants and the
      corporals”.


And now a learned lackey of the Russian bourgeoisie comes out in a “highly
respectable” liberal organ with a warning against the first road, the
“French”. The learned historian wants the “German” road,
and is quite outspoken about it. He knows perfectly well that the German road
did not escape an armed uprising of the people. In 1848 and 1849 there were a
number of uprisings and even provisional revolutionary governments in
Germany. But none of these uprisings was fully victorious. The most
successful of them, the Berlin uprising of March 18, 1848, terminated not in the
overthrow of the royal power, but in concessions granted by the king,
who remained in power and very soon managed to recover from his partial defeat
and withdraw all these concessions.


And so, the learned historian of the bourgeoisie does not fear an uprising of
the people. He fears the victory of the people. He is not afraid of the
people administering a slight lesson to the reactionaries and the bureaucracy,
the bureaucracy which he hates so much. He is afraid of the people
overthrowing the reactionary government. He hates the autocracy and
desires its overthrow with all his heart; it is not from the preservation of the
autocracy, not from the poisoning of the people’s organism by the slow
putrefaction of the still living parasite of monarchist rule that he expects the
doom of Russia, but from the complete victory of the people.


This man of cheap-jack scholarship knows that a time of revolution is a time of
object lessons for the people, but he does not want object lessons on the
destruction of reaction, and tries to scare us with object lessons on
the destruction of the revolution. He is scared to death of the road
which has led to the. complete victory of the revolution, even for a short
time, and yearns with all his heart for an outcome like the German, in which
reaction secured complete victory for a long, long time.


He does not welcome revolution in Russia, but merely tries to find extenuating
circumstances for it. He desires not a victorious revolution, but an
unsuccessful revolution. He considers reaction a phenomenon that is in order and
legitimate, natural and durable, reliable and reasonable.

    

He regards revolution as a phenomenon that is illegitimate, fantastic, and
unnatural, one that can at best be justified to a certain degree on the
grounds of the instability, the “weakness”, the
“unsoundness” of the autocratic government. This
“objective” historian regards revolution not as the most lawful
right of the people, but merely as a sinful and dangerous method of correcting
the extremes of reaction. In his opinion a revolution which has been completely
victorious is “anarchy”, whereas completely victorious reaction is
not anarchy, but merely a slight exaggeration of certain necessary functions of
the state. He knows of no other “rule” but a monarchy, no other
“system” and no other “social organisation” but those of
the bourgeoisie. Of the European forces which revolution in Russia will
“provide with a providential mission” he knows only the
“German corporal”, but he neither knows nor cares to know the
German Social-Democratic worker. He detests most of all the
“presumption” of those who “are preparing to outstrip the
Western bourgeoisie” (the Professor writes the word bourgeoisie in
ironical quotation marks as if to say: what a stupid term to apply to

European—En-ro-pe-an—civilisation!).

This “objective
historian” smugly closes his eyes to the fact that it is precisely because
of the old abomination of the Russian autocracy that Europe has for decades and
decades been marking time and even retrogressing politically. He fears the
object lesson of the “police sergeant who will have gained new
strength” and therefore—O leader of the people!
0 statesman!—he utters a warning above all against
resolutely smashing all
the “forces” of the contemporary police sergeant. What contemptible
servility! What a despicable betrayal of the revolution, dished up with the
sauce of a pseudo-scholarly and pseudo-objective analysis of the question!
Scratch a Russian and you will find a Tartar, said Napoleon. We say, scratch a
Russian liberal bourgeois and you will find a police sergeant in a brand-new
uniform, who is permitted to retain nine-tenths of his old strength for
the very profound, “scholarly”, and “objective” reason
that otherwise, he may, perhaps, want to “gain new strength”!
Every bourgeois ideologist has the soul of a thoroughgoing huckster; he does not
think of destroying the forces of reaction and of the “police
sergeant”, but

    

of bribing this police sergeant, of greasing his palm and appeasing him by
      striking a bargain with him as quickly as possible.


How inimitably this most learned ideologist of the bourgeoisie corroborates all
that we have so often said in Proletary about the nature and character
of Russian liberalism! Unlike the European bourgeoisie, which was revolutionary
in its time and went over to the side of reaction decades later, our home-grown
wiseacres immediately skip revolution, or want to do so, and arrive at the
moderate and tidy rule of the reactionary bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie does not
and, because of its class position, cannot want revolution. It merely wants to
strike a bargain with the monarchy against the revolutionary people; it merely
wants to steal to power behind the backs of that people.


And what an instructive lesson this liberal bourgeois sage teaches those
doctrinaire Social-Democrats who have gone as far as the following resolution,
which was adopted by the Caucasian supporters of the new Iskra and
specially approved by the Editorial Board of Iskra in a
special supplement. This resolution (together with Iskra’s approval) is
given in full in N. Lenin’s Two Tactics (pp.

       68-69),[2]

but since many comrades in Russia are not acquainted with this
resolution, and since the Iskra Editorial Board refused to publish
this, in their opinion, so “very apt” resolution, we reproduce it
here in full so as to edify all Social- Democrats and put Iskra to
shame:


"Whereas we consider it to be our task to take advantage of the
revolutionary situation so as to deepen Social- Democratic consciousness in the
proletariat, and in order to secure for the Party complete freedom to criticise
the nascent bourgeois-state system, the Conference” (the Caucasian
new-Iskra Conference) “declares itself against the formation of a
Social-Democratic provisional government, and entering such a government, and
considers it to be the most expedient course to exercise pressure from without
upon the bourgeois provisional government in order to secure a feasible measure
of democratisation of the state system. The Conference believes that the
formation of a provisional government by

    

Social-Democrats, or their entering such a government, would lead, on the one
hand, to the masses of the proletariat becoming disappointed in the
Social-Democratic Party and abandoning it, because the Social-Democrats, despite
the seizure of power, would not be able to satisfy the pressing needs of the
working class, including the establishment of socialism, and, on the other hand,
would cause the bourgeois classes to recoil from the revolution and thus
diminish its sweep.”


This is a shameful resolution, for (against the will and mind of its authors,
who have stepped on to the inclined plane of opportunism) it expresses a
betrayal of the interests of the working class to the bourgeoisie. This
resolution sanctifies the conversion of the proletariat into the tail-end of
the bourgeoisie for the duration of the democratic revolution. One need but
place this resolution side by side with the passage from Mr. Vinogradov’s
article quoted above (and anybody will find hundreds and thousands of similar
passages in the writings of the liberal publicists) to realise what a marsh the
new-Iskrists have got into. Mr. Vinogradov, this typical ideologist of the
bourgeoisie, has already recoiled from the cause of the revolution. Has
he not thereby diminished the “sweep of the revolution”, gentlemen
of the new

Iskra? 

Should you not go penitently to the Vinogradovs and
beg them, at the price of your refraining from leading the revolution,
not “to recoil from the revolution”?

 

Notes
 

[1]

Osvobozhdeniye—Russian for “emancipation,
liberation”.—Tr.

[2]

See pp. 93-94 of this volume—Ed.
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Theory of Spontaneous Generation









Lenin: The Theory of Spontaneous Generation







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Theory of Spontaneous Generation




Published:
Proletary, No. 16, September 14 (1), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 246-251.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

“Iskra has shown that a constituent assembly can be formed by way
of spontaneous generation, without the aid of any government whatever, and
consequently without the aid of a provisional government as well. Henceforth
this terrible problem may be regarded as settled, and all disputes in
connection with it must cease.”


Thus runs the Bund statement made in No. 247 of Posledniye Izvestia,
dated September 1 (August 19). Unless this is irony, no better
“development” of Iskra’s views could be imagined. In any
case, the theory of “spontaneous generation” has been established,
the “terrible problem” has been settled, and disputes “must
cease”. What a blessing! We shall now live without disputes about this
terrible question, cherishing this new, recently discovered, and simple theory
of “spontaneous generation”, a theory as clear as the eyes of a
child. True, this theory of spontaneous generation was not generated
spontaneously, but appeared to the common view as the fruit of cohabitation
between the Bund and the new Iskra—but after all what is
important is not the origin, but the value of a theory!


How slow-witted were those unfortunate Russian Social- Democrats who discussed
this “terrible question” both at the Third Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P. and at the Conference of new-Iskrists: some of these discussed at
length the question of a provisional government for the purpose of
generating, but not spontaneously, a constituent assembly. Others (the
Conference resolution) thought it possible that “the revolution’s decisive
victory over tsarism may be marked” also by the “decision of some
representative institution to call, under the direct revolutionary pressure

    

of the people, a constituent assembly”. No one, however, not even the
new Iskra’s Editorial Board, who attended the Conference in full
together with Plekhanov, could ever have thought up what "’Iskra’ has
now shown”, and what the Bund has now summarised, confirmed, and
christened with a magnificent name. Like all great discoveries, the theory
of the spontaneous generation of a constituent assembly immediately sheds
light on what was utter confusion. Now everything has become clear. There is no
need to think of a revolutionary provisional government (remember
Iskra’s famous dictum: let not the combination of the words “long
live” and “government” defile your lips); there is no need to
make the members of the State Duma give a “revolutionary pledge” to
“transform the State Duma into a revolutionary assembly”
(Cherevanin, in Iskra, No. 108). A constituent assembly
can be
generated spontaneously!! It will be immaculately brought
forth-by the people themselves, who will not defile them selves with
any “intermediary” by way of a government, even a
provisional, even a revolutionary one. This will be birth
“without original sin”, by the pure method of general
elections with no “Jacobin” struggle for power, with no
defilement of the holy cause through betrayal by bourgeois
representative assemblies, and even without any coarse midwives, who
hitherto in this profane, sinful, and unclean world had punctually
appeared on the scene every time the old society was pregnant with a
new one.  

Hail spontaneous generation! Let all the revolutionary peoples of all Russia now
appreciate its “possibility”—and consequently its necessity to
them as the most rational, easy, and simple road to freedom! Let a monument
be speedily erected in honour of the Bund and the new Iskra,
the
spontaneous progenitors of the theory of spontaneous generation!


But however much we may be blinded by the glaring light of this new scientific
discovery, we must touch up on certain base features in this sublime
creation. Just as the moon is very badly made in Hamburg,[3]

so too new theories
are fabricated none too carefully at the editorial office of Posledniye
Izvestia. The recipe is a simple one, long a favourite with people who
could never be accused of harbouring a single original thought—take
contrasting views, mix

    

them, and divide into two parts! From Proletary we take the criticism
    of popular elections under the autocracy, from
    Iskra—condemnation of the “terrible
    problem”; from
Proletary— the active boycott, from Iskra—the
uselessness of insurrection as a slogan... “like a bee that gathers a fee
from each flowering tree”. And the good Bundists are smugly preening them
selves, rejoicing at the termination of disputes on the terrible problem, and
admiring themselves: how superior they are to the narrow and biased views of
both contending parties!


It doesn’t work out, comrades of the Bund. You have shown no other “way of
spontaneous generation” than that of the new Iskra. And as
regards the latter, you yourselves have had to admit that “under the
autocracy and against the will of the government, which holds the entire
machinery of state in its hands”, elections of popular representatives
can only be farcical elections. Do not abandon us half-way, 0 creators
of the new theory; tell us in what “way” other than the new
Iskra’s you “visualise” “spontaneous generation”?


In opposition to Iskra, Proletary wrote that the only people who will
be able to conduct elections under the autocracy are the
Osvobozhdeniye League, who will willingly call them popular

      elections.[1]

The Bund replies: “This argument does not hold water, since
it is beyond doubt that the autocracy will allow no one—not even the
Osvobozhdeniye League—to conduct elections except within limits
established by law.” We may respectfully remark: the Zemstvos, municipal
councillors, and members of “unions” have held, and are holding,
elections. That is a fact. Their numerous bureaux provide proof of it.


The Bund writes: “We should not start agitation against the Duma and for
an insurrection in general [!] since insurrection, as merely a means of
effecting a political revolution, cannot in this case land not “in
general”?] serve as a slogan for agitation. We can and must reply to the Duma by
extending and intensifying political ’agitation for a constituent assembly to be
elected on the basis of universal, etc., suffrage.” To this we answer: in the
first place, had the Bundists done a little thinking, or even simply consulted

    

our Party programme, they would have seen that a constituent assembly, too, is
only a “means”. It is illogical to declare one “means”
suitable as a slogan, and another unsuitable “in general”. Secondly,
we have already for a long time past repeatedly explained in detail that a
slogan calling for a constituent assembly alone is inadequate, since it has
become an Osvobozhdeniye slogan, the slogan of the bourgeois
“compromisers” (see Proletary, Nos. 3 and

  4[2]

).

It is quite
natural for the liberal monarchist bourgeoisie to gloss over the
question of the method of convening a constituent assembly. For
representatives of the revolutionary proletariat it is totally
impermissible. The theory of spontaneous generation fully befits the former, but
as regards the latter, it can only disgrace them in the eyes of class-conscious
workers.


The Bund’s final argument: “An armed uprising is imperative, and we must
keep on preparing for it all the time. However, we are as yet unable to launch
an uprising, there fore [!!i there is no point in linking it up with the Duma.”
To this we reply:

1) to acknowledge that insurrection and preparations
for it are imperative and at the same time to turn up one’s nose contemptuously
at the question of “combat squads” ("taken from the
Vperyod arsenal”, as the Bund writes) means to defeat one’s own
purpose and reveal a lack of thought in one’s writings.

2) A provisional revolutionary government is an organ of
insurrection. This principle, which is clearly expressed in a
resolution of the Third Congress, was accepted in essence by the
new-Iskra Conference too, although, in our opinion, it was
less aptly put (a provisional revolutionary government “emerging
from a victorious popular insurrection”: both logic and
historical experience show that it is possible to have provisional
revolutionary governments as organs of insurrection which are far from
victorious, or which are not completely victorious; moreover, a
provisional revolutionary government does not only
“emerge” from an uprising, but also directs it). The
Bundists do not attempt to dispute this proposition,

    

and indeed it cannot be disputed. To recognise that an uprising and preparations
      for it are imperative, and at the same time to demand the cessation of
      disputes about the “terrible problem” of a provisional
      government means to write without thinking. 3) The phrase about the
      formation of a constituent assembly “without the aid of any government
      whatever, and consequently, without the aid of a provisional government as
      well” is an anarchist one. It is wholly on a level with the
    famous Iskra phrase about “defiling” the lips by
    combining the words “long live” with
    “government”. It shows a failure to understand the significance
    of a revolutionary government as one of the greatest and finest
    “means” of effecting a political revolution. The paltry
    “liberalism” flaunted here by the Bund in emulation
of Iskra (that is to say, we can manage without any
      government, even a provisional one!) is sheer anarchist
      liberalism. The formation of a
constituent assembly without the aid of an uprising is an idea worthy
only of bourgeois philistines, as even the comrades of the Bund
realise. Moreover, an uprising without the aid of a provisional
revolutionary government can be neither an uprising of the whole people nor a
victorious uprising. Again and again we must state with regret that the
Bundists’ conclusions do not hang together. 4) If it is necessary to prepare for
an uprising, such preparation must of necessity include the dissemination and
explanation of slogans calling for an armed uprising of the people, the
formation of a revolutionary army, and the establishment of a provisional
revolutionary government. We must ourselves study new methods of struggle,
their conditions, their forms, their dangers, their practical realisation, etc.,
and enlighten the masses on these matters. 5) The proposition: “we are as
yet unable to launch an uprising” is wrong. The Potemkin events
have proved rather that we are unable to prevent premature outbreaks of the
uprising that is being prepared. The Potemkin sailors were less
prepared than those on other ships, and the sweep of the uprising was less than
it might have been. What is the conclusion to be drawn from this? First, that
the task of preparing an uprising should include that of preventing premature
outbreaks of an uprising that is being or has almost been prepared. Secondly,
that the uprising now

    

developing spontaneously is outstripping the purposeful and planned
work we are doing to prepare it. We are unable now to restrain the
insurrectionary outbreaks which occur here and there sporadically,
disconnectedly, and spontaneously. So much the more are we in duty bound to
speed up dissemination and explanation of all the political tasks and
political requisites of a successful uprising. All the more ill-advised,
therefore, are suggestions that an end be put to the disputes about the
“terrible problem” of a provisional government. 6) Is the idea that
“there is no point in linking up insurrection with the Duma”
correct? No, it is wrong. To determine beforehand just when .the uprising should
take place is absurd, especially for us who are living abroad. In this sense
there can be no question of any “linking up”, as has been repeatedly
pointed out by Proletary. But agitation in favour of insurrection
and advocacy of the latter must of necessity be “linked up”
with all the important political events which are stirring the people. Our
entire dispute now centres on the slogan of agitation which should be made the
hub of our “Duma” agitation campaign. Is the Duma an event of that
kind? Undoubtedly, it is. Will the workers and peasants ask us:

What would be the best reply to the Duma? Undoubtedly, they will, and are even
doing so already. How are we to reply to these questions? Not by referring to
spontaneous generation (which can only be treated as a joke), but by
explaining the conditions, forms, prerequisites, tasks, and organs of
an insurrection. The more we achieve by such explanations, the more
likely will it be that the inevitable insurrectionary outbreaks will be able to
develop more smoothly and rapidly into a successful and victorious uprising.

 

Notes
 

[1]

See p. 198 of this volume.—Ed.

[2]

“Revolutionary Struggle and Liberal Brokerage”, “The Democratic
Tasks of the Revolutionary Proletariat”. See present edition, Vol. 8.,
pp. 492-93, 511-18.—Ed.
 



[3]

An expression from Gogol’s Diary of a
Madman.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Letter to the International Socialist Bureau









Lenin: Letter to the International Socialist Bureau







V. I.  

      Lenin
Letter to the International Socialist Bureau




Published:

      First published in 1929 in the second and third editions of V. I. Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol. 8.

      Published according to the text in the second and third editions of the Collected Works which has been checked against a French typewritten copy of the text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 252.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

September 16, 1905


Dear Comrade,


All your letters proposing that the International Socialist Bureau intervene to
reconcile the two groups in our Party have been forwarded to the Central
Committee in Russia. I am now in a position to inform you that the Central
Committee is prepared to take part in the conference referred to, on condition
that it will be confined to a preliminary exchange of views. I hope the
delegates of the Central Committee will arrive in Geneva or Berlin in the very
near future, probably in September.


However, I must inform you that the Central Committee is preparing to conclude
an agreement with the Organising Committee in Russia, which is the executive
body of the Minority in the Party. Preliminary negotiations have already taken
place, and both parties have arrived at an understanding concerning sums
contributed to the cause of the Russian revolution by organisations abroad. The
text of this agreement was forwarded to you a fortnight ago.


Since only full understanding between the comrades in Russia can guarantee a
lasting reconciliation, it would be advisable to await the outcome of these
negotiations before calling the conference you mention in your letter to us.


Vladimir Ulyanov (N. Lenin)

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Friends Meet









Lenin: Friends Meet







V. I.  

      Lenin
Friends Meet




Published:
Proletary, No. 18, September 26 (13), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 253-261.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

During the last few days foreign papers, which are very carefully following the
development of the political crisis in Russia, have published a number of
interesting reports on the activities of the Zemstvos and the
Osvobozhdeniye
League. Here is what they say:


"After a two-hour discussion the St. Petersburg Conference of Marshals
of the Nobility arrived at complete agreement with the Minister of the Interior
concerning the elections” to the State Duma (Vossische
Zeitung, [2]

September 16). “Reports from all the gubernias and cities of Russia
show that most electors are utterly indifferent to the political rights granted
them” (ibid.). Golovin (Chairman of the Moscow Gubernia Zemstvo
Board) is conducting negotiations with Durnovo (Governor General of Moscow)
concerning permission to hold a Zemstvo Congress. Durnovo told Golovin that he
was in full sympathy with the Zemstvos, but that he had been ordered to exert
every effort to prevent the Congress. Golovin made reference to the Congress of
Professors. Durnovo replied that “this is an altogether different matter,
since the students had to be persuaded to resume their studies at all
events” (Frankfurter Zeitung, September 17). “The Zemstvo
Congress has been authorised to meet in Moscow on the 25th inst. 
in order to
discuss the electoral programme, provided it keeps. strictly to that subject.”
(The Times, September 18, cable gram from St. Petersburg.)
“M. Golovin today visited the Governor General with reference to the
forthcoming Zemstvo Congress. His Excellency stated that the Congress would be
permitted to assemble, but that ·the programme must be confined to three
points—first, the participation of the

    

Zemstvos and towns in the elections to the State Duma; secondly, the
      organisation. of the electoral campaign; and, thirdly, the participation
      of the Zemstvos and towns in the work of assisting in relief work in
      famine-stricken districts.” (Ibid., cablegram from Moscow.)


Friends have met and come to terms. An agreement has been reached between
Golovin (the leader of the Zemstvo party) and Durnovo. Only infants could fail
to see that the agreement is based on mutual concessions, on the principle of
do ut des (I give you that you may give me). What the autocracy has
conceded is clear: it has permitted the Congress. What has been conceded by the
Zemstvo party (or is it the Osvobozhdeniye Party? God alone knows! And
is it worth while finding out?) no one mentions. The bourgeoisie has every
reason to conceal its negotiations with the autocracy. But even if we do not
know the details, the particulars, we are fully aware of the gist of the
concessions made by the bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie has promised the
autocracy to moderate its revolutionary fervour which consisted in
Petrunkevich having been regarded in Court circles as a former
revolutionary.... The bourgeoisie has promised a discount in return for a
discount. We do not know how big this discount is. However, we do know that
the “bar gaining price” asked for by the bourgeoisie was twofold:
for the people—a monarchist constitution with two chambers; for the
tsar—the convocation of people’s representatives, nothing more (since the
celebrated Zemstvo delegation did not dare to ask Nicholas II for more). It is
on this double bargaining price that the bourgeoisie has now promised the
autocracy a discount. The bourgeoisie has promised to be dutiful, loyal,
and

  law-abiding.[1]


Friends met and came to an agreement.


About the same time, other friends began to meet and come to terms. The
St. Petersburg correspondent of the

    

Frankfurter Zeitung, a Bourse paper (September 15), reports that a
secret congress of the Osvobozhdeniye League has taken place, evidently
in Moscow. “At this meeting it was decided that the
Osvobozhdeniye League should be turned into a
democratic-constitutional party; A motion to this effect was tabled by
Zemstvo members belonging to the Osvobozhdeniye League, and was carried
unanimously by the Congress” (or was it a conference?). “Thereupon
forty members of the League were elected to draft and edit the party
programme. This commission is to start work soon.” The question of the
State Duma was discussed. After a lively debate it was decided to take part
in the elections “on condition, however, that party members elected
participate in the State Duma not in order to concern themselves with current
affairs, but for the purpose of continuing the struggle within the Duma
itself”. In the course of the debates it was pointed out that a widespread
(or far-reaching— weitgehender) boycott is impossible, and only a
boycott of that nature would have any sense. (Is it possible, gentlemen, that no
one cried out at your meeting: “Don’t say ‘I cannot’, say ‘I don’t want
to!’”?—Note by the Editors of Proletary.) However, the meeting
holds that the State Duma is a good arena for the propaganda of democratic
ideas. “A true friend of the people,” according to the minutes of the
meeting, “a friend of freedom, will enter the State Duma only for the
purpose of fighting for a constitutional state.” (Remember
S. S. of Osvobozhdeniye, who explained to all and
sundry that for the
radical intelligentsia extension of suffrage is the focal point, whereas for the
Zemstvos, for the landlords, and capitalists, it is the extension of the rights
of the State Duma.—Editors of Proletary.) “At the same time
the meeting pointed out that the democratic members of the Duma should bear in
mind that in this struggle there must be a complete break with the existing
government” (the italics are in the original) “and such a break
should not be feared. These decisions of the meeting will, of course, be printed
and circulated.” (The Editors of Proletary have so far obtained neither
this leaflet nor any information about it from Russia.) “In view of the
far-reaching influence of the Osvobozhdentsi, as members of the
Osvobozhdeniye League call themselves, who count among their number
representatives of

    

the most diverse strata of society and who are headed by Zemstvo leaders, their
      election campaign among circles of society closest to them and qualified
      to vote acquires great importance. There is no doubt that a strong nucleus
      of these Osvobozhdentsi will penetrate into the State Duma and
    constitute its Left wing, as soon as the State Duma turns into a body
    genuinely representative of the people. If these radicals succeed in winning
    the candidates of the moderate Zemstvos and the towns over to their side, a
    constituent assembly may eventually be proclaimed.


"The participation of Russian political parties in the elections is thus
apparently a settled matter, for the Union of Unions has also finally declared
itself in favour of participation. Only the Jewish Bund is campaigning against
the Duma elections, and at big meetings held in various cities ... the workers
in general have taken a categorical stand against the State Duma, from
which they are excluded.”


That is how the correspondent of a German bourgeois newspaper writes the history
of the Russian revolution. His reports, probably, contain errors of detail, but
by and large they are undoubtedly close to the truth—of course, so far as
facts, not predictions, are concerned.


What is the real significance of the facts he describes?


The Russian bourgeoisie, as we have pointed out hundreds of times, is acting as
intermediary between the tsar and the people, between the government and the
revolution, in a desire to make use of the latter in order to secure power for
itself in its own class interests. Therefore, until it attains power,
it is bound to strive for “friendship” both with the tsar
and with the revolution. And that is what it is doing. The dignitary Golovin is
sent to strike up a friendship with Durnovo. An anonymous scribbler is sent to
strike up a friendship with the “people”, with the revolution. In
the first case friends met and came to terms. In the second case they hold out
their hands, nod their heads in friendly fashion, promise to be true friends of
the people, friends of liberty, swear to take part in the Duma only for the sake
of the struggle and nothing but the struggle, avow that they will make a
complete and final

    

break with the existing government, and hold out even the prospect of a
constituent assembly being proclaimed. They act the radical, dance attendance on
revolutionaries, and make up to them in order to win the title of friends of the
people and of liberty; they are prepared to promise any thing—on the
off-chance of someone swallowing the bait!


The bait has been swallowed. The new Iskra with Parvus at its head has
done that. Friends have met and begun negotiations about an
agreement. Cherevanin cries out (in Iskra, No. 108): “We must
make the Osvobozhdeniye League members who are entering the Duma give
us a revolutionary pledge.” “We agree, we quite agree,” is the
reply. “We shall proclaim a constituent assembly.” Martov (in the Vienna
Arbeiter Zeitung translated into Russian in Proletary,
No. 15) seconds Cherevanin: “Pressure must be brought to bear so that only
resolute advocates of free and democratic representation are elected.”
“Of course, of course,” the Osvobozhdeniye League replies,
“honest to God, we are most resolute people; we are out for a complete
break with the existing government.” “We must remind them that they are in
duty bound to express the interests of the people,” Parvus, our
Ledru-Rollin[3]

thunders. “They must be forced to express the
interests of the people.”—“Most assuredly,” the
Osvobozhdeniye League replies. “We even have it
recorded in the minutes
that we are true friends of the people, friends of liberty.” “Political
parties must be formed,” Parvus demands. “Done,” the
Osvobozhdeniye League replies. “We are already called the
Constitutional-Democratic Party.” “A clear programme is needed,” Parvus
persists. “Why, of course,” the Osvobozhdeniye League replies,
“we have set forty men to write a programme, and are only too glad to do
it ..." “An agreement on Social-Democratic support for the
Osvobozhdeniye League must be concluded,” all the new-Iskra
crowd wind up in chorus. The Osvobozhdeniye League is moved to
tears. Golovin pays a call on Durnovo to tender his congratulations.


Which of them are the buffoons, and which the dupes? All the mistakes of
Iskra’s tactics in the Duma question have now led up to a natural and
inevitable finale. The disgraceful part played by Iskra in its war
against the idea of an active boycott is now obvious to each and all. There

    

is no doubt now as to who benefited by Iskra’s tactics. The
    idea of an active boycott has been buried by the majority of the monarchist
    bourgeoisie. Iskra’s tactics will inevitably be buried by the
    majority of Russian Social-Democrats.


Parvus let his tongue run away with him to the extent of talking about a formal
agreement with the Osvobozhdeniye League (the “democrats”),
about joint political responsibility binding them and the Social-Democrats, and
about Social-Democratic support for the Osvobozhdeniye League on the
basis of precisely defined conditions and demands— even new-Iskrists will,
probably, repudiate this absurd and disgraceful talk. Parvus, however, has
simply given franker and blunter expression to the idea underlying the
new-Iskra views. The formal support he proposes is merely the
inevitable consequence of the moral support the new Iskra has
all along been giving the monarchist bourgeoisie by condemning an active boycott
of the Duma, by justifying and championing the idea of democrats entering the
Duma, and by playing at parliamentarianism when no parliament whatever
exists. It has been well said: we have no parliament as yet, but we have
parliamentary cretinism galore.


The fundamental error of the new-Iskrists has come to the fore. They have
constantly turned a blind eye to the theory of compromise, the
political theory underlying the Osvobozhdeniye trend, and the truest
and most profound expression of the Russian bourgeoisie’s class stand and class
interests. They have kept harping on only one aspect of the matter—the
conflicts between the bourgeoisie and the autocracy, with complete disregard of
the other aspect— the compromise between the bourgeoisie and the
autocracy, against the people, the proletariat, and the revolution. And yet it
is precisely this second aspect that is coming more and more to the fore
acquiring ever greater and more fundamental importance with each advance of the
Russian revolution, each month of a situation which is so intolerable to
bourgeois adherents of law and order.


The fundamental error of the new-Iskrists led them to a radically incorrect
appraisal of the ways in which Social- Democracy should take advantage of the
conflicts between

    

the bourgeoisie and the autocracy, and the ways of fanning the flames
of these conflicts by our efforts. Yes, it is our absolute duty to fan the
flames of these conflicts at all times, be it without a Duma, or prior to a
Duma, or in the Duma itself, if it ever meets. But the new-Iskrists do not see
where the proper means are to be found. Instead of encouraging the
flames by breaking the windows and allowing fresh air—the workers’
uprisings—to rush in, they sweat at making toy bellows and fanning the
revolutionary zeal of the Osvobozhdeniye people by presenting them with
farcical demands and conditions.


Indeed, it is our duty to support the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a
revolutionary way. But with us this support has always consisted (remember the
attitude of Zarya and the old Iskra towards
Osvobozhdeniye), and, as far as revolutionary Social-Democrats are
concerned, will always consist, first and foremost, in ruthlessly exposing and
branding every false step of this “democratic”—save the mark!
— bourgeoisie. If it is at all possible for us to exert influence on the
democratism of the bourgeoisie, that influence will have effect only when all
acts of treachery, all the bourgeoisie’s errors, its unfulfilled promises and
fine words that are belied by events and deeds, are stigmatised on every
occasion when a bourgeois democrat speaks to workers or politically
conscious peasants. Since this bourgeoisie, which only yesterday was proclaiming
from the house-tops that it would boycott the Duma, has today already basely
retract ed its promises, changed its decisions, redrafted its resolutions, and
come to an agreement with the Durnovos about a legal mode of action, we must
withhold moral support of these liars and lackeys of the autocracy, prevent them
from getting away with broken promises and making new ones to the workers (which
will likewise be cast to the wind the moment the Duma becomes a legislative
instead of a consultative body). No, we must brand them and impress upon the
whole of the proletariat that fresh betrayals on the part of these bourgeois
“democrats”, who reconcile the constitution with Trepov, and
Social-Democracy with Osvobozhdeniye politics, are inescapable and
inevitable. We must demonstrate and prove to all the workers—using the
instance of the bourgeois betrayal of the people on the

    

question of the boycott, as well as other examples—we must demonstrate
      that all these Petrunkeviches and the like are already full-fledged
      Cavaignacs and Thiers.[4]


Let us assume that we shall not cope with the task of frustrating this Duma
before it makes an appearance. Let us assume that the Duma meets. Constitutional
conflicts within it will be inevitable, for the bourgeoisie is certain to aspire
to power. Even then, we must support this aspiration, since the proletariat
also has something to gain from a constitutional system too, because the rule of
the bourgeoisie as a class will clear the ground for our struggle for
socialism. That is all true. But this is just where our radical divergence of
opinion from the new Iskra begins, not ends. This divergence is not on
the question of whether support should be given to bourgeois democrats, but on
the question of the means of giving that support in a revolutionary epoch and of
exerting pressure on them. By justifying their treachery or shutting one’s eyes
to it, by hastening to make deals with them, rushing to play at
parliamentarianism, exacting promises and pledges from them, you achieve only
one thing—they exert pressure on you, not you on them! We have
lived to see the revolution. The time of mere literary pressure is gone; the
time of parliamentary pressure has not yet arrived. It is only an
uprising that can exercise effective, not paltry pressure. When civil
war spreads over the whole country, pressure is exercised by armed force, by
giving battle, and then any other attempt to bring pressure to bear amounts to
hollow and wretched phrase-mongering. Nobody has yet ventured to assert that the
period of insurrection has passed in Russia. And since that is so, any
avoidance of the tasks of a rising, any argument against its necessity, any
“watering-down” of our demands to the bourgeois democrats that they
participate in the uprising, means laying down our arms at the feet of the
bourgeoisie, converting the proletariat into an appendage of the
bourgeoisie. Nowhere in the world has the proletariat as yet ever laid down its
arms when a serious struggle has commenced, nor has it ever yet yielded to the
accursed heritage of oppression and exploitation without measuring swords with
the enemy. Such are now our means and hopes of bringing pressure to bear. No one
can foretell the outcome of the struggle. If

    

the proletariat is victorious—it will be the workers and peas ants who
will make the revolution, and not, the Golovins and Struves. If the proletariat
is defeated—the bourgeoisie will obtain new constitutional rewards for
assisting the autocracy in this struggle. Then and only then a new era will be
inaugurated, a new generation will come forward, European history will repeat
itself, parliamentarianism will for a time become the real touchstone of all
politics.


If you want to exercise pressure now, then prepare for insurrection, preach it,
and organise it. Only an uprising holds out the possibility that the Duma farce
will not be the end of the Russian bourgeois revolution, but the beginning of a
complete democratic upheaval, which will kindle the fire of proletarian
revolutions all over the world. Only an uprising can guarantee that our
“United Landtag” will become the prelude to a constituent assembly
of a non Frankfort type, that the revolution will not end in a mere March 18
(1848), that we shall have not only a July 14 (1789), but also an August 10
(1792). Only an uprising, and not pledges obtained from the
Osvobozhdeniye League members, can be a surety that from the ranks of
the latter there will emerge individual Johann Jacobys,[5]

who,
finally disgusted by the loathsomeness of the Golovin’s cringing and fawning,
will at the last minute march in the ranks of the proletariat and the peasantry
to fight for the revolution.

 

Notes
 

[1]

Foreign papers of September21 (N. S.) reported from St. Peters burg
that the Bureau of the Zemstvo Congress had received many withdrawals from
participation in the September 25 Congress on the ground that its
programme had been considerably curtailed by the government. We cannot
vouch for the accuracy of this information, but even if it is only a
rumour, it undoubtedly confirms our views on the significance of the
negotiations between Golovin and Durnovo.—Lenin
 



[2]

Die Vossische Zeitung—a moderate liberal
newspaper published in Berlin between 1704 and 1934.





[3]

Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre-Auguste
(1807-1874)—French politician, representative of the petty-bourgeois
democrats.





[4]

Cavaignac, Louis-Eugène— French general;
Minister for War in the provisional government following the February revolution
of 1848. During the June days of 1848, he was in charge of the suppression of
the Paris workers’ uprising.


Thiers, Louis-Adolphe— French bourgeois politician and bitter
enemy of the working class. In 1871 he was head of the government and displayed
great brutality in putting down the uprising of the Paris Communards.





[5]

Jacoby, Johann (1805-1877)—German bourgeois democrat,
participant  in the revolution of 1848. Became a Social-Democrat after the
Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Argue About Tactics, But Give Clear Slogans!









Lenin: Argue About Tactics, But Give Clear Slogans!







V. I.  

      Lenin
Argue About Tactics, But Give Clear Slogans!




Published:
Proletary, No. 18, September 26 (13), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 262-264.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The argument about the tactics in respect of the State Duma is becoming more and
more heated. The differences between Iskra and Proletary are
becoming ever deeper, especially since Parvus’s article in Iskra.


Tactics must be debated, but in this the utmost clarity must be striven
for. Questions of tactics are questions of the Party’s political conduct. A line
of conduct can and should be grounded in theory, in historical
references, in an analysis of the entire political situation, etc. But in all
these discussions the party of a class engaged in a struggle should never lose
sight of the need for absolutely clear answers—which do not permit of
a double interpretation—to concrete questions of our political
conduct: “yes” or “no”? Should this or that be done right now, at
the given moment, or should it not be done?


Such clear replies are essential to prevent differences from being exaggerated
or confused, and also to make definitely known to the working class the specific
kind of advice being offered it by this or that group of Social-Democrats at a
given moment.


With a view to introducing complete clarity into our controversy with
Iskra we have drawn up the following list of concrete questions
concerning the political conduct of the Social-Democrats in the present Duma
election campaign. We do not in the least claim that this list is complete, and
would welcome suggestions for amending, changing, or subdividing any of the
questions. It stands to reason that what is said here concerning election
meetings applies to all meetings in general.

    

What is the Advice the Social-Democrats are Giving the Proletariat
with Reference to the State Duma?

1. Should workers endeavour to gain entry to election meetings?

Iskra:Yes

Proletary: Yes



2. Should workers endeavour to gain entry to election meetings even by force?

Iskra: Yes

Proletary: Yes



3. Should we speak at such meetings about the uselessness of the Duma and
   explain all the aims and the entire programme of Social-Democracy?

Iskra: Yes

Proletary: Yes



4. Should the workers and the people as a whole be called upon at such meetings
   to rise up in arms and form a revolutionary army and a provisional
   revolutionary government?

Iskra: ?

Proletary: Yes



5. Should these slogans (point 4) be made the focus of our whole
   “Duma” campaign?

Iskra: No

Proletary: Yes



6. Should Osvobozhdeniye League members (or
“Constitutional-Democrats”) entering the State Duma be
   denounced as bourgeois traitors who are pursuing a policy of
   “compromise” with the tsar?

Iskra: No

Proletary: Yes



7. Should we Social-Democrats tell the people that it would be preferable to
   elect to the State Duma the Petrunkeviches rather than the Stakhoviches,
   etc.?

Iskra: Yes

Proletary: No



8. Should we conclude any agreement whatever with the Osvobozhdeniye
   League on our support of the latter on the basis of certain conditions,
   demands, pledges, etc.?

Iskra: Yes

Proletary: No


 

9. Should we make the slogan of “revolutionary self-government” the
   central point of our agitation?

Iskra: Yes

Proletary: No



10. Should we call upon the people immediately to elect, on the basis of
    universal suffrage, bodies of revolutionary self-government and through
    these a constituent assembly?

Iskra: Yes

Proletary: No



11. Should we elect Social-Democratic election committees? Should we put up
    Social-Democratic candidates for the State Duma?

Iskra: Yes

Proletary: No


 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Playing at Parliamentarianism









Lenin: Playing at Parliamentarianism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Playing at Parliamentarianism




Published:
Proletary, No. 18, September 26 (13), 1905.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 265-280.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We have on repeated occasions (in Proletary, No. 12, before
promulgation of the State Duma Act, and in Nos. 14 to 17 after August
6) enlarged on our tactics with regard to the State Duma, and now we must
consider them anew in their relation to the new views expressed by Parvus
(special reprint from Iskra, No. 110, the article:
“Social-Democracy and the State Duma”).


Let us first follow Parvus’s main arguments step by step. He begins his article
by stating, “We must fight to the last against a packed parliament, that
mixture of baseness and paltriness”, and to this true statement he
immediately adds the following, which is no less true: “We can overthrow
the State Duma ... only by a popular uprising. Likewise, it is only by a popular
uprising that we can force the government to change the election laws and
extend the rights of the Duma.” Excellent. What, it may be asked, should be our
slogans of agitation with regard to the State Duma? What are the main
and particularly important forms of organisation for the struggle
against the mixture of baseness and paltriness? Parvus puts the question in
essentially the same way when he says: “What we, for our part, can
contribute to the preparation of an uprising is agitation and organisation.” And
here is how he answers the first part of this question, about the attitude to
election meetings.


"If we interfere with these meetings,” writes Parvus, “if we disrupt
them, we shall merely be rendering a service to the government.”


So Parvus is opposed to having the workers interfere with the attempts
of a handful of landlords and merchants to limit the subject of
discussion at election meetings to

    

the base and paltry State Duma? He is against workers taking advantage of the
      election meetings in order to criticise the “base” State Duma
      and to expound their Social-Democratic views and their slogans?


So it seems, but, immediately after the sentence quoted, Parvus states something
that is already quite different. “What is not given to the workers
voluntarily,” we read in his article, “they must take by force. They must
show up at assemblies of voters en masse and transform them into
workers’ meetings.” (The italics in the quotations are ours
throughout—Editorial Board of “Proletary”.)
“Instead of discussing whether to elect Ivan Fomich or Foma Ivanich,
they will put political questions on the agenda.” (Parvus probably wanted to say
Social-Democratic questions, for the question of the election of Ivan or Foma is
also a political question.) “At these meetings we can discuss the policy
of the government, the tactics of the liberals, the class struggle, and the
State Duma itself. All this will lead to the masses becoming revolutionised.”


Now see how it all works out in Parvus’s article. On the one hand, we must not
interfere with the meetings of the Trubetskois, Petrunkeviches, and
Stakhoviches. At the end of his article Parvus definitely condemns the idea of a
boycott. On the other hand, we must show up at the meetings

1) by force;

2)
“transform” the meetings of the Petrunkeviches and
Stakhoviches into “workers’ meetings”;

3) instead of
discussing the question for which the meetings have been called (whether to
elect Foma or Ivan?), we must discuss our Social-Democratic questions—the
class struggle, socialism, and, of course, the need for a popular uprising, the
requisites for it, its aims, means and methods, weapons, and its organs, such as
a revolutionary army and a revolutionary government. We say “of
course”, for even though he did not say a word about preaching
insurrection at the election meetings, Parvus himself acknowledged at the outset
that we must fight to the last and that we can attain our immediate objects
only by means of an uprising.


It is obvious that Parvus has got into a tangle. He fights against the idea of a
boycott, does not advise interfering with meetings and disrupting them, and yet
simultaneously, Bide by side with this, he advises breaking into meetings

    

by force (does this not mean “disrupting”?), transforming them
into workers’ meetings (does this not mean “interfering” with the
Petrunkeviches and Stakhoviches?), and discussing not the Duma, but our
own Social-Democratic, revolutionary questions, which the Petrunkeviches do not
want to discuss seriously, but which the workers and class-conscious peasants
are very eager to discuss, and undoubtedly will discuss.


Why has Parvus got into such a tangle? Because he has failed to understand the
point at issue. He set out to fight against the idea of a boycott, imagining
that a boycott means mere abstention, rejection of the idea of utilising
election meetings for the purposes of our agitation. Yet no one, even
in the legal press, let alone the illegal press, advocates such a passive
boycott. Parvus reveals utter ignorance of Russian political problems when he
confuses a passive and an active boycott, when, in discussing the boycott, he
does not devote a single word to an analysis of the second kind of
boycott.


We have more than once spoken of the conventional meaning of the term “an
active boycott”, and stated that there is no need for the workers to
boycott the Duma, since the Duma itself is boycotting them. We, however, clearly
defined the real content of this conventional term from the very outset, as far
back as a month and a half ago, when we wrote in Proletary, No. i2,
prior to the promulgation of the State Duma Act: “As distinct from passive
abstention, an active boycott should imply increasing agitation ten fold,
organising meetings everywhere, taking advantage of election meetings, even if
we have to force our way into them, holding demonstrations, political strikes,
and so on and so forth.” And somewhat further: “‘An active boycott’” (we
give this term in quotation marks as a conventional term) “means
agitation, recruiting, organising the revolutionary forces on a larger scale,
with redoubled energy and bringing triple pressure to bear.”


This is expressed so clearly that only people completely alien to Russian
political problems could fail to under stand it, or people with hopelessly
confused thinking, Konfusionsräthe ("councillors of confusion”),
as the Germans say.

 

Now then, what is it that Parvus really wants? When he advises breaking into
      election meetings by force, transforming them into workers’ meetings,
      discussing Social-Democratic questions and insurrection, “instead
      of discussing whether to elect Ivan Fomich or Foma Ivanich” (note
      “instead of” and not “together with, in addition to”),
      what he is advising is an active boycott. As you see, Parvus met with a
      slight mishap: he was heading for one door, but stumbled through
      another. He declared war on the idea of a boycott, but himself declared
      (on the question of election meetings) in favour of an active boycott,
      i.e., the only kind of boycott that was discussed in the Russian political
      press.


Of course, Parvus may object that conventional terms are not binding on
him. Formally, such an objection would be justified, but it is worthless in
essence. One must surely know what is under discussion. We are not going to
quibble about words, but here we are dealing with political terms which have
already taken root in Russia, on the scene of action—a fait
accompli that must be reckoned with. Any Social-Democratic writer abroad
who took it into his head to ignore slogans which develop on the scene of action
would merely be displaying narrow-minded and sterile literary conceit. We
repeat: no one in Russia ever spoke, and no one ever wrote in the revolutionary
press, of any other boycott but an active one. Parvus might be fully entitled to
criticise the term, reject its conventional meaning, or interpret it
differently, etc., but to ignore it, or to distort the meaning it has already
acquired, means confusing the issue.


We have pointed out above that Parvus says “not together with” but
“instead of”. What Parvus advises is not bringing forward our
Social-Democratic questions and the question of an uprising together with that
of having Foma or Ivan elected, but bringing forward the question of the class
struggle and an uprising instead of the question of elections. This
distinction between “not together with” and “instead of”
is highly significant and calls for attention, the more so that, as is shown by
the further content of his article, it might have entered Parvus’s head to
change the wording and say: not instead of but together with.

 

We must consider two questions:

1) Is it possible to discuss, at election
meetings, the election of Ivan or of Foma “together with” the class
struggle, socialism, and insurrection?

2) If that is possible, should the
former and the latter questions be discussed together, or the latter in place of
the former? Anyone who is familiar with Russian conditions will scarcely be at a
loss in replying to these two questions. Getting into election meetings and
transforming them into workers’ meetings calls for the use of force, i.e.,
crushing the resistance of the police and the military first of all. In the more
or less important workers’ centres (and it is only there that the workers’
Social-Democratic Party can count on leading a really broad, popular movement),
the resistance of the police and the military will be most serious. It would be
plain folly on our part to shut our eyes to this. Parvus himself says that the
“election agitation may at any moment turn into a revolutionary
uprising”. If that is so, then it is our duty to take stock of our forces
and adapt them to this very task of insurrection, and not to the task
of furthering the election of Foma as against Ivan to the State Duma. If that is
so, the main and central slogan of our entire Duma campaign of agitation should
be one calling for an insurrection, a revolutionary army, and a revolutionary
government. If that is so, then it is our duty, before and above all else, to
advocate and explain these very slogans at each and every meeting. Hence, Parvus
once again blows up his own argument in, on the one hand, expecting an uprising
“at any moment”, and, on the other, maintaining complete silence
about propaganda of insurrection and an analysis of its prerequisites, methods,
and organs as the “mainspring” of the Duma campaign.


To proceed. Let us consider another contingency, possible in individual centres,
especially the smaller. Let us assume that attempts to force our way into
meetings do not give rise to a serious struggle against the government, or go so
far as an insurrection. Let us assume that in individual instances these
attempts are crowned with success. In that case, we must in the first place not
lose sight of an institution called martial law. To every partial
victory of the people over the police and the military, the government
retaliates, as is probably known even to Parvus, by proclaiming martial

    

law. Does this prospect frighten us? No, because it is a step that brings the
      uprising nearer and renders the entire struggle in general more
      acute. Does it frighten the Zemstvos and the Duma electors generally? It
      undoubtedly does, for it would facilitate the arrest of the Milyukovs, for
      it provides the government with pretexts for banning some election
      meetings, and perhaps all meetings and the whole Duma to boot!
      Consequently, it all boils down again to the fact that some want an
      uprising, advocate it, make preparations for it, agitate for it, organise
      insurrectionary detachments, etc., whereas others do not want an uprising,
      struggle against the idea of insurrection, condemn the advocacy
      of insurrection as mad and criminal, etc. Is Parvus really
      ignorant of the fact that these “others” are all
      Osvobozhdeniye League members, i.e., even the extreme Left
      wing of the bourgeois democrats who may get into the Duma??


And (this in the second place) if Parvus does know this, then he must also know
the following. Resistance to forcible entry into election meetings and to their
transformation into workers’ meetings will be offered not only (and some times
even not so much) by the police and the military, but by the Zemstvo and
“Osvobozhdeniye” people themselves. Only infants can shut their
eyes to this. The Zemstvo and the Osvobozhdeniye people pose the
question more clearly and directly than some Social-Democrats do: either prepare
an uprising and make it the hub of our agitation and all our work, or go over to
the Duma platform and make it the basis of all political struggle. The Zemstvo
and Osvobozhdeniye people have already solved this question, as we
have often pointed out and emphasised in Proletary, beginning with
No. 12. They call meetings precisely and solely in order to discuss the election
of Foma or Ivan, Petrunkevich or Stakhovich, and to adopt a programme of
“struggle” ("struggle” in quotation marks, struggle while
wearing a lackey’s white gloves) based on the Duma, and not on insurrection. The
Zemstvo and Osvobozhdeniye people (we are linking the two together
purposely, for there are no grounds for drawing any political distinction
between them) will certainly not be averse to admitting revolutionaries and
Social-Democrats to a meeting of theirs (only when and where this can be done
without recourse to any considerable

    

degree of force!!), if they can find among them stupid people who are ready to
promise “support” to Foma as against Ivan, to Petrunkevich as
against Stakhovich. But the Zemstvos will never tolerate any attempts to ’have
their meetings transformed into workers’ meetings, to have
their meetings turned into revolutionary mass meetings, to make open
and direct appeals for armed insurrection from their tribune. It is
even somewhat awkward to go into elaborate explanations of this obvious truth,
but it has to be masticated for the benefit of Parvus and Iskra. The
Zemstvo and Osvobozhdeniye people will inevitably resist such
use being made of their meetings, although these bourgeois hagglers will of
course offer resistance not by force, but by safer, “peaceful”, and
circuitous means. They will enter into no deals with people who promise them
“popular” support for Petrunkevich against Stakhovich, for
Stakhovich against Gringmut, otherwise than on condition that election meetings
are not turned into workers’ meetings, that their platform is not used for a
call to insurrection. If they learn that workers are coming to their meetings
(and they almost always will find this out, since one cannot conceal a mass
demonstration) some of them will straightaway inform the authorities, others
will take to urging the Social-Democrats to refrain, a third group will hasten
to assure the Governor that “they are not to blame”, that they want
a Duma, want to enter the Duma, and that they have always, through their
“faithful colleague” Mr. Struve, condemned the “mad and
criminal” advocacy of insurrection; a fourth group will advise changing
the time and place of the meeting; a fifth group, those who are
“bolder” and shrewder politically, will discreetly say that they
will be delighted to hear the workers, will thank the Social-Democratic
speaker, will scrape and bow to the “people”, will make high-flown,
pretentious, and emotion-charged speeches assuring each and all that they are
always for the people, heart and soul for the people, that they are with the
people and not with the tsar, that “their” Petrunkevich said so a
long time ago, that they “fully agree” with the Social-Democratic
speaker about the “baseness and paltriness” of the State Duma, but
that it is necessary, in the splendid words of that highly esteemed
parliamentarian, Parvus, who so appropriately transplants

    

to non-parliamentary Russia the parliamentary patterns of the Vollmar alliances
      between the Social-Democrats and the Catholics—that it is necessary
      “not to interfere with the election campaign, but rather to extend
      it”; extending it means not senselessly jeopardising the fate of the
      State Duma, but getting the whole people to “support” Foma’s
      election instead of Ivan’s, the election of Petrunkevich and Rodichev
      instead of Stakhovich, Stakhovich instead of Gringmut, and so on.


In a word, the more stupid and the more cowardly the Zemstvos will be, the less
chance will there be of their listening to Parvus at their election meeting. The
more intelligent and bolder the Zemstvo people, the more chance of that will
there be, and also the more chances, that, in his role of supporter of Foma
against Ivan, Parvus will have proved the dupe.


No, my dear Parvus! So long as there is no parliament in Russia, applying the
tactics of parliamentarianism to Russia means so much unbecoming playing at
parliamentarianism, means turning into hangers-on to the landlords, instead of
being leaders of the revolutionary workers and politically conscious
peasants. To enter into secret deals with the Rodichevs and the Petrunkeviches
about support for them against Stakhovich, as a substitute for temporary
agreements between open political parties, which are non-existent in our
country, means sowing corruption in the workers’ midst.


To the direct and clear slogan of the Zemstvo and Osvobozhdeniye
people—down with criminal advocacy of insurrection, let us work in the
Duma and through the Duma—we must reply with our direct and clear
slogan—down with the bourgeois betrayers of liberty, the
Osvobozhdeniye gentry and their like, down with the Duma, and hail the
armed uprising!


To combine the insurrection slogan and “participation” in the
elections of Foma or Ivan means introducing utter confusion, under the pretext
of “comprehensiveness” and “multiformity” of agitation, and
“flexibility” and “responsiveness” of slogans; in
practice such a combination amounts to Manilovism. In practice, Parvus’s and
Martov’s appearance before the Zemstvos in “support” of
Petrunkevich against Stakhovich (admitting the possibility of exceptional

    

cases when such an appearance would be at all feasible) will not be an open
appearance before the mass of the people, but the backstage appearance of a
duped leader of the workers before a handful of betrayers of the workers. From
the standpoint of theory or of the general principles of our tactics, to combine
these slogans now, at the given moment, is a variety of parliamentary
cretinism. For us revolutionary Social-Democrats insurrection is not an absolute
slogan, but a concrete one. We put it off in 1897, in 1902 we put it forward in
the sense of general preparations, and only after January 9, 1905, did we
advance it as a direct appeal. We do not forget that Marx was in favour of an
uprising in 1848, whereas in 1850 he condemned the ravings and phrase mongering
about an uprising[5];

that before the war of
1870-71 Liebknecht denounced participation in the Reichstag, whereas after the
war he participated in it himself. We at once stated in Proletary,
No. 12, that it would be ridiculous to renounce for the future all struggle
based on the Duma. We know that not only a parliament but even a travesty of a
parliament may, when the conditions for an uprising are lacking, become the
focal point of all our agitation for the entire period when an uprising is out
of the question.


However, we demand a clear and precise presentation of the question. If you
think that the period of insurrection is over in Russia—say so, and uphold
your opinion openly. We shall appraise and discuss it thoroughly and calmly,
from every angle, from the standpoint of the concrete conditions. But when you
yourselves talk of the possibility of an uprising “at any moment”
and of its necessity—then we denounce, and shall continue to denounce as
miserable Manilovism, all the various disquisitions against an active boycott of
the Duma. If an uprising is possible and necessary, then that is precisely what
we must make the central slogan of the whole of our campaign around the Duma;
then we must expose the venal soul of a “Frankfort Parliament
windbag” in every Osvobozhdeniye adherent who shuns this slogan
of insurrection. If an uprising is possible and necessary, that means there can
be no legal centre for a legal struggle for the aims of the uprising, nor can
Manilov-like phrase-mongering take its place. If an uprising is possible

    

and necessary, it means that the government “has placed the bayonet as
      the main point on the agenda”, has launched civil war,
    proclaimed martial law as a form of counter-criticism of democratic
    criticism; under such circumstances, to take the
    “near-parliamentary” signboard of the State Duma seriously, to
    begin to play a shady and furtive two some at parliamentarianism with the
    Petrunkeviches, means substituting the political chicanery of clowning
    intellectuals for the policy of the revolutionary proletariat.



Having shown the basic falsity of Parvus’s position, we can deal only briefly
with a few of the most glaring manifestations of this falsity. Parvus writes:
“Before the elections or after the elections, a legal basis for
the existence of political parties is created in connection with the
State Duma.” That is
not true. What is actually being created now is a “legal
basis” for governmental manipulation of elections. That basis is termed:

1) the Rural Superintendent (peasant elections are entirely under his
thumb);

2) the secret police (the arrest of Milyukov);

3) martial law. When a “legal
basis for the existence of political parties” (including the Russian
Social-Democratic Labour Party) is created in fact, and not in the
language of journalists, then we shall have to reconsider the whole question of
insurrection, for to us insurrection is only one of the important means, but
one that is not always obligatory, of clearing the way for the struggle for
socialism.


"It is necessary to come out immediately, not as individual social groups,
not as lawyers, engineers, or Zemstvo members, but as liberal, democratic,
Social-Democratic, parties—officially and openly. The representatives of
the various tendencies could come to an agreement among themselves in this
respect, just as agreements are made between the various parties in a
parliament.”


Yes, this they can do, only not openly but in secret, for if Parvus has
forgotten Trepov, Trepov has not forgotten Parvus. What Parvus terms a
parliamentary agreement (sometimes indispensable to Social-Democrats in a
parliamentary country) is in present-day Russia, in September 1905,
the most contemptible playing at parliamentarianism.

    

The betrayers of the revolution are now making an agreement between the
Osvobozhdeniye supporters and the revolutionaries their prime
objective; the supporters of revolution—an agreement between the
Social-Democrats and all revolutionary democrats, i.e., supporters of an
uprising. If the new Iskra, Parvus, and

      Plekhanov[1]
now enter
into a “parliamentary” agreement with the Osvobozhdeniye
group (about the latter forming a party—see above, the article entitled
“Friends

Meet”[2]

),

we shall publicly declare that these Social-Democrats
have lost all sense of reality and must go by the board. We shall then conclude
an agreement with the revolutionary democrats on the basis of joint agitation
for an uprising, for its preparation, and accomplishment.


We have already shown, in an analysis of the

new-I skra 

resolutions
(Lenin: Two Tactics), that Iskra is descending to the level of
the liberal landlord, whereas Proletary is raising and inspiring the
revolutionary

      peasant.[3]


"Each party should organise its own election committee for the conduct of
the election campaign throughout the country. The parties should agree among
themselves about practical measures for extending freedom of speech, of
assembly, and so forth, during the elections. They should bind themselves by
joint political responsibility” (just listen, fellow-workers!
The new-Iskra group want to bind you to the Petrunkeviches!
Down with the
Petrunkeviches and the new-Iskrists!) “so that if an official
representative of any political party is prosecuted as such by the police or is
condemned in court, the representatives of all the other [!] parties should
declare their solidarity with him and all together organise [!] a popular [??]
protest and, if possible, [mark this!] a popular uprising in his defence.”


Good riddance to you, my dear Parvus! Organise protests and an uprising with the
Petrunkeviches (democrats) and

    

the Stakhoviches (liberals)—our ways have parted. It is with the
      revolutionary democrats that we shall do that. Only, while you
    are about it, change your slogans as well, most esteemed heroes of
    “parliamentary agreement”. Instead of the slogan “an
    uprising is imperative”, just say: “an uprising, if
      possible, will supplement the protests”. Then all the
    Osvobozhdeniye supporters will agree with you! Instead of the
    slogan “universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and secret
    ballot”, advance the following: “If possible, the
    government should guarantee direct, equal, universal and secret
    suffrage”. Good riddance to you, gentle men! We shall patiently wait
    for Parvus, Petrunkevich, Stakhovich, and Martov to “organise a
    popular protest and. if possible, a popular uprising” in defence of
    Milyukov. For in our “near-parliamentary” era it seems to be
    more timely, gentlemen, to defend Mr. Milyukov than the hundreds and
    thousands of workers who are being arrested and beaten up!...


Parvus declares categorically: “We have no chance what ever of getting our
representatives elected to the Duma independently.” Yet he writes: “If,
however, election committees prove unfeasible. we shall still have to bend
every effort to put up our own candidates.” Despite the qualifications demanded
Parvus believes that “in individual cases the possibility of putting up
Social-Democratic candidates is not excluded”. “One or two
Social-Democratic candidates, irrespective of where they may be put up, will
become a political slogan for the whole country.”


Thank you for at least being clear. But then, what stands in your way,
gentlemen? The newspaper Bus long ago put forward its candidates, all
those Stakhoviches, Petrunkeviches, and other betrayers of the revolution who
cool their heels in Mr. Durnovo’s antechamber. Why is Iskra silent? Why
does it not go from words to deeds? Why does it not put forward Axelrod,
Starover, Parvus, and Martov as candidates for the State Duma? Try it,
gentlemen, conduct an experiment, experimentum in corpore

      vili.[4]

Try it, and we shall see at once which of us is right: you who believe
that these candidates will become “a slogan for the whole

    

country”, or we who believe that at the present time these candidates will
only play the role of buffoons.


Parvus writes: “The government has given a handful of people the right to
elect a body which is to manage the affairs of the whole nation. This imposes on
the artificially selected voters the duty of using their exclusive right with
due regard to the opinion of the popular masses and of not being guided by
arbitrary personal” (but by class and party?) “considerations. Our
task is to remind them of this duty, force [!!] them to perform it, and we
must stop at nothing in carrying out this task.”


This reasoning, quite naturally supplemented by the assurance that the tactics
of (active) boycott expresses disbelief in the “revolutionary forces of
the country” (sic!), is fundamentally wrong. It is a typically
bourgeois-sentimentalist presentation of the question that all Social-Democrats
should rise up against. Parvus’s reasoning is bourgeois, for he fails to see the
class essence of the Duma—the agreement between the bourgeoisie and the
autocracy. Parvus’s reasoning is so much empty and sentimental phrase-mongering,
for he is prepared—even if fleetingly—to take seriously
the false words of the
Osvobozhdeniye adherents that they desire to “act with due regard
to the opinion of the popular masses”. The esteemed Parvus is some three
years behind the times. When the liberals had no press and no illegal
organisation, whereas we possessed both, we helped them in their political
development. History will not fail to record this service among the deeds of the
Social-Democratic movement. But from political sucklings the liberals have now
become the chief political wirepullers and have shown their treachery to the
revolution in deed. To lay the main stress at the present time not on
the need to expose the treachery of the bourgeois compromisers”, but to
remind them of their “duty” to manage the affairs (not of the
bourgeoisie, but) of the whole people, means toadying to the
Osvobozhdeniye League! It is only they who can seriously seek an
expression of “the revolutionary forces of the country” in the State
Duma. The Social-Democrats know that the best we can achieve now is
the neutralisation, the paralysing of the bourgeoisie’s efforts at treachery. The
Zemstvo and the Osvobozhdeniye people are not “a revolutionary
force of the country”, and you should feel

    

ashamed to be ignorant of that, Comrade Parvus. The proletariat and the
      peasantry, which is fighting against the landlords, are now the only
      revolutionary force in the democratic revolution.


The formulation of the conditions of proletarian support for the
Osvobozhdeniye League is the gem of gems in Parvus’s remarkable
article. “It is necessary,” writes Parvus, “to impose definite
political demands on the opposition candidates who wish to avail themselves of
our support.” “These might, for instance, be: 1) the demand in the Duma
itself that it be immediately dissolved.and a constituent assembly convened,
elected on the basis of universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot;
2) the denial of all military and financial credits to the government until this
demand is fulfilled.” (A poor Russian translation from the German, but the
meaning is clear.)


One downward step is followed by another. One misstep on to an inclined plane,
and the fall becomes headlong. Our supermen like Parvus and Plekhanov, who hold
themselves aloof from both sections of the Party, loftily ignore those very
new-Iskra resolutions for which they are morally and politically
responsible. These supermen imagine themselves superior to both the
“Majority” and the “Minority”; in actual fact they are
inferior to both, since to all the shortcomings in the Majority they
have been able to add the shortcomings in the Minority, as well as all the
shortcomings of the turncoat.


Take Parvus. He has always gone hand in glove with Iskra, even when the
plan of the Zemstvo campaign and of January 9 opened his eyes, though not for
long, to its opportunist stand. Nevertheless, Parvus wanted to be considered a
“conciliator”—most likely because of the fact that when, after
January 9, he began to advance the slogan calling for a provisional government,
the Bolsheviks were obliged to correct him and point out that his slogans
contained elements of phrase-mongering. “No tsar, but a workers’
government !" Parvus vociferated under the impression of January
9. “Without the people, but with a liberal Duma!” is what his present
“tactics” amount to after August 6. No, comrade, we shall not base
our tactics on fleeting impulses, bowing to the exigencies of the moment!


Parvus has now concocted “new” conditions for the liberals.

    

Poor new-Iskrists, how exhausted they must feel after concocting
“conditions” for an agreement with the Osvobozhdeniye
League! At the Second Congress, Starover (see his resolution, which was
rejected by the Third Congress) concocted one set of conditions, which
immediately fell through, for neither in the plan of the Zemstvo campaign, nor
now have these conditions been advanced in full by any of the new Iskrists who
wrote about an “agreement” with the Osvobozhdeniye
League. The new-Iskra Conference advanced other and stricter conditions
in the resolution on the attitude to the liberals. Parvus of the Iskra
bears moral responsibility for this resolution—but what do literary
supermen care for mere resolutions drawn up with the participation of
responsible representatives of the proletariat! Supermen snap their fingers at
Party resolutions!


The new-Iskra resolution on the attitude to opposition parties
states in black and white that the Social-Democrats “demand of all enemies
of tsarism”:


"1) Active and unequivocal support of all determined action by the
organised proletariat directed towards dealing fresh blows at tsarism.”


In proposing an “agreement” with the Osvobozhdeniye League
and promising them “support”, Parvus demands nothing of the kind.


"2) Open recognition and unqualified support of the demand for a popular
constituent assembly elected on the basis of universal, etc., suffrage, and
open action against all parties and groups that are trying to curtail the rights
of the people, whether it be by limiting suffrage or by accepting the grant
of a monarchist constitution in lieu of a constituent assembly.”


Parvus repudiates the whole of the second part of these conditions. He even
completely disregards the question of whom the Osvobozhdeniye League
members in the Duma should “demand the convocation” of a constituent
assembly from. From the tsar, no doubt? But why shouldn’t you convoke it
yourselves, esteemed heroes of “parliamentary agreement”? Or are you no
longer opposed to having it “granted” by the tsar?


"3) Resolute support of the working-class struggle against the government
and the magnates of capital, for the right to strike and the right of
association.”

 

Parvus exempts the Osvobozhdeniye League from this
    “condition”, evidently on the occasion of the Duma ’s
    convocation and the injuriousness of the tactic—“the worse,
    the better” (although in the same breath Parvus mockingly
    assures the reader that it would be worse if the Duma had
    legislative rights, i.e., that the one step towards something
    better, the one the Osvobozhdeniye League is striving
    for, is a step for the worse!!).


"4) Open resistance to all attempts by the government and the feudal
nobility to suppress the peasant revolutionary movement by measures of barbarous
violence against the persons and property of the peasants.”


Why have you forgotten this condition, my good Parvus? Can it be that you are no
longer prepared to put this excellent demand to Petrunkevich? Stakhovich?
Rodichev? Milyukov? Struve?


"5) Refusal to support any measures intended to preserve, in a free Russia,
any restrictions of the rights of individual nationalities and any traces of
national oppression.”


And


"6) Active participation in helping the people to arm them selves for the
fight against reaction, and support for the Social-Democrats’ endeavours to
organise an armed mass struggle.”


Why, my dear Parvus, have you forgotten these conditions?

 

Notes
 

[1]

We mention Plekhanov because he has stated in print that
Iskra’s tactic is better than Proletary’s. True,
Plekhanov makes no mention of the new-“Iskra” resolutions and
those of the Third Congress; however, dodges and evasions on the part of a
Social-Democratic writer are a circumstance that enhances rather than
extenuates the blame attaching to him.—Lenin

[2]

See pp. 254-55 of this volume—Ed.

[3]

See p. 47 of this volume.—Ed.

[4]

An experiment on a vile body.—Ed.
 



[5]

The reference is to the following works: K. Marx and F. Engels, Revue, Mai
bis October, 1850; K. Marx, Enthüllungen über den
Kommunistenprozess
zu Köln (see K. Marx and F. Engels, Werke, Berlin 1960, Band 7,
S. 440-41 and Band 8, S. 412-13).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Liberal Unions and Social-Democracy









Lenin: The Liberal Unions and Social-Democracy







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Liberal Unions and Social-Democracy[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 18, September 26 (13), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 281-282.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Of what importance are the “trade unions” of intellectuals to the
proletariat, and should we Social-Democrats join them so as to fight against any
beclouding of the workers’ class-consciousness?


The “trade” unions of intellectuals and the Union of Unions are
political organisations. In fact, they are liberal unions. These unions
constitute, on the whole, the nucleus of the so-called
Constitutional-Democratic, i.e., bourgeois-liberal, Party. A most important duty
now falls to us: to exert every effort to instil a party spirit into
the proletariat, to weld its vanguard into a genuine political party
absolutely independent of all other parties, and absolutely its own
master. It is therefore incumbent upon us to exercise extreme caution in taking
any step likely to cause confusion in clear-cut and definite Party
relations. The entire liberal bourgeoisie is now doing its very utmost to
prevent the formation of a fully independent class party of the proletariat in
order to “unite” and “merge” the entire
“liberation” movement in a single stream of democratism with the
purpose of concealing the bourgeois nature of that democratism.


Under these circumstances it would be a great mistake for members of the
Social-Democratic Party to enter the liberal unions. It would place them in the
extremely false position of being members of two different and mutually hostile
parties. One cannot serve two gods. One cannot belong to two parties. Owing to
the absence of political liberty in our country, and in the gloom of the
autocratic regime, it is very easy to confuse the parties; the interests of the
bourgeoisie demand such confusion. The interests of the proletariat
demand a definite and clear demarcation of the parties. At present it is

    

impossible to obtain genuine and not merely verbal guarantees that groups of
      Social-Democrats joining intellectualist “trade” unions would
      preserve complete independence, remain members of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party alone and of no other party, who would
      account for their every step to their party organisation. The
    chances are a hundred to one that these members would not be able to
    preserve their independence, that they would be obliged to resort to shifts,
    which are useless from the standpoint of results, and injurious as serving
    to corrupt the still young party spirit of the workers.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The Liberal Unions and Social-Democracy—an
insert written by Lenin to an article by V. V. Vorovsky, which was published
under the same title in Proletary, No. 18, September 26 (13), 1905.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## From the Defensive to the Offensive









Lenin: From the Defensive to the Offensive







V. I.  

      Lenin
From the Defensive to the Offensive




Published:
Proletary, No. 15, September 26 (13), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 283-285.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The special correspondent of Le Temps, a highly reputable conservative
paper, wired the following to that paper from St. Petersburg on September 21
(8):



"The night before last a group of 70 persons attacked the Riga Central
Prison, cut the telephone wires and, using rope ladders, made their way into the
prison yard, where after a stiff engagement two prison warders were killed and
three seriously wounded. The demonstrators then freed two political prisoners
who were to be court martialled and expected to be sentenced to death. During
the pursuit of the demonstrators, who managed to escape, except for two who were
arrested, one policeman was killed and several others wounded."



And so matters are moving ahead! Despite the incredible and utterly
indescribable difficulties, headway is being made in the matter of getting
armed. Individual terrorism, bred of intellectualist impotence, is gradually
becoming a thing of the past. Instead of spending tens of thousands of rubles
and a vast amount of revolutionary energy on the assassination of some
Sergei[1]

(who probably did more to make Moscow revolutionary-minded than
many revolutionaries), on assassinations “in the name of the
people”—military operations together with the people are now
commencing. It is by engaging in such operations that the pioneers of armed
struggle become fused with the masses not merely in word but in deed, assume
leadership of the combat squads and contingents of the proletariat, train in the
crucible of civil war dozens of popular leaders who, tomorrow, on the
day of the workers’ uprising, will be able to help with their experience and
their heroic courage thousands and tens of thousands of workers.


Hail the heroes of the Riga revolutionary contingent!
May their success serve as encouragement and example to

    

Social-Democratic workers throughout Russia. Long live the pioneers of the
      people’s revolutionary army!


See how successful the venture of the Riga revolutionaries was even from a
purely military standpoint. The enemy losses are three killed and probably five
to ten wounded. Our loss is only two men, who were probably wounded and thus
taken prisoner by the enemy. Our trophies are two revolutionary leaders rescued
from prison. This is indeed a brilliant victory!! It is a real victory, scored
in a battle against an enemy armed to the teeth. It is no longer a plot against
some detested individual, no act of vengeance or desperation, no mere
“intimidation”—no, it was a well thought-out and prepared
commencement of operations by a contingent of the revolutionary army, planned
with due regard for the correlation of forces. The number of such contingents
of 25 to 75 men each can be increased to several dozen in every big city, and
frequently in the suburbs of a big city. Workers will join them in hundreds; it
is only necessary to begin extensive propaganda of this idea immediately, form
such contingents, supply them with all sorts of weapons, ranging from knives and
revolvers to bombs, and give these contingents military training and education.


Fortunately, the time has passed when revolution was “made” by
individual revolutionary terrorists, because the people were not
revolutionary. The bomb has ceased to be the weapon of the solitary “bomb
thrower”, and is becoming an essential weapon of the people. With
the improvements in military materiel the technique of street fighting
is also changing, and necessarily so. At present time we are all (and very
wisely so) making a study of how to put up barricades and defend them. Though
this old work is useful, we must not overlook the newest developments in
military weapons. The progress made in the use of explosives has resulted in a
number of innovations in gunnery. The Japanese proved stronger than the Russians
partly because they were able to make much better use of explosives. Extensive
use of high explosives was one of the characteristic features of the recent
war. And the Japanese, now recognised throughout the world as experts in
military matters, have now adopted the hand bomb, which they used with
such telling effect against Port Arthur. Let us learn from the Japanese! Let us
not lose heart

    

because of the grave set-backs that have attended attempts to transport large
quantities of arms. No failures can sap the energy of those who feel and
actually see how intimately they are bound up with the revolutionary class, and
realise that truly the whole people has now risen in defence of their immediate
objectives. Bombs can be manufactured anywhere and everywhere. They are now
being produced in Russia on a far larger scale than any of us know (and every
member of the Social-Democratic organisation undoubtedly knows of more than one
instance of such workshops being set up). They are manufactured on an
incomparably larger scale than is known to the police (and the latter
undoubtedly know more than the revolutionaries in each separate
organisation). No force will be able to stand up to contingents of a
revolutionary army armed with bombs, contingents that one fine night will launch
simultaneously several such attacks as the one in Riga, and will be
backed—and this is the last and most important condition—by the
rising of hundreds of thousands of workers who have not forgotten the
“peaceful” 9th of January, and who long for an armed
January 9.


Matters in Russia are obviously heading towards that. Consider reports in the
legal newspapers about bombs being found in the baggage of peaceful steamer
passengers. Read about the hundreds of attacks on the police and the
military, about the scores killed on the spot and the scores seriously
injured during the last two months. Even correspondents of the treacherous
bourgeois Osvobozhdeniye, which is so busy condemning the
“mad” and “criminal” advocacy of insurrection, admit
that never before have tragic events been so imminent as they are now.


To work, comrades! Let each stand at his post! Let every workers’ circle bear in
mind that any day events may require that it take a leading part in the final
and decisive battle.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Sergei—the Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich
Romanov, the tsar’s uncle, Governor General of Moscow and one of the most
reactionary representatives of the tsarist autocracy. Assassinated by the
Socialist-Revolutionary Kalyaev on February 4 (17),
 1905.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the Current Moment









Lenin: On the Current Moment







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Current Moment




Published:
Proletary, No. 18, September 26 (13), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 286-287.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The determined stand taken by the Smolensk Municipal Council has been held up by
Proletary, in issue No.

 15,[1]

as an instance of what might be called
“revolutionary self-government” (which Iskra confuses with
the slogan of a popular uprising). The Council declared the billeting of the
Cossacks contrary to law, stopped all payments to them, organised a city
militia to protect the population, and appealed to the soldiers to refrain from
violence against citizens.


To illustrate the workings of the same idea and to characterise the moment we
are living through, we shall quote from l’Humanité a
resolution passed
by the Kerch Municipal Council in connection with the recent pogrom in that
city.


The Council decreed: 1) that sympathy be expressed to the Jewish inhabitants on
the casualties (killed and injured) and the material losses incurred; 2) that
two scholarships be established at the local Gymnasium in memory of pupils
killed during the disturbances; 3) inasmuch as the local authorities proved
incapable and little disposed to protect the lives and property of the
population, that payments for the upkeep of the police be discontinued from
local funds; 4) that a sum of 1,500 rubles be distributed among the poorer Jews
who had suffered most during the disturbances; 5) that the harbour-master be
commended as the only local official who had energetically and humanely
prevented the further spread of the mass manhandling; 6) that the Minister for
the Interior be informed of the authorities’ unlawful behaviour during the
disturbances, and a Senate investigation be demanded.

 

In the measure that the Kerch Municipal Council has, of its own free will,
extended the scope of the powers it is entitled to by law, and in the measure
that it is participating in the revolutionary life of the whole country, it is
embarking upon really “revolutionary self-government”. But where are
the guarantees that that self-government will turn into one by the
people? And should we Social-Democrats emphasise this “piece of
revolution” as the main slogan of agitation, or speak of a complete and
decisive victory of the revolution, which is impossible without an uprising?

 

Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 221-22 of this volume.—Ed.
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## From the Editorial Board of the Central Organ of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party









Lenin: From the Editorial Board of the Central Organ of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
From the Editorial Board of the Central Organ of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party




Published:
Rabochy,[1] No. 2, September 1905.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 288-289.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Comrades,


We wish to draw your attention to one of the methods of co-operation between the
Central Organ and the press of the various localities, in the matter of
agitation. The Central Organ is very often accused of being out of touch with
the movement, being couched in unpopular language, etc., etc. There is of course
some truth in these reproaches, and we are fully aware that our work, which is
conducted from afar, is inadequate in such an eventful period. However, our
isolation is in part due to the infrequent and irregular communications
between the Central Organ and the masses of local Social-Democrats, and
to insufficient co-operation between the two. We quite agree that we are not
helping you sufficiently, but then, neither are you giving as enough help. We
now want to draw your attention in a comradely way to the elimination of
one of these shortcomings.


The comrades on the spot do not make sufficient use of the Central Organ for
purposes of agitation. The Central Organ arrives late, and the number of copies
received is small. It is therefore necessary more frequently:

1) to have articles and items reprinted in local bulletins;

2) more often to adapt or
paraphrase in more popular language the slogans (and articles) of the Central
Organ, in local bulletins, in doing which you may complement, alter, abridge
them, etc., since you, who are on the spot, can see what is best, and all Party
publications belong to the Party as a whole;

3) to quote the Central
Organ in local bulletins more often, so as

    

to familiarise the masses with the title of the Central Organ, with the
idea of having their own permanent paper, the idea of having their own
ideological centre, of always being able to turn to it, etc., etc. You should on
all occasions endeavour to indicate in your bulletins that the very same idea
was pro pounded in such and such an article in Proletary, or that news
to the same effect is contained in such and such of the letters it has
published, etc., etc. This is most important for the purpose of familiarising
the masses with our Central Organ, and widening our entire sphere of
influence.


The local committees have often republished articles, selecting whatever
appealed to them most. What is particularly important now is to have uniform
slogans (on the attitude towards the liberals, the Osvobozhdeniye
League, their “theory of agreement”, their draft constitution, etc.;
on the question of a revolutionary army and the programme of a revolutionary
government; on the boycott of the State Duma, etc., etc.). You should try to
make every possible use of the Central Organ in your local agitation, not only
by republishing but also by

paraphrasing

its ideas and
slogans in your bulletins, developing or amending them to conform with
the local conditions, etc. This is extremely important for establishing actual
co-operation between us, for exchanging opinions, correcting our slogans and
acquainting the masses of the workers with the fact that we have a
permanent Central Organ of the Party.


We earnestly request that this letter be read and discussed in absolutely all
organisations and study circles of the Party, down to the very lowest.


The Editorial Board of “Proletary”

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Rabochy (The Worker)—an illegal and popular
Social-Democratic newspaper, which was published in Moscow by the R.S.D.L.P.’s

   

Central Committee in 1906 by decision of the Party’s Third Congress. Four
issues came out between August and October.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Jena Congress of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party









Lenin: The Jena Congress of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Jena Congress of the German Social-Democratic Workers’ Party




Written: Written in September 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1924 in the magazine Pod Znamenem Marxizma (Under the Banner of Marxism), No. 2.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 290-294.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Congresses of the German Social-Democrats have long become events whose
importance goes far beyond the con fines of the German labour movement. The
German Social-Democratic movement ranks first in respect of organisation,
integrality and coherence, and the extent and rich content of its Marxist
literature. It is natural that under such circumstances resolutions of
the German Social-Democratic congresses also frequently acquire almost
international significance. Such was the case with the question of the latest
opportunist tendencies in socialism (Bernsteinism). The decision of the Dresden
Social-Democratic Congress, which confirmed the old and tested tactics of
revolutionary Social-Democracy, was adopted by the Amsterdam International
Socialist Congress, and has now become the common decision of the whole
class-conscious proletariat throughout the world. Such is now the case too. The
question of a mass political strike—the main question at the Jena
Congress—is agitating the entire international Social-Democratic
movement. It has been brought to the fore lately by events in a number of
countries, including Russia, and even perhaps Russia in particular. The German
Social-Democrats’ decision will undoubtedly exercise considerable influence on
the entire international labour movement by giving support and strength to the
revolutionary spirit of militant workers.


However, let us first take brief note of the other and less important questions
discussed and decided by the Jena Congress. First of all, it considered the
question of Party organisation. We shall not of course dwell here on the details

    

of the revision of the German Party Rules. It is important that the highly
characteristic basic feature of this revision should be stressed, i.e., the
tendency towards further, more comprehensive and stricter application of the
principle of centralism, the establishment of a stronger
organisation. This tendency found expression, first, in the inclusion
in the Rules of a direct provision to the effect that every Social-Democrat is
obliged to belong to a Party organisation, with the exception of cases when this
is precluded by very serious reasons. Secondly, it found expression in the
institution of a system of Social-Democratic local branches instead of the
system of delegates, the replacement of the principle of one-man authority and
confidence in an individual, by the principle of collective, organisational
links. Thirdly, it expressed itself in a decision to the effect that all Party
organisations must contribute 25 per cent of their revenue to the Party’s
central treasury.


On the whole, this obviously shows that the growth of the Social-Democratic
movement and of its revolutionary spirit necessarily and inevitably leads to the
more consistent establishment of centralism. In this respect the development of
the German Social-Democratic movement is highly instructive to us Russians. Not
so long ago organisational questions occupied a disproportionate place among
current problems of Party life, and to some extent this holds true of the
present as well. Since the Third Congress two organisational tendencies in the
Party have become fully defined. One is towards consistent centralism and
consistent extension of the democratic principle in Party organisations, not for
the sake of demagogy, or because it sounds good, but in order to put this into
effect as Social-Democracy’s free field of activity extends in Russia. The other
tendency is towards diffusiveness of organisation, “vagueness of
organisation”, whose injuriousness is now understood even by Plekhanov,
who defended it for such a long time (let us hope that events will soon force
him to understand likewise the connection between this vagueness of organisation
and vagueness of tactics).


Recall the disputes about Clause 1 of our Rules. The Conference of the
new-Iskrists, who had been previously fervently defending the “idea”
underlying their mistaken formulation

    

of this clause, now simply discarded all the clause and the idea as a whole. The
      Third Congress confirmed the principle of centralism and
    organisational ties. The new-Iskrists immediately attempted to put
    on a basis of general principles the question whether every Party member
    must belong to an organisation. We now see that the
    Germans—opportunists and revolutionaries alike— do not even
    question the legitimacy of such a requirement as a matter of
    principle. When they brought this requirement (that every Party
    member must belong to a Party organisation) straight into their Rules, they
    explained the need of exceptions to this rule, not by
    considerations of principle but by the absence of sufficient
      freedom in Germany! Vollmar, who at Jena delivered the report on the
    organisational question, justified toleration of exceptions to the rule on
    the ground that it would be impossible for such people (petty officials) to
    belong to the Social-Democratic Party openly. It goes without
    saying that the situation in Russia is different: since there is no freedom
    all organisations are equally secret. Under conditions of revolutionary
    freedom it is particularly important that parties be quite distinct from
    each other, and that no “diffusiveness” be permitted in this
    respect. However the principle of the desirability of stronger
    organisational ties remains unshaken.


As regards the delegate system, which the German Social-Democrats have now
discarded, its existence was due entirely to the Exceptional Law Against the
Socialists. The farther this law receded into the past, the more natural and
inevitable became the transition to a Party system based on direct links between
organisations, instead of on links through delegates.


Another question that came up for discussion at Jena prior to the question of
political strike is also highly instructive for Russia. This was the question of
the May Day celebrations, or, to be more exact (to take the gist of the matter
and not the item that gave rise to the discussion), the question of the relation
of the trade union movement to the Social-Democratic Party. Proletary
has spoken several times about the profound impression made on German
Social-Democrats, and not only on them alone, by the Cologne Trade
Union Congress.[1]

It became more than evident at this Congress that
even in Germany, where the traditions of Marxism

    

and its influence are strongest, anti-socialist tendencies, tendencies
towards “pure trade-unionism” of the British, i.e., absolutely
bourgeois type, are developing in the trade unions—mark you,
Social-Democratic trade unions. That is why from the question of a May
Day demonstration in its literal sense, there inevitably arose at the Jena
Congress the question of trade-unionism and Social-Democracy, the question of
Economism, to speak in terms of trends within the Russian Social-Democratic
movement.


Fischer, who delivered the report on the question of May Day, frankly stated
that it would be a bad mistake to ignore the fact that in the trade unions the
socialist spirit is disappearing now here, now there. Things had gone so far
that, for instance, Bringmann, representative of the carpenters’ union, had
uttered and published statements like the following:

“The strike on May Day is like a foreign body in the human body.” “In
the given circumstances the trade unions are the sole means for improving the
condition of the workers”, etc. And these “symptoms of
disease”, as Fischer aptly termed them, are being supplemented by a number
of others. In Germany, as in Russia and indeed everywhere, a narrow
trade-unionism, or Economism, is linking up with opportunism (revisionism). The
newspaper published by this same carpenters’ union wrote about the crumbling
foundations of scientific socialism, the erroneousness of the theory of crises,
the theory of collapse, etc. The revisionist Calwer did not call on the workers
to show discontent or increase their demands, but to be modest, etc.,
etc. Liebknecht met with approval from the Congress when he spoke against the
idea of the trade unions’ “neutrality”, and remarked that
“Bebel, it is true, also spoke in favour of neutrality, but, in my
opinion, this is one of the few points on which Bebel does not have the hacking
of the majority of the Party”.


Bebel himself denied that he had advised the trade unions to be neutral with
regard to the Social-Democratic movement. Bebel fully recognised the danger of
narrow trade-unionism. He went on to say that he knew even worse examples of
this craft union apathy: young trade union leaders go so far as to jeer at the
Party in general, at socialism in general, at the theory of the class
struggle. These statements of Bebel’s evoked general indignation at the
Social-Democratic Congress.

    

There was loud applause when he resolutely declared: “Comrades, be on
your guard, think of what you are doing; you are travelling a fatal path,
      which in the end will lead to your doom.”


It thus stands to the credit of the German Social-Democratic movement that it
faced the danger squarely. It did not gloss over the extremes of Economism, or
invent lame excuses and subterfuges (such as were so abundantly invented by our
Plekhanov, for instance, after the Second Congress). No, it bluntly named the
disease, resolutely condemned the injurious tendencies, and straightforwardly
and openly called on all Party members to combat them. This is instructive to
Russian Social-Democrats, some of whom have earned the praise of Mr. Struve for
having begun to “see the light” on the question of the trade union
movement.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The Cologne Congress of German Trade Unions took place in May
 1905.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## No Falsehood! Our Strength Lies in Stating the Truth!









Lenin: No Falsehood! Our Strength Lies in Stating the Truth!







V. I.  

      Lenin
No Falsehood! Our Strength Lies in Stating the Truth!




Written: Written in September 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1926 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 295-299.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

Letter to the Editorial Board[3]

"We are not strong enough to launch an uprising ... there fore there is no
point in linking it up with the Duma ... a constituent assembly should be the
battle-cry of our agitation.” That is what the Bund wrote, and no adequate
reply was provided by the author of the article in No.

 16.[1]


These words of the Bund’s are an excellent reflection of philistinism
within the Social-Democratic movement, philistinism in the sense of banality,
the golden mean, insipidity, generalities, mediocrity (qualities that have
always been characteristic of the Bund, which, as is known, played the part of
an ideological parasite in 1897-1900, in 1901-03, in 1904, and now in 1905).


That is the current view, the commonly accepted stand point, “common
sense” (“the triumph of common sense” in

Osvobozhdeniye

and “seeing the light”).


This is a tremendous falsehood, the exposure of which is of the utmost
import to the Russian revolution and to the class-conscious proletariat, as the
only possible creator of a victorious revolution.


We are not strong enough to launch an uprising; therefore we should not
link it up with anything; therefore the slogan must not call for an
armed uprising, but for a constituent assembly.


It is just like saying: “Naked and unfortunate, hungry and tormented, we
are unable to emerge from the swamp in which

    

we are perishing, and ascend to the mountain top where there is light and
      sunshine, clean air and all the fruits of the earth. We have no ladder,
      and without it we cannot ascend. We are unable to acquire a
      ladder. Therefore we should not link up our struggle for an ascent with
      the slogan of obtaining (respective, making) a ladder. Therefore
    our slogan should be ’To the mountain top, to the mountain top: there
    happiness and deliverance, air and light, new spirit and vigour
await us’.”


Since there is no ladder, without which an ascent is
impossible—therefore you should not make the acquisition of a
ladder your
slogan, and work on making one—therefore the slogan should be: “Get
to the summit; to the mountain top, there happiness, etc., await you!”


“As ever, weakness had taken refuge in a belief in miracles,” as
Marx said![4]


Is it the weakness of the proletariat, or the weak thinking of the Bund
and the new Iskra that is now taking refuge in a belief in miracles, in
the belief that the mountain can be scaled without a ladder, in the belief that
a constituent assembly is possible without an uprising?


Such belief is that of the insane. Without an armed uprising a constituent
assembly is a phantasm, a phrase, a lie, a Frankfort talking shop.


The deceit and falsity of the Osvobozhdeniye trend, of that first
bourgeois
slogan

in Russia to assume a broadly political, mass-political,
popular form, consist in that very support of a belief in miracles, in the
support of that lie. For the liberal bourgeoisie needs the lie, since to it that
is no lie, but the greatest of truths, the truth of its class interests, the
truth of bourgeois liberty, the truth of capitalist equality, the holy of holies
of the huckster fraternity.


This is its (the bourgeoisie’s) truth, for what It needs Is not the victory of
the people, or the mountain top but a swamp for the masses; it wants
the bosses and money-bags to be seated on the backs of the common people; it
needs not a victory, but a deal, a compromise with the enemy=a sell-out
to the enemy.


For the bourgeoisie this is no miracle”, but reality, the reality of
treason to the revolution, not of the victory of the revolution.

 

“...We are not strong enough to acquire a ladder ... we are not strong enough to
launch an uprising.” Is that the case, gentlemen?


If that is the case, then recast all your propaganda and
agitation, begin to speak to the workers and the entire people in new
and different words, in language framed in a new and different way.


Tell the people: workers of St. Petersburg, Riga, Warsaw, Odessa, Tiflis ... we
are not strong enough to launch a rising and be victorious in a
rising. Therefore there is no point in thinking, no point in vain
talking about a popular constituent assembly. Don’t debase grand
words with petty subterfuges. Don’t cover up your weakness with a belief in
miracles. Proclaim your weakness aloud to one and all—a fault confessed
is half redressed. False rhetoric and false boastfulness spell moral ruin and
lead unfailingly to political extinction.


Workers! We are too weak to bring about an uprising and win victory in one!
Therefore stop all talk about a popular constituent assembly, drive
away those liars who speak about it, expose the treachery of the
Osvobozhdeniye gentry, the “Duma enthusiasts”, the
Constitutional-Democrats, and the rest of the vile crew, for it is
only

in
word

that they want a popular constituent assembly; actually they want
an assembly directed against the people, one that will not constitute
anything new, but will merely patch up the old, one that will not give you new
garments, a new life, a new weapon for the great new struggle, but will give you
only tinsel over your old rags, only mirages and deceptions, popguns instead of
rifles and chains instead of weapons.


Workers! We are too weak for an uprising. Therefore, do not talk and do not let
the Osvobozhdeniye prostitutes, the Constitutional-Democrats,
and Duma supporters talk of a

revolution;

do not allow those
bourgeois scoundrels to sully a great popular concept with their claptrap.


We are weak? That means that we have no revolution, nor can there be
one. That is not a revolution of the people, but swindling of the people by
the Petrunkeviches and a pack of liberal lackeys of the tsar. That is not a
struggle for liberty, but a bartering away of the people’s freedom in exchange
for parliamentary seats for the Osvobozhdeniye
    

League. That is not the beginning of a new life, but perpetuation of the old
      starvation and drudgery, the old stagnancy, and putrefaction.


We are not strong enough to bring about an uprising, fellow-workers! We are not
strong enough to rouse the people to the pitch of revolution! We are not strong
enough to attain freedom.... We have only enough strength to jostle the enemy,
but not to overthrow him, to jostle him in such a way that Petrunkevich will be
able to take a seat beside him. Hence, away with all talk about revolution,
liberty, and popular representation; whoever talks of these things without
actually working at the ladder needed to attain to these things, at the
uprising needed to win them, is a liar and a humbug, who is merely deceiving
you.


We are weak, fellow-workers! We are backed only by the proletariat, and by the
millions of peasants who have started a scattered and unarmed struggle in their
blind and ignorant way.


Against us are the entire Court clique and all the workers and peasants clad in
soldiers’ uniform

 and[2]



To sum up. We are weak. Weakness seeks salvation in a belief in miracles. That
is a fact which emerges from the Bund’s statements, from Iskra’s plan.


But what is the fact, gentlemen? Is it the weakness of the forces of the
proletariat of all Russia or the weak thinking of the Bundists and the
new-Iskrists?


Speak the truth:


1) There is no revolution. There is only a deal between the liberal bourgeoisie
   and the tsar....


2) There is no struggle for liberty. There is only the bartering away of the
   people’s freedom.


3) There is no struggle for popular representation. There is only representation
   for the money-bag.


We are weak ... from this inevitably follows all treachery to the

revolution.



If you want a revolution, freedom, popular representation ...

you
must
be
strong.


 

You are weak?

      
Revolution is for the strong!

      
Our lot is to remain in rags.


You are weak?

      
Only the strong win freedom.

      
The weak will always remain slaves. The experience of all
history.


You are weak?

      
You will be represented by your masters, the

slav-owners,  the exploiters.

      
"Representation” is either conquest by the strong, or a
scrap of paper, a hoax,

blindfolding
the
one
who
is
weak
so
as
to
dull
his
faculties....


Starting from the end


ω) Who is weak? The forces of the proletariat, or the minds of the Iskrists and
Bundists?


χ) Do you want a revolution? Then you must be strong!


ξ) We must speak the truth: therein lies our strength,
and the masses, the people, the multitude will decide
in actual practice, after the struggle, whether we have strength.


Have we strength?


Or are we weak.


ω) Who is weak.

 

Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 246-51 of this volume.—Ed.

[2]

This sentence is unfinished in the MS.—Ed.
 



[3]

The present draft of the article was not completed by
Lenin.





[4]

See K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works, Moscow
1958, Vol. 1, p. 251.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the So-Called Armenian Social-Democratic Workers' Organisation









Lenin: On the So-Called Armenian Social-Democratic Workers' Organisation







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the So-Called Armenian Social-Democratic Workers’ Organisation




Written: Written in September-October 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1931, in Lenin Miscellany XVI.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 300.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We are in receipt of a letter from the Central Commit tee, informing us
that the Armenian Social-Democratic Workers’ Organisation has expressed a desire
to sign the resolution adopted at the conference of all
Social-Democratic parties.[1]

The Central Committee, however, does not agree to accept this
signature, because it was opposed to the participation in the conference of
this organisation, which is purely foreign and has no serious links within
Russia. We hope soon to publish in Proletary more detailed in formation
concerning the true nature of this organisation. For the time being we shall
merely observe that all those who wish to help a really Social-Democratic
movement among the Armenian workers in the Caucasus should have dealings only
with the Caucasian organisations of the R.S.D.L.P., which publish Armenian
literature in the Caucasus, and not in Geneva.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The Conference of Social-Democratic Organisations in
Russia was held in Riga on September 7-9 (20-22), 1905. For the resolutions
passed by the Conference see The C.P.S.U. in Resolutions and Decisions of
Its Congresses, Conferences and Plenary Meetings of the Central Committee,
Russ. ed., Moscow 1953, Part 1, pp. 91-94.


In a letter to members of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. dated
September 7, 1905 Lenin spoke of the close ties between the “Armenian
Social-Democratic Workers’ Organisation” and the Bund (see Lenin
Miscellany V, p. 493).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Zemstvo Congress









Lenin: The Zemstvo Congress







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Zemstvo Congress




Published:
Proletary, No. 19, October 3 (September 20), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 301-306.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

On Monday, September 12 (25), there opened in Moscow a Zemstvo and Municipal
Congress, which discussed and finally determined the attitude to the Duma. Like
previous Zemstvo congresses, this Congress marks a further step in the
political development and political organisation of the Russian
bourgeoisie. That is why every class-conscious worker must give attention to
this birth of a bourgeois constitutional party. The political development of the
proletariat as a class has always and everywhere proceeded hand in hand with the
political development of the bourgeoisie as a class.


But besides this general significance, the Zemstvo Congress is also of
tremendous importance in connection with the burning question of our attitude
towards the Duma. A compromise between the bourgeoisie and tsarism, or the
former’s more resolute struggle against the latter—such is the gist of
this question, which, as is known, is giving rise to differences on
Social-Democracy’s tactics too.


To begin with, let us remind the reader that at-their preceding Congress the
Zemstvo people roundly condemned the Bulygin Duma, and accepted the well-known
Osvobozhdeniye draft constitution (a monarchy and a two-chamber
system). The question of boycotting the Duma was at first decided in the
affirmative by the majority, but later it was reconsidered and deferred until
the next congress, which was to be called immediately following the
promulgation of the State Duma Act—there was even talk of calling it by
telegraph. In fact, the Congress was not called for a long time. At first, as we
noted in Proletary, No. 14, rumour had it that the Zemstvos had
cancelled the Congress. Later, the public learned of the negotiations between
Mr. Golovin and Durnovo, which we described and appraised in the

    

preceding issue of

 Proletary,[1]

and which resulted in the police
    permitting the Congress. The Congress was therefore held under
    conditions entirely different from the preceding, which had been banned by
    the police, who had threatened to disperse it, had made out a report and,
    after the Congress, ordered a Senate investigation. This time the Zemstvos
    and the police came to terms and reached an agreement in advance.


To give the reader a better idea of the significance of the difference between
“then” and “now”, let us remind him of the statement
that appeared in the latest issue of Osvobozhdeniye.
Mr. “Independent” (probably, independent of the police?) wrote the
following in No. 76, in full accord with the author of the leading article in
that issue: “There should be no question of any sort of compromise
whatever. As be fore, liberty must be won and not begged for.... We should
not—and this is in the highest degree important—for a moment
renounce either the former methods of struggle or the positions that have
already been won. If compromises are possible here too, then that possibility
must be removed immediately and in good earnest. All that has till now been done
to organise the forces of emancipation must also be done in the future.... The
activities of the congresses, unions, and assemblies should continue in the same
spirit and in the same direction as hitherto.”


It is impossible to express oneself more clearly. After August 6, the organ of
the Zemstvo or “Constitutional Democratic” Party resolutely and
unconditionally expresses itself against renouncing the former methods of
struggle. How ever, the gist of the false stand taken by the liberal
bourgeoisie lies in the fact that, along with a desire for liberty, they no
less ardently desire a deal with tsarism. That is why they say one thing and do
another. In order “not to renounce the former methods of struggle”,
they should be boycotting the Duma. After renouncing the boycott, it was
logically inevitable for them to renounce some of the “former
methods of struggle”. Osvobozhdeniye began to fulminate against
compromises at the very moment Golovin was making a compromise with
Durnovo. Osvobozhdeniye began to vociferate, “we should not for a
moment renounce”, just when the Zemstvo Congress renounced the former
freedom of its sessions. On

    

the occasion of the “granting” of a Duma, that purported inception
of liberty, the Zemstvos agreed to confer less freely.


And indeed: 1) the programme for the Congress was cut down by Mr. Durnovo, i.e.,
by the police; 2) the chairman promised to adjourn the Congress in the event of
a discussion on questions not on the agenda authorised by the police; 3) the
Congress consented to hold its sittings in the presence of a police
agent—sent by Durnovo (chef de cabinet)— who was empowered
to close the Congress if the “terms” of the agreement between
Mr. Golovin and Mr. Durnovo were infringed; 4) also on pain of closure of the
Congress, police forbade all “seditious outcries” (according to a
wire from the special correspondent of the conservative paper Le Temps,
who added that all these terms were faithfully observed).


It goes without saying that since we derive our information from foreign
newspapers we cannot vouch for the absolute accuracy or the exhaustive nature of
this information. But there are no grounds for doubting that on the whole it is
accurate. On the contrary, Mr. Golovin (who certainly did not intend his
negotiations with Durnovo to become known to the public!) most likely promised
the police even more regarding the loyal behaviour of the Zemstvos!


The undeniable fact is that Osvobozhdeniye’s words are utterly at
variance with the deeds of its adherents. Osvobozhdeniye’s journalists
harangue against the police, while the wirepullers most amicably arrange matters
with the police. The beginning of the Zemstvo campaign for the Duma elections
coincided with the beginning of agreement between the Zemstvo bourgeoisie and
the autocracy.


Foreign correspondents speak unanimously of the peaceful nature of
this Zemstvo Congress as compared with the preceding. Only one speaker, or
according to other information two, favoured boycotting the Duma. The
majority stood for participation (we stated in No.

  12[2]

of Proletary,
even before the Duma Act was promulgated, that the Zemstvo Right wing had
already made up its mind on this question). The majority considered that
non-participation in the elections would be a “sign of timidity”—a
view fully shared, as we know, by Parvus and the new Iskra. On the
other hand,

    

our Zemstvos displayed their boldness... by coming to terms with the
    police....


The Congress adopted a resolution which, instead of condemning the Duma, merely
states (we are at a loss to say whether timidly or boldly) that the “Duma
will not be a popular representative body in the literal sense of the
term”. Russian citizens are invited to unite on the programmes adopted at
previous Zemstvo Congresses and to carry on their struggle on the basis of the
Duma. The resolution does not say a single word about fighting outside the Duma
and apart from the Duma: that is what the Osvobozhdeniye writer, who is
“independent” of the police, calls “not for a moment
renouncing the former methods of struggle....”


Moderating their formerly excessive “revolutionary” zeal, the
Zemstvos are applying their efforts to “constructive” work in
connection with the Duma. They have drawn up a detailed political programme (we
are not yet in possession of its complete text); they have endeavoured to cover
up their retreat from democracy by reiterating the main points of moderate
constitutionalism; they have dealt in detail with the question of the election
campaign, the organisation of local and central election committees, drawing up
lists of candidates, etc.


After all this is it still not clear what the landlord and merchant liberalism
of the Zemstvos and Osvobozhdeniye League is driving at?


What they want is: to start discarding, one by one, the militant demands of
democracy, everything that guarantees the rights of the revolutionary people,
that develops and extends the struggle for liberty (while maintaining silence in
the resolution about the struggle apart from the Duma, etc.); to start clinching
all such demands of democracy that secure power for the bourgeoisie alone (snug
berths in the Duma above all)! Less agitation among the people and more activity
in the Duma!


As William Stead, that “liberal” who but yesterday was an admirer of
the autocracy, so aptly put it (see his letter to The Times of
September 26), external peace called for peace within the country, peace between
the tsar and the liberal bourgeoisie, such as was proclaimed by the Law of
August 6! By their behaviour the Zemstvos are proving

    

that they are willing to make peace, although, of course, by no means
    immediately or in all respects. “Mr. Mikhail Stakhovich, a friend and
    colleague of Shipov’s,” wrote the Temps correspondent on September
    27, “is counting on the creation of a party of the centre, which would
    favour the autocracy and a consultative Duma; he asserts that many members
    of the extreme parties” (!! what aspersion on the
    Osvobozhdeniye supporters—Editors of
      “Proletary”) “are prepared to join this party.”
    Mr. Stakhovich’s assertion is confirmed not only by the statements of many
    legally published news papers, but even more so by the Zemstvo gentlemen’s
    deeds. The Times correspondent informs us on September 26
    that Mr. M. Stakhovich was present at the Congress. “The last named is
    still a strong believer in the victory of the moderate elements, indeed, the
    almost total absence of the usual fiery denunciations of the
    government, except casual [!!] references to the horrors of the Caucasus,
    rather confirms his forecast.” The same correspondent of this conservative
    British paper writes: “The temper of the Assembly offers a singular
    contrast to the sentiment dominating the July Congress, when a large number
    of delegates advocated a boycott of the government [Duma] scheme.”


Can it be that Iskra will still refuse to abandon its erroneous opinion
that those who favoured a boycott wanted passive abstention, whereas the
Stakhoviches, who favour participation, want a serious struggle? Will it really
continue even now to stand, together with Parvus, for an agreement with the
Osvobozhdeniye adherents and support for them, after they have
obviously begun to come to terms with the Durnovos?


P. S. In all fairness it must be said that more and more information keeps
coming in showing that the Russian new Iskrists do not agree with the new
Iskra. We have just received a leaflet issued by the St. Petersburg
(Menshevik) group, entitled: “The State Duma or a Constituent Assembly.”
Together with criticism of the Duma we find here the slogan “Down with the
Duma !" The workers’ representatives are urged to tell the liberals
“that they must not recognise the State Duma”, “that they must
renounce their right [the print in the leaflet is not legible] of election to
the Duma”, that they must help the workers “to arm for the struggle
against the Black Hundreds and the State Duma”.

    

The St.. Petersburg Mensheviks have thus adopted the slogan of an active
      boycott. Here too, as in the well-known case of the “Zemstvo
      campaign plan”,[3]
Iskra is at variance
    with its adherents in Russia. Only in one respect do the St. Peters burg
    Mensheviks come close to Iskra: they urge the workers immediately
    to elect “representatives in factories, work shops, and departments,
    just as they did for the Shidlovsky[4]

Commission.... When they
    meet, let our representatives wage a struggle against the State Duma, just
    as our delegates in the Shidlovsky Commission fought against that cunning
    trap set by the autocracy.” This slogan is very similar to the
    Iskra slogan calling for “revolutionary
    self-government”, although the comrades of the St. Petersburg group do
    not, of course, use this inept and high-sounding phrase. We have no doubt
    but that the St. Petersburg workers will see the erroneousness of this
    slogan and a false analogy with the Shidlovsky Commission. At that time the
    workers were boycotting the Commission; now the Duma is boycotting the
    workers.


While the tsar retains power, revolutionary self-government can be
only a fragment of the revolution (the decision of the Smolensk Municipal
Council, etc.). Making it the main slogan of the revolutionary proletariat means
sowing confusion and playing into the hands of the Osvobozhdeniye
people. In developing, extending, strengthening, and spreading the organisation
of the revolutionary forces of the proletariat and the peasantry, we
must not confuse this organisation of war, this organisation of an uprising,
with self-government. In purpose, manner of origin, and character, the
organisation of an armed uprising, the organisation of a revolutionary army, is
quite unlike the organisation of revolutionary self-government. The
more zealously the liberal bourgeoisie, the Osvobozhdeniye gentry,
endeavour to curtail, blur, and dock the consistent revolutionary-democratic
slogans, the more clearly and directly must we bring forward such
slogans—the convocation of a popular constituent assembly by a provisional
revolutionary government, the organisation of an armed uprising, and a
revolutionary army for the overthrow of tsarist rule.

 

Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 253-61 of this volume.—Ed.

[2]

See pp. 179-87 of this volume.—Ed.
 



[3]

The reference is to the Mensheviks’ plan of support for the
“Zemstvo campaign” which was conducted by bourgeois liberals between
the autumn of 1904 and January 1905. The campaign consisted of a series of
conferences, public meetings, and banquets arranged by Zemstvo leaders. At these
affairs speeches were made and resolutions passed in support of moderate
constitutionalist demands. Lenin sharply criticised the “plan of fire
Zemstvo campaign” in an article entitled “The Zemstvo Campaign and
Iskra’s Plan” (see present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 497-518).





[4]

The Shidlovsky Commission, which was headed by
Senator Shidlovsky, was set up by an imperial ukase of January 29 (February
11), 1905 ostensibly “to enquire without delay into the causes of
discontent among the workers in the city of St. Petersburg and its
suburbs”. The commission was made up of officials, the heads of
government-owned factories, and factory owners. The intention was also to
include elected representatives of the workers. The Bolsheviks, who considered
this manoeuvre on the part of the tsarist regime an attempt to distract the
workers from the revolutionary struggle, proposed that elections to the
commission be used to p resent political demands to the tsar’s government (see
the book Leaflets of the St. Petersburg Bolsheviks, Vol. 1, 1939,
pp. 197-202). When the demands were rejected by the government the electors
refused to nominate their representatives to the commission, and called upon the
St. Petersburg workers to strike. On the following day mass political strikes
began, and on February 20 (March 5) the authorities were obliged to abolish
 the commission.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Socialism and the Peasantry









Lenin: Socialism and the Peasantry







V. I.  

      Lenin
Socialism and the Peasantry




Published:
Proletary, No. 20, October 10 (September 27), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 307-315.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The revolution Russia is going through is a revolution of the entire people. The
interests of the whole people have come into irreconcilable conflict with those
of a handful of men constituting the autocratic government or backing it. The
very existence of present-day society, which is based on commodity production
and wherein the interests of the various classes and population groups are
extremely varied and conflicting, calls for the destruction of the autocracy,
the establishment of political liberty, and the open and direct expression of
the dominating classes’ interests in the organisation and administration of the
state. Bourgeois in its social and economic essence, the democratic revolution
cannot but express the needs of all bourgeois society.


However, this society, which now seems a united whole in the struggle against
the autocracy, is itself irremediably split by the chasm between capital and
labour. The people that have risen against the autocracy are not a united
people. Employers and wage-workers, the insignificant number of the rich
("the upper ten thousand”) and the tens of millions of those who toil and
own no property—these are indeed “two nations”, as was said by
a far-sighted Englishman as long ago as the first half of the
nineteenth century.[3]

The struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie
stands on the order of the day throughout Europe. This struggle has long spread
to Russia as well. In present-day Russia it is not two contending forces that
form the content of the revolution, but two distinct and different social wars:
one waged within the present autocratic-feudal system, the other within the
future bourgeois-democratic system, whose birth we are already witnessing. One
is the struggle of the entire people

    

for freedom (the freedom of bourgeois society), for democracy, i.e., the
      sovereignty of the people; the other Is the class struggle of the
      proletariat against the bourgeoisie for a socialist organisation of
      society.


An arduous and formidable task thus devolves on the socialists—to wage two
wars simultaneously, wars that are totally different in their nature, their
aims, and the composition of the social forces capable of playing a decisive
part in either of them. The Social-Democratic movement has explicitly set itself
this difficult task, and has definitely coped with it thanks to its having based
its entire programme on scientific socialism, i.e., Marxism, and thanks to its
having become one of the contingents of the army of world Social-Democracy,
which has verified, confirmed, explained, and developed in detail the principles
of Marxism on the basis of the experience of so many democratic and socialist
movements in the most diverse countries of Europe.


Revolutionary Social-Democracy has long indicated and proved the bourgeois
nature of Russian democratism, ranging from the liberal-Narodnik to the
Osvobozhdeniye varieties. It has always pointed out that it is
inevitable for bourgeois democratism to be half-hearted, limited, and
narrow. For the period of the democratic revolution it has set the socialist
proletariat the task of winning the peasant masses over to its side, and,
paralysing the bourgeoisie’s instability, of smashing and crushing the
autocracy. A decisive victory of the democratic revolution is possible only in
the form of a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the
peasantry. But the sooner this victory is achieved, and the fuller it is, the
faster and the more profoundly will fresh contradictions and a fresh class
struggle develop within the fully democratised bourgeois system. The more
completely we achieve the democratic revolution, the closer shall we approach
the tasks of the socialist revolution, the more acute and incisive will be the
proletariat’s struggle against the very foundations of bourgeois society.


The Social-Democrats must wage a relentless struggle against any departure from
this presentation of the revolutionary-democratic and socialist tasks of the
proletariat. It is absurd to ignore the democratic, i.e., essentially bourgeois,
nature of the present revolution, and hence it is absurd to

    

bring forward such slogans as the one calling for the establishment of
revolutionary communes. It is absurd and reactionary to belittle the tasks of
the proletariat’s participation— and leading participation at
that—in the democratic revolution, by shunning, for instance, the slogan
of a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the
peasantry. It is absurd to confuse the tasks and prerequisites of a democratic
revolution with those of a socialist revolution, which, we repeat, differ both
in their nature and in the composition of the social forces taking part in them.


It is on this last mentioned mistake that we propose to dwell in detail. The
undeveloped state of the class contradictions in the people in general, and in
the peasantry in particular, is an unavoidable phenomenon in the epoch of a
democratic revolution, which for the first time lays the foundations for a
really extensive development of capitalism. This lack of economic development
results in the survival and revival, in one form or another, of the backward
forms of a socialism which is petty-bourgeois, for it idealises reforms that do
not go beyond the framework of petty-bourgeois relation ships. The mass of the
peasants do not and cannot realise that the fullest “freedom” and
the “justest” distribution even of all the land, far from destroying
capitalism, will, on the contrary, create the conditions for a particularly
extensive and powerful development of capitalism. Whereas Social-Democracy
singles out and supports only the revolutionary-democratic substance of these
peasant aspirations, petty-bourgeois socialism elevates to a theory this
political backwardness of the peasants, confusing or jumbling together the
prerequisites and the tasks of a genuine democratic revolution with those of an
imaginary socialist revolution.


The most striking expression of this vague petty-bourgeois ideology is the
programme, or rather draft programme, of the
“Socialist-Revolutionaries”, who made the more haste to proclaim
themselves a party, the less developed among them were the forms and
prerequisites for a party. When analysing their draft programme (see
Vperyod, No.

  3[1]

)

we already had occasion to point out that the
Socialist-Revolutionaries’ views are rooted in the old Russian Narodnik ideas.

    

However, as the entire economic development of Russia, the entire course of
the Russian revolution, is remorsely and ruthlessly cutting the ground from
under the foundations of pure Narodism day by day and hour by hour, the
views of the Socialist-Revolutionaries inevitably tend to become
eclectic. They are trying to patch up the rents in the Narodnik ideas with
bits of fashionable opportunist “criticism” of Marxism, but this does not
make the tattered garment wear any the better. All in all, their programme
is nothing but an absolutely lifeless and self-contradictory document,
which is merely an expression of a stage in the history of Russian
socialism on the road from the Russia of serfdom to bourgeois Russia, the
road “from Narodism to Marxism This definition, which typifies a number of
more or less small streams of contemporary revolutionary thought, is also
applicable to the latest draft agrarian programme of the Polish Socialist
Party (P.S.P.), published in No. 6-8 of

     Przed&whatthewit.[2]



The draft divides the agrarian programme into two parts. Part I sets forth
“reforms for the realisation of which social conditions have already
matured”; Part II—“formulates the consummation and integration of
the agrarian reforms set forth in Part I”. Part I, in its turn, is
subdivided into three sections: A) labour protection—demands for the
benefit of the agricultural proletariat; B) agrarian reforms (in the narrow
sense, or, so to say, peasant demands), and C) protection of the rural
population (self-government, etc.).


This programme takes a step towards Marxism in attempting to single out
something in the nature of a minimum from the maximum programme—then in
providing a wholly independent formulation of demands of a purely proletarian
nature; further, the preamble to the programme recognises that it is wholly
inadmissible for socialists to “flatter the proprietory instincts of the
peasant masses”. As a matter of fact, if the truth contained in this
latter proposition had been given sufficient thought and carried to its logical
conclusion, that would have inevitably resulted in a strictly Marxist
programme. The trouble is that the P.S.P. which draws its ideas just as
willingly from the fount of opportunist criticism

    

of Marxism is not a consistently proletarian party. “Since it has not been
proved that landed property tends to concentrate,” we read in the preamble to
the programme, “it is inconceivable to champion this form of economy with
absolute sincerity and assurance, and to convince the peasant that the small
farms will inevitably disappear.”


This is nothing but an echo of bourgeois political economy. Bourgeois economists
are doing their utmost to instil in the small peasant the idea that capitalism
is compatible with the well-being of the small independent farmer. That is why
they veil the general question of commodity production, the yoke of capital, and
the decline and degradation of small peasant farming by stressing the
particular question of the concentration of landed property. They shut their
eyes to the fact that large-scale production in specialised branches of
agriculture producing for the market is also developing on small and
medium-sized holdings, and that ownership of this kind is deteriorating because
of greater leasing of land, as well as under the burden of mortgages and the
pressure of usury. They obscure the indisputable fact of the technical
superiority of large-scale production in agriculture and the fall in the
peasant’s living standards in his struggle against capitalism. There is nothing
in the P.S.P. statements but a repetition of these bourgeois prejudices,
resurrected by the present-day Davids.[4]


The unsoundness of theoretical views affects the practical programme as
well. Take Part I—the agrarian reforms in the narrow sense of the term. On
the one hand, you read in Clause 5: “The abolition of all restrictions on
the purchase of land allotments,” and in 6: “The abolition of
szarwark[5]

and obligatory cartage (compulsory services).” These are purely Marxist
minimum demands. By presenting them (especially Clause 5) the P.S.P. is making a
step forward in comparison with our Socialist-Revolutionaries, who in company
with Moskovskiye Vedomosti have a weakness for the vaunted “in
alienability of land allotments”. By presenting these demands the
P.S.P. is verging on the Marxist idea regarding the struggle against remnants of
serfdom, as the basis and content of the present-day peasant movement. Although
the P.S.P. verges on to this idea, it is far from fully and consciously
accepting it.

 

The main clauses of the minimum programme under consideration read as follows:

"1) nationalisation through confiscation of the royal and state
demesnes[6]

as well as estates belonging to the clergy;

2) nationalisation of the big landed estates in the absence of direct heirs;

3) nationalisation of forests, rivers, and lakes.” These demands have all
the defects of a programme whose main demand at present is the

    nationalisation of the land. So long as full political liberty
    and sovereignty of the people do not exist, whilst there is no
    democratic republic, it is both premature and inexpedient to
    present the demand for nationalisation, since nationalisation
    means transference to the state, and the present state is a police
    and class state; the state of tomorrow will in any case be a class
    state. As a slogan meant to lead forward towards democratisation,
    this demand is quite useless, for it does not place the stress on
    the peasants’ relations to the landlords (the peasants take the
    land of the landlords) but on the landlords’ relations to the
    state. This presentation of the question is totally wrong at a
    time like the present, when the peasants are fighting in a
    revolutionary way for the land, against both the landlords and the
    landlords’ state. Revolutionary peasant committees for
    confiscation, as instruments of confiscation—this is the
    only slogan that meets the needs of such a time and promotes the
    class struggle against the landlords, a struggle indissolubly
    bound up with the revolutionary destruction of the landlords’
    state.


The other clauses of the agrarian minimum programme in the draft programme of
the P.S.P. are as follows:

"4) limitation of property rights, inasmuch as
they become an impediment to all improvements in agriculture, should such
improvements be considered necessary by the majority of those concerned;
...

7) nationalisation of insurance of grain crops against fire and hail, and of cattle
against epidemics;

8) legislation for state assistance in the formation of
agricultural artels and co-operatives;

9) agricultural schools.”


These clauses are quite in the spirit of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, or
(what amounts to the same thing) of bourgeois reformism. There is nothing
revolutionary about them. They are, of course, progressive—no one disputes
that—but progressive in the interests of property-owners. For a socialist
to advance them means nothing but flattering proprietory

    

instincts. To advance them is the same as demanding state aid to trusts,
cartels, syndicates, and manufacturers’ associations, which are no less
“progressive” than co-operatives, insurance, etc., in
agriculture. All this is capitalist progress. To show concern for that is not
our affair, but that of the employers, the entrepreneurs. Proletarian
socialism, as distinct from petty-bourgeois socialism, leaves it to the Counts
de Rocquigny, the land-owning Zemstvo members, etc., to take care of the
co-operatives of the landowners, big and little—and concerns itself
entirely and exclusively with wage-workers’ co-operatives for the
purpose of fighting the landowners.


Let us now consider Part II of the programme. It consists of only one point:
“Nationalisation of the big landed estates through confiscation. The
arable land and pastures thus acquired by the people must be divided up into
allotments and turned over to the landless peasants and those with small
holdings, on guaranteed long-term leases.”


A fine “consummation”, indeed! Under the guise of
“consummation and integration of agrarian reforms” a party
calling itself
socialist proposes what is by no means a socialist organisation of society, but
rather an absurd petty-bourgeois utopia. Here we have a most telling example of
complete con fusion of the democratic and the socialist revolutions, and
complete failure to understand the difference in their aims. The transfer of the
land from the landlords to the peasants may be—and in fact has in Europe
everywhere been—a component part of the democratic revolution, one of the
stages in the bourgeois revolution, but only bourgeois radicals can call it
“consummation” or “final realisation”. The
redistribution of land among the various categories of proprietors, among the various
classes of farmers, may be advantageous and necessary for the victory of
democracy, the complete eradication of all traces of serf-ownership, for raising
the living standards of the masses, accelerating the development of capitalism,
etc.; the most resolute support of a measure like that may be incumbent upon the
socialist proletariat in the epoch of a democratic revolution, but only
socialist production and not petty peasant production, can constitute a
“consummation and final realisation”. “Guaranteeing”
small-peasant leaseholds whilst commodity production and

    

capitalism are preserved, is nothing but a reactionary petty-bourgeois utopia.


We see now that the P.S.P.’s fundamental error is not peculiar to that Party
alone, is not an isolated instance or some thing fortuitous. It expresses in a
clearer and more distinct form (than the vaunted “socialisation” of
the Socialist-Revolutionaries, which they themselves are unable to understand)
the basic error of all Russian Narodism, all Russian bourgeois
liberalism and radicalism in the agrarian question, including the bourgeois
liberalism and radicalism that found expression in the discussions at the
recent (September) Zemstvo Congress in Moscow.


This basic error may be expressed as follows:


In the presentation of immediate aims the programme of the P.S.P. is not
revolutionary. In its ultimate aims it is not socialist.


In other words: a failure to understand the difference between a democratic
revolution and a socialist revolution leads to a failure to express the
genuinely revolutionary aspect of the democratic aims, while all the
nebulousness of the bourgeois-democratic world outlook is brought into the
socialist aims. The result is a slogan which is not revolutionary enough for a
democrat, and inexcusably confused for a socialist.


On the other hand, Social-Democracy’s programme meets all requirements both of
support for genuinely revolutionary democratism and the presentation of a clear
socialist aim. In the present-day peasant movement we see a struggle against
serfdom, a struggle against the landlords and the landlords’ state. We give full
support to this struggle. The only correct slogan for such support is:
confiscation through revolutionary peasant committees. What should be done with
the confiscated land is a secondary question. It is not we who will settle this
question, but the peasants. When it comes to being settled a struggle will begin
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie within the peasantry. That is why we
either leave this question open (which is so displeasing to the petty-bourgeois
projectors) or merely indicate the beginning of the road to be taken,
by demanding the return of the cut off lands[7]

(in
which unthinking people see an obstacle to the movement, despite the numerous
explanations given by the Social-Democrats).

 

There is only one way to make the agrarian reform, which is unavoidable in
present-day Russia, play a revolutionary- democratic role: it must be effected
on the revolutionary initiative of the peasants themselves, despite the
landlords and the bureaucracy, and despite the state, i.e., it must be effected
by revolutionary means. The very worst distribution of land after a reform of
this sort will be better from all standpoints than what we have at
present. And this is the road we indicate when we make our prime demand the
establishment of revolutionary peasant committees.


But at the same time we say to the rural proletariat:

“The most radical victory of the peasants, which you must help with all
your force to achieve, will not rid you of poverty. This can be achieved only by
one means: the victory of the entire proletariat—both industrial and
agricultural— over the entire bourgeoisie and the formation of a socialist
society.”


Together with the peasant proprietors, against the land lords and the landlords’
state; together with the urban proletariat, against the entire bourgeoisie and
all the peasant proprietors. Such is the slogan of the class-conscious rural
proletariat. And if the petty proprietors do not immediately accept this slogan,
or even if they refuse to accept it altogether, it will nevertheless become the
workers’ slogan, will inevitably be borne out by the entire course of the
revolution, will rid us of petty-bourgeois illusions, and will clearly and definitely
indicate to us our socialist goal.

 

Notes
 

[1]

“From Narodism to Marxism”, 1905. See present edition, Vol. 8,
pp. 83-89.—Ed.

[2]

The Dawn—Ed.
 



[3]

The reference is to Benjamin Disraeli.





[4]

David, Eduard—German economist and adherent
of Bernstein. A criticism of his views is given by Lenin in The Agrarian
Question and the “Critics of Marx”.





[5]

Szarwark—statute labour for the repair and
construction of roads, bridges and other, mostly military, structures, imposed
 on the peasants in Poland.





[6]

Demesnes—lands belonging to members of the
tsar’s family.





[7]

Cut-off lands (otrezki)—land which the
landlords “cut off”, i.e., took away from the peasants, when serfdom
was abolished in
 Russia in 1861.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Replete Bourgeoisie and a Craving Bourgeoisie









Lenin: A Replete Bourgeoisie and a Craving Bourgeoisie







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Replete Bourgeoisie and a Craving Bourgeoisie




Published:
Proletary, No. 20, October 10 (September 27), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 316-322.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Le Temps, one of the most influential organs of the French conservative
bourgeoisie, is waging a most desperate campaign against socialism, and it is a
rare day on which one fails to see in its columns the names of Marx, Bebel,
Guesde and Jaurès, accompanied by the most vicious comment and
vituperation. Le Temps cannot speak of socialism without trembling with
rage.


The newspaper is following what well-intentioned Europeans call the Russian
“crisis”, with the utmost attention, and never fails to offer
edifying counsel to la nation amie et alliée—the
“friendly and allied nation”. Thus on the present occasion, too, it
devotes its leading article to the recent Zemstvo Congress. It recalls the
preceding July Congress and cannot refrain even in retrospect from expressing
its dissatisfaction. It was, you see, “a spectacle of utter incoherence
of ideas and of complete incertitude of intention”; the Bulygin scheme
was already known, but the delegates nevertheless confined themselves to
“violent speeches”, without being able to come to a decision on the
question of boycott or participation. The organ of the French ruling bourgeoisie
even reminds the Zemstvo delegates with irritation that they had no mandates!


On the contrary, what a smile of satisfaction has now come over the face of the
bourgeois who is replete with political power! How graciously he hastens to
shake the noble hand of his confrère who as yet is only craving for
political power, but who is already revealing his “maturity”! The boycott
has been rejected, and now nothing more is being said about the absence of
mandates. “The decision of the Zemstvo delegates,” says Le Temps,
“does them credit.... It shows that

    

the political education of the most enlightened elements of the Russian people
is progressing, and that they are abandoning vague plans of political
prestidigitation, to enter boldly on the path of necessary evolution.”


The bourgeois who is replete with political power and who has experience of what
real victories of the people, the workers and peasants, lead to in revolutions,
has no hesitation in declaring the September Congress of the liberal land lords
and merchants a victory of evolution over revolution.


He praises the “moderation” of the Congress. He points with evident
satisfaction to the rejection of the resolutions on “parcelling up the
land” and on suffrage for women. “The wisdom and moderation of these
decisions clearly indicate that the opinions of the extreme parties did not
prevail at this Congress. The programme agreed on is sufficiently democratic
to disarm the revolutionaries. Since the Zemstvo Congress expects to
put its plans into effect solely by lawful means, its programme may also rally
those reformists whom personal issues will not cut off from the rest of the
Congress.


The replete bourgeois slaps the craving bourgeois encouragingly on the
shoulder—to have advanced a programme “sufficiently
democratic” to throw dust into people’s eyes and disarm the
revolutionaries, and have taken the path of legality, that is in plain and
straightforward language to have come to terms with the Trepovs and
Romanovs—that is true statesman-like wisdom.


That the hopes which the shrewd bourgeois places in simple minded
revolutionaries are not quite groundless has been proved by our wiseacres of the
new Iskra. They have dropped the reins and dashed into a trap; they are
eagerly proposing to exact democratic pledges from the moderate bourgeois, who
are now prepared heart and soul to promise anything and to pledge themselves to
anything. It is not only in struggle between hostile parties, but even in the
struggle within the socialist parties (as we found from experience after the
Second Congress) that all promises go by the board, once the more or less
substantial interests of the contending parties are involved. As the English
saying goes—promises like pie-crust are leaven to be

       broken.[1]

 

What did Iskra’s tactics with regard to the Duma boil down to? To the
    ideological and tactical disarmament of the revolutionaries. The
    wiseacres of the opportunist Iskra worked for this disarmament by
    denouncing the idea of an active boycott, substituting (fully in the spirit
    of Novoye Vremya,[2]

and almost in the same terms) a
    passive boycott for an active, preaching confidence and trustfulness in the
    Milyukovs and Stakhoviches who now embrace each other, and
    replacing the revolutionary slogan of insurrection with
    Osvobozhdeniye’s bourgeois twaddle, such as the
    “revolutionary self-government of citizens


It is only the blind who can still fail to see what a swamp Iskra has
floundered into. In the illegal press it is completely isolated, with only
Osvobozhdeniye on its side. The Bund, which even Martov and Axelrod will
not suspect of any liking for the “Vperyod arsenal”, has
come out resolutely for an active boycott. In the legal press all the scoundrels
and all the moderate liberals have united against the radical bourgeois who have
voiced sympathy with the boycott and are disposed towards the peasantry in a
most friendly way.


Well, did Lenin tell any falsehood when, in analysing the new-Iskra
resolutions, he said in his Two Tactics that “Iskra” is
descending to the level of the liberal landlords, while Proletary
is endeavouring to raise the level of the revolutionary peasants?


We have mentioned Novoye Vremya. Both that reptile of an organ and
Moskovskiye Vedomosti are waging a desperate struggle against the idea
of a boycott, thereby revealing to all and sundry the Duma’s actual political
significance. As a sample, here is a typical outburst by Novoye Vremya,
which we shall dwell on the more readily as it is shedding new light on the
abysmal bourgeois vileness displayed by even such a “respectable”
liberal organ as Russkiye Vedomosti.


Mr. Yollos, its well-known Berlin correspondent, deals with the Jena Congress in
No. 247. To begin with, his philistine soul rejoices at the fact that there has
appeared such a kind-hearted and fair-minded bourgeois liberal, the wealthy
Abbe, who has made to the city of Jena the gift of a People’s House, in which
all parties, including even the Social-Democrats, are free to meet. And
Mr. Yollos draws the moral:

“One can benefit the people outside definite party bounds

    

too.” That, of course, is true. But what are we to say of a writer, who, at a
time of desperate party struggle in Russia, indulges in praise of
non-partisanship? Doesn’t Mr. Yollos really understand that this is a piece of
the worst political tactlessness, since he is thereby playing into the hands of
Novoye Vremya? The true meaning of this philistine delight in
non-partisanship will, however, become apparent to the reader from the following
statement by Mr. Yollos:

“Needless to say there are political conditions under which it is useful
for the time being to keep ultimate aims to oneself, and to bear in
mind the immediate aims common to socialism and to liberalism.”


Now that is frank! Thank you, Mr. Yollos, for at least being explicit! It
remains for us, whenever addressing the workers, to make use of such declaration
at all times and on all occasions to show up the bourgeois nature of
Russian liberalism, and to make clear to the workers the need for an
independent party of the proletariat, one that is undeviatingly hostile
to the bourgeoisie, even the most liberal.


But all these tirades by our “democrat” are nothing compared with
what is to come. Mr. Yollos does not confine him self to advising the
proletariat “to keep its ultimate aims to itself for the time
being”, i.e., renounce socialism. No, he also advises renouncing the idea
of bringing the present political revolution to its consummation. Mr. Yollos
cites a speech by Bebel and plays up the passage in which Bebel expresses doubt
as to whether we can succeed in transforming Russia into a civilised state
“so soon”, while at the same time declaring that the old autocratic
regime will never return, and “the old Russia is no longer
possible”. Concerning this passage Mr. Yollos writes the following:
“I do not consider Bebel an authority on Russian affairs, but I must
observe that in this part of his speech he differs favourably from Kautsky and
several other doctrinaires who recommend

Revolution in Permanenz (uninterrupted revolution).

As a clever man and politician who realises what
concrete forms a state of uninterrupted anarchy assumes in the life of a
nation, Bebel sees progress primarily in the promotion of cultural aims, and his
words make it quite clear that he draws no line of demarcation and certainly
erects no barriers between the Russian

    

intelligentsia and the Russian proletariat, at any rate before the elementary
rights of man have been secured.”


First of all this is a libel on Bebel, a libel fully in the style of
Novoye Vremya. Bebel always and unequivocally draws a “line of
demarcation” between bourgeois and proletarian democratism; Mr. Yollos
cannot be ignorant of that. Bebel distinguishes in no uncertain fashion between
the bourgeois intelligentsia and the Social-Democratic intelligentsia. To assure
the Russian reader that Bebel, while fighting for “culture”, ever
hushes up the mendacity and treachery of the bourgeois democrats on the one
hand, and the socialist aims of the working class on the other, means slandering
in the grossest manner the leader of revolutionary Social-Democracy in Germany.


Secondly, it does not at all follow from Bebel’s speech that he regards the
Russian revolution otherwise than Kautsky. The “favourable
difference” in this respect between Bebel and Kautsky is a sheer
fabrication by Mr. Yollos, who has extracted and distorted a single passage in
Bebel’s speech, while maintaining silence about Bebel’s numerous declarations
fully in favour of the Russian revolution and its decisive victory.


Thirdly—and for us this is the most interesting feature of the stand taken
by Russkiye Vedomosti—Mr. Yollos’s outburst shows that he is
a/raid of a decisive victory of the revolution in Russia. Mr. Yollos
says that “uninterrupted revolution” is “uninterrupted
anarchy”. To say that means saying that revolution is sedition; to say
that means becoming a traitor to the revolution. And let not the
Osvobozhdeniye diplomatists, who are so fond of asserting that they
have no enemies on their left, try to tell us that this is only an accidental
slip on the part of Russkiye Vedomosti. That is not true. It is an
expression of the most profound sentiments and the most deep-rooted interests of
the liberal landlord and the liberal manufacturer. It is the same thing as the
statement made by Mr. Vinogradov, who is calling for a struggle to prevent the
Russian revolution from entering on the path of 1789. It is the same as the
servility of Mr. Trubetskoi, who told the tsar that he disapproved of
sedition. This is no slip. It is the sole truthful statement in words on the
count less disgraceful deeds of our bourgeois democrats, who are

    

wearied of “uninterrupted anarchy”, are beginning to long
for law and order, are already tired of “fighting”

.(even 

though they never did any fighting), and already recoil from
revolution at the mere sight of workers and peasants actually rising for actual
battle, eager to strike blows, and not receive them. The bourgeois democrats are
prepared to wink at the misdeeds of the Trepovs and the slaughter of unarmed
people; they are not afraid of that, but of “anarchy” of a quite
different kind, when power will no longer be wielded by Trepov or by
Petrunkevich and Rodichev, and the uprising of the peasants and workers will be
victorious. The bourgeois democrats rally to the Duma idea so eagerly
for the very reason that they see in it an earnest of the betrayal of the
revolution, an earnest of the prevention of the complete victory of the
revolution—that terrible “uninterrupted anarchy”.


Novoye Vremya provides evidence of the fact that our analysis of the
liberals’ psychology is a faithful one. These dyed-in-the-wool lackeys of the
Trepovs took immediate note of Russkiye Vedomosti’s baseness and
hastened to heartily embrace their confrères. It is
precisely this lie
of Mr. Yollos’s about Bebel “differing favourably” from Kautsky that
Novoye Vremya of September 13 (26) cites approvingly, remarking in its
turn:


“Thus, our radical ‘absentees’ will have to exclude Bebel too from the
number of their allies.”


This is a perfectly legitimate conclusion. The professional Novoye
Vremya traitors have correctly appraised the sum and substance of the
“slip” made by Russkiye Vedomosti.

Morever, 
Novoye
Vremya, that past master of politics, at once drew a conclusion with
regard to the Duma. Although Mr. Yollos did not say a word about Bebel’s
views on the boycott, Novoye Vremya nevertheless labelled as
“absentees” those in favour of the boycott. Novoye Vremya
supplemented the libel against Bebel with a libel against the
“radicals”, expressing, however, the absolutely correct opinion that
the “radical absentees’” tactics are governed by the idea of the complete
victory of the revolution, the idea of uninterrupted revolution, whereas the
pro-Duma liberals are prompted by the fear of “uninterrupted
anarchy”. Novoye Vremya is right. Trepov’s lackeys were fully
justified in catching Mr. Yollos in the act

    

and telling him: If you do not want “uninterrupted anarchy” then it
      follows that you are my ally, and no democratic bombast will dissuade me
      of this. Ours is a minor family quarrel—against the
      “doctrinaires”, the supporters of “uninterrupted
      anarchy”, however, we shall be at one!


Will Iskra fail to realise even now that in reproaching the boycott
supporters with abstention, i.e., absenteeism, it was talking after the
Novoye Vremya fashion? Can it fail to realise that this concurrence of
its slogans with those of Novoye Vremya proves that there is something
fundamentally false in its stand?


The replete European bourgeoisie lauds the moderation of the Russian
bourgeoisie, which is craving for power. Trepov’s lackeys laud Mr. Yollos of
Russkiye Vedomosti for censuring the idea of “uninterrupted
anarchy”. The Novoye Vremya and new-Iskra gentry scoff
at “absenteeism”....

 

Notes
 

[1]

This phrase is in English in the original.—Ed.
 



[2]

Novaye Vremya (New Times)—a newspaper
published in St. Peters burg from 1868 to October 1917. Moderately liberal at
the outset, it became, after 1876, the organ of reactionary circles of the
nobility and the bureaucracy. The paper was hostile not only to the
revolutionary movement, but even to the liberal-bourgeois. Following 1905 it
became an organ of the Black Hundreds. Lenin called Novoye Vremya the
acme of venality in the press.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Landlords on the Boycott of the Duma









Lenin: The Landlords on the Boycott of the Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Landlords on the Boycott of the Duma




Published:
Proletary, No. 20, October 10 (September 27), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 323-326.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The abridged minutes of the July Zemstvo Congress have been published in No. 76
of Osvobozhdeniye. At present, when the question of the tactics towards
the State Duma is in the limelight, this material is most noteworthy, for it is
unique in showing just how the Zemstvo and Osvobozhdeniye
people discussed the boycott issue. Certainly no one doubts that prior to the
conclusion of peace—the appearance of the Duma Act—they were, or
tried to appear, more revolutionary than they are at present. Nevertheless, the
nature of their arguments is most useful for a verification of our own appraisal
of the issue. After all, this is probably the first case in Russian political
history of concrete political steps being discussed simultaneously by both
opposition and revolutionary parties.


It is quite natural that the bourgeois democrats were impelled to raise the
boycott issue not by the general programme of their struggle or by the
interests, of definite classes, but primarily by a vague feeling of
embarrassment, of shame at the contradictory and false position they have placed
themselves in. “How can we take part in something we have ourselves
condemned?” Mr. Shishkov asked. “Why, the people will think that we
endorse the scheme.” As you see, this liberal’s very first thought of the
boycott is linked with the question of the people—he feels instinctively
that to go into the Duma means wronging the people. He cannot get rid of gleams
of good intentions to march with the people. Mr. Rayevsky, another speaker, puts
the question on a more abstract plane: “We have always been steadfast in
principle, but in tactics we are entering into a compromise. It will

    

turn out that we condemned the Bulygin scheme and yet are bent on becoming
representatives of the people. We shall not tread this slippery path.”
      This, of course, is a slight exaggeration on the part of Mr. Rayevsky, for
      the Osvobozhdeniye League has never been steadfast in
    principle. It is also incorrect to reduce the question to a bare
      repudiation of compromise: revolutionary Social-Democrats who
      have absorbed the
    spirit of Marxism would have told this speaker that it is ridiculous to
    absolutely reject compromises that are imposed by life itself, and that
    this is not the point at issue; what matters is a clear understanding and
    persistent pursuit of the aims of the struggle under all
      circumstances. However, we repeat, any materialistic presentation of the
    problem is basically alien to a bourgeois democrat. His doubts are merely a
    symptom of the deep split within the various strata of bourgeois democracy.


Mr. Rodichev, the phrase-monger who spoke after Mr. .Rayevsky, settled the
question very simply: “At one time we protested against the new Zemstvo
regulations, yet we entered the Zemstvos.... If we had the forces with which to
effect a boycott, we should declare one” (and is not this “lack of
forces”, gentlemen, due to the fact that the interests of the
property-owners are hostile to an unyielding struggle against the autocracy, and
hostile to the workers and peasants?).... “The first rule of military art
is to get away in time...” (believe it or not, that is what this knight of
liberalism from Tver actually said! And yet the liberals jeer at
Kuropatkin). “There will be a boycott if we, after entering the Duma, make
the following our first decision: ’We are leaving. This is not a genuine
representation, which you can no longer do without. Give us a real
representation!’”

That would be a real “boycott”. (Why, of course! To say “give
us” !—could anything be more “real” for a
Zemstvo Balalaikin?[1]

No wonder they laughed so heartily when Mr. Golovin told
them how “easily he had dispelled” the Governor of Moscow’s
apprehensions lest the Zemstvo Congress declare itself a constituent assembly.)


Mr. Kolyubakin said: “The preceding speakers put the question as follows:
’Either go into the Bulygin Duma, or do nothing at all’” (Iskra puts
the question exactly like these ’preceding speakers” of the monarchist
bourgeoisie’s right

    

wing). “We must appeal to the people, who will be unanimously opposed to
the Bulygin Duma.... Appeal to the people, exercise freedom of speech and of
assembly in actual practice. But by entering a disreputable institution you are
disgracing yourselves. You will be in the minority there, and this minority will
disgrace itself in the eyes of the population.” In this speech one again senses
the link between the boycott idea and an appeal to the peasantry, the
significance of that idea as a turn away from the tsar and towards the people. And
with admirable candour, Mr. Shchepkin hastened to rejoin to Mr. Kolyubakin’s
speech, which he so thoroughly understood: “Never mind if we make a
mistake in the eyes of the people, if only we save the cause” (... the
cause of the bourgeoisie, would probably have been the workers’
interjection had they been present at this illustrious gathering). “I do
not dispute that we may soon have to tread the revolutionary path. But the draft
drawn up by the Bureau” (the draft resolution against a boycott)
“seeks to avoid this, since we are not revolutionary either by upbringing
or by inclination” (class upbringing, class inclination).


Mr. Shchepkin argues wisely! Better than the whole

new-Iskra 

lot taken
together, he understands that the crux of the matter is not the choice of ways
and means, but the disparity of aims. It is necessary to “save the
cause” of law and order—that is what really matters. The
revolutionary path, which may lead to the victory of the workers and peasants,
cannot be risked.


On the other hand, that magniloquent windbag Mr. de Roberti talks exactly like a
new-Iskra adherent: “What is to be done if, owing to its
inefficacy, the draft becomes law? An armed uprising?” (Come, come, Mr. Roberti,
how can one “link up an uprising with the Duma!”? What a pity you are not
acquainted with our Bund, which would have explained to you that the two cannot
be linked together.) “That, I believe, will undoubtedly come in due
time. But at present, resistance can either be merely passive, or passive while
always ready to become active.” (Oh, what a charming radical! He ought to borrow
the slogan “revolutionary self government” from the new
Iskra—what arias he could render on this theme, what
arias!...)... “to elect only those who would enter with the
determination to effect a revolution

    

at all costs”. That’s the kind of people we are! Well, were we wrong when
      we said that Parvus met a friend in such an Osvobozhdeniye man,
    or that the new Iskra had risen to the bait of the
      high-flown phrases of the magniloquent landed proprietors?

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Balalaikin—a character in
Saltykov-Shchedrin’s Modern Idyll, a
 liberal windbag, adventurer and liar.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the Question of Party Unity









Lenin: On the Question of Party Unity







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Question of Party Unity[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 20, October 10 (September 27), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 327-328.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

On our part, we can only welcome the perfectly clear and definite presentation
of the question by the Central Committee—either fusion with the Party on
the basis of the decisions of the Third Congress, or a unity congress. The
Organising Committee will have to make the final choice. If it rejects entry
into the Party on the basis of the decisions of the Third Congress, then the
preparation and elaboration of the terms for a unity congress should be begun at
once. To this end, both sides should first of all declare formally and quite
explicitly that in principle the convening of two congresses at the same time
and in the same place has been deemed necessary; secondly, it should likewise
be formally established that all organisations in each section of the Party must
unreservedly submit to decisions of the congress of their own section. In other
words, both congresses should be of binding and not merely advisory significance
to their respective Party sections; thirdly, the basis on which the congresses
are to be convened should be definitely established in advance, i.e., what
organisations are to send delegates and how many delegates with the right to
vote each may send (for the section of the Party that has recognised the Third
Congress, points 2 and 3 have already been defined in the Rules of the
R.S.D.L.P. as adopted by that congress); fourthly, negotiations should at once
be started on the time and place of the congress (the congresses themselves will
decide as to the terms on which they will fuse, and the time of fusion);
fifthly, it is extremely important that work should at once begin on drawing up
a most explicit and detailed draft proposal on fusion, which should be submitted
for decision to both congresses. This is a matter of imperative

    

necessity. The experience of other parties and of our own shows clearly that
      unless a draft proposal or draft proposals for fusion are prepared,
      published, and thoroughly discussed beforehand, it will be quite
      impossible for the congresses to come to a decision on so difficult a
      question.


So, it is now up to the Organising Committee, and its decision will be eagerly
awaited by all who favour unity.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

On the Question of Party Unity—it was
under this headline that Proletary, No. 20 of October 10 (September
27), 1905 published the following documents: minutes of the third
conference of representatives of the R.S.D.L.P.’s Central Committee and the
Mensheviks’ Organising Committee as elected at the Geneva Conference, and the
Central Committee’s comments on these minutes. In its appraisal of the
Mensheviks’ behaviour at the joint conference and the demands presented by them,
the Central Committee pointed out that their policy was the same as it had been
prior to the Third Congress, and that it was leading to “the greatest
chaos and anarchy, to the disintegration of the Party”.


The documents were published with a note “From the Editorial
Board” written by Lenin.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## An Irate Reply









Lenin: An Irate Reply







V. I.  

      Lenin
An Irate Reply




Published:
Proletary, No. 20, October 10 (September 27), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 329.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Our article, “The Theory of Spontaneous Generation”
(Proletary, No.

  16[1]

),

has evoked an extremely irate reply from the
Bund. The latter even ran short of its own supply of virulent words and borrowed
some from Plekhanov, that well-known opponent of coarse polemics. What is the
trouble? Why is the Bund so incensed? It is so because we, on the one hand,
mentioned the possibility of there being irony in the Bund’s praise for
Iskra, and, on the other hand, ridiculed the Bund’s solidarity with
Iskra on a number of questions. It is such duplicity that the Bund
imputes to us, accusing us of prestidigitation, etc., while maintaining
complete silence about all our analysis of the Bund’s indubitably
unironical and just as indubitably incorrect arguments. Why has the Bund
maintained silence over this analysis of the crux of a question it has itself
raised? That is because this analysis reveals the duplicity in the stand of
the Bund itself, which, on the one hand, has renounced Iskra’s
“Duma” tactics, and, on the other, has in dead earnest repeated a
number of Iskra’s mistakes. What the irate Bund puts down to our
duplicity should in fact be put down to the duplicity of the Bund’s own
stand on the question of whether our slogan should be the convocation of a
constituent assembly by a provisional revolutionary government, or by the tsar
or by the State Duma, or whether it should be the spontaneous generation of this
constituent assembly.


We have shown that the Bund is all muddled on this issue. Till this
very moment the Bund has not provided a straight forward answer. And if the Bund
is now railing because we have held up a mirror to it, we can only answer by
quoting the saying: “It’s no use blaming the mirror if....”

 

Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 246-51 of this volume.—Ed.
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A New Menshevik Conference









Lenin: A New Menshevik Conference







V. I.  

      Lenin
A New Menshevik Conference




Published:
Proletary, No. 20, October 10 (September 27), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 330-331.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We are in receipt of hectographed copies of the resolutions passed by the
“Southern Constituent [!?] Conference” of the
Mensheviks.[1]

The most important of these resolutions (on
the State Duma) will be dealt with by us on some other occasion. For the present
we shall only note that of the two main points of Iskra’s
“Duma” tactics the Conference rejected “pressure for the
election of resolute people to the State Duma” (like Martov, Cherevanin,
and Parvus), but accepted “organisation of nation-wide popular elections
to a constituent assembly”. Three resolutions were adopted on the
composition of Iskra’s Editorial Board, yet the question was not
settled. One resolution asks Axelrod not to leave the Editorial Board; another
requests Plekhanov to return to the Board (the Conference—probably without
humorous intention—expressing “surprise” at Plekhanov’s
resignation); the third thanks Iskra, expresses complete confidence in
it, etc., but refers the question of the composition of the Editorial Board to
an “all-Russia constituent conference for final decision”. The
“First All-Russia Conference”, as is known, “referred”
this question for decision to the local organisations. The latter
“refer” it to the decision of a constituent
conference.... This is probably what is called doing away with red tape and
formalities.... In the meantime Iskra continues calling itself the
Central Organ, although even its own supporters have not conferred such a title
on it. A convenient position this, indeed!


The organisational Rules of the Southern Conference are a copy of the Rules we
are already familiar with, but contain some minor changes. A new clause has been
added: “Party congresses, which must be convened as far as possible once

    

a year, are the supreme organ of the Party.” We heartily welcome this
amendment. In connection with the new and excellent point that the
“Central Committee shall be elected at the Congress”, and also with
the excellent desire to have the question of the Editorial Board decided at the
Congress (be it even in the future), this amendment shows progress towards the
decisions of the Third Congress. Let us hope that in another four months the
next “constituent” conference will also set up the procedure for
convening congresses, these supreme organs of the Party.... On the question of
unity the Conference unfortunately beats about the bush, without giving a clear
reply to the question: “Do you want to unite on the basis of the Third
Congress? If not, do you want to prepare two congresses to assemble at the same
time and in the same place?” Let us hope that the next
“constituent” conference (preferably in something under four
months!) will decide the matter.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The Southern Russian Constituent Conference of the
Mensheviks was held in Kiev in August 1905. Its decisions were criticised
by Lenin also in the article “The Latest in Iskra Tactics, or
Mock Elections as a New Incentive to an Uprising” (see pp. 356-73 of
 this volume).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Representation of the R.S.D.L.P. in the International Socialist Bureau









Lenin: Representation of the R.S.D.L.P. in the International Socialist Bureau







V. I.  

      Lenin
Representation of the R.S.D.L.P. in the International Socialist Bureau




Published:
Proletary, No. 20, October 10 (September 27), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 332-334.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

“The Southern Constituent Conference” of the Mensheviks has passed
the following resolution on this question:


"After acquainting itself with documents which show that Comrade Lenin,
without taking any steps towards reaching an agreement with the ’Minority’ on
the question of R.S.D.L.P. representation in the International Bureau, has made
this question an issue there between the two sections of the Party, and has laid
stress on minor points of sectional differences, the Conference of Southern
Organisations expresses its profound regret on this score. At the same time it
requests Comrade Plekhanov to continue representing our section of the Party in
the International Bureau and urges all ’Majority’ organisations immediately to
give their opinion on this question, and for their part to authorise Comrade
Plekhanov to act as such representative in the interests of the unity which we
are striving to attain, and to preserve with regard to all other socialist
parties in all other countries the prestige of the R.S.D.L.P., which is equally
dear to all of us.”


This resolution compels the undersigned to state the actual facts of the case:

1) The Mensheviks cannot but know that all agreements are contingent on the
Central Committee located in Russia. By deliberately referring to “Comrade
Lenin” alone, they are telling an untruth.

2) Immediately after the Third
Congress, two members of the Central Commit tee in Russia applied to Plekhanov
in person, expressing the wish that he act both as representative of the
R.S.D.L.P. in the International Bureau and as editor of a theoretical

    

organ. Plekhanov refused. The phrase “without ... any steps” is
based on a departure from the truth.

3) When, after this refusal, Plekhanov
resigned from the Iskra Editorial Board he declared in print (May 29),
without writing to the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., that he
would consent to represent only both sections of the R.S.D.L.P., and
likewise through the press asked those who recognise the Third Congress whether
they agreed to this.

4) Proletary’s Editorial Board immediately
published Plekhanov’s statement (in No. 5 of June 26 [13 1), adding that this
question had been referred to the Central Committee for decision.

5) Pending the
Central Committee’s decision on this question, I got in touch with the
International Bureau, on behalf of the Central Committee, in order to inform the
International Bureau about the Third Congress, and to inform the Central
Committee about the work of the International Bureau; at the same time I stated
that the question of R.S.D.L.P. representation on the International Bureau had
not yet been

       settled.[1]

In other words, the Central Committee maintained contacts
with the International Bureau through its representative abroad, pending a
decision on the question of a special representative on the Bureau.

6) When I
plainly and explicitly informed the International Bureau of the provisional
nature of my relations with it, I raised no question whatever
of a “struggle” or “differences”, but confined myself
exclusively to communicating the decisions of the Third Congress, which I was
absolutely bound to do.

7) On June 16 Plekhanov sent a letter to the
International Bureau in which he (a) erroneously asserted that he had already
been authorised by both groups to act as their representative and (b) set forth
the history of the split from the time of the Second Congress, telling this
story with many digressions from the truth, wholly in the Menshevik spirit, and
calling the convocation of the Third Congress by the Central Committee
“an utterly arbitrary act”, dubbing the conciliators in our Party
“the Marsh”, and stating that “something like half the
organisations ’with full rights’” were represented at the Congress, which was a
“combination of ultra-centralists and the Marsh”, etc.

 

8) I refuted this letter of Plekhanov’s point by point in my letter of July
   24, 1905 to the International

       Bureau.[2]

(I learned of Plekhanov’s letter
   only a month after it had been sent by him, when the International Bureau
   sent me a copy.) On the question of the “Marsh” I wrote in my
   letter to the following effect. “It is true that there is a ’Marsh’ in
   our Party. Its members were continually changing sides during the
   controversies within our Party. The first of these turncoats was Plekhanov,
   who went over from the Majority to the Minority in November 19O3, only to
   leave the Minority on May 29 of this year, when he resigned from

   Iskra’s 

Editorial Board. We do not approve of changing sides like
   that, but think we cannot be blamed if, after much vacillation, irresolute
   people who were members of the ’Marsh’, are inclined to follow us.” Dealing
   with the state of affairs after the split, I referred, in the same letter, to
   the necessity of providing the International Bureau with “a complete
   translation of all resolutions of the Conference”. “If
   Iskra refuses to send the translation to the Bureau,” I added,
   “we are prepared to do so ourselves.”


Let the readers now judge for themselves whether Plekhanov’s behaviour is
anything like impartial, and whether the statement of the facts by the new
conference bears any relation to the truth. Who is to blame for undermining the
prestige of the R.S.D.L.P.? For taking the initiative in acquainting the
International Bureau with the history of the split after the Second Congress?
For stressing “sectional differences”??


N. Lenin


P. S. To satisfy the Southern Conference’s desire to learn the opinion of the
Majority organisations, we are publishing elsewhere in this issue the resolution
of the Kostroma Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.,[3]

forwarded to us in
August 1905. The Editors have not received any other resolutions on this
question.

 

Notes
 

[1]

“A Letter to the International Socialist Bureau”, 1905. See present
edition, Vol. 8, p. 456.—Ed.

[2]

See pp. 142-45 of this volume.—Ed.
 



[3]

The Kostroma Committee, which adhered to the Bolshevik
stand, opposed the appointment of Plekhanov as representative to the
 International Socialist Bureau.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Talks With Our Readers









Lenin: Talks With Our Readers







V. I.  

      Lenin
Talks With Our Readers[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 20, October 10 (September 27), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 335.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

From the Editors. We are publishing excerpts from a letter written by a
comrade who is a member of one of our Party committees. This comrade is one of
the few that not only write to the Central Organ, but speak of their
understanding of tactics and of the way they apply this
tactics. Without such talks, not intended specially for publication, it is
impossible to work out uniform Party tactics in common. Without such an exchange
of opinions with those engaged in practical work, the editorial board of a paper
brought out abroad will never be the real mouthpiece of the whole Party. That is
why we are publishing an opinion expressed by a comrade who is familiar with a
small part of the most recent literature, because we wish to encourage the
largest possible number of practical workers to talk to us and exchange opinions
on all Party problems.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

“Talks with Our Readers” is the
editor’s introduction to a letter, published by Proletary
in excerpts, from the Bolshevik S. Gusev, who in the second half of
1905 was the secretary of the Odessa Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. In his letter
Gusev expressed his opinion of the Bolsheviks’ tactics in the 1905 Revolution,
reported on the explanatory work among the masses that was being conducted on
these questions, and criticised the decisions of the Geneva Conference of the
Mensheviks. Replying to Gusev on September 7 (20), 1905, Lenin wrote that he was
instituting contacts between the Central Organ and practical workers, and that
the editorial board intended publishing his letter in part. “On the whole
we are in agreement and hold the same opinions (your ideas coincide with mine in
Two Tactics),” Lenin wrote (Collected Works, Vol. 34, “A
Letter to S. I. Gusev”).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Days of Bloodshed in Moscow









Lenin: Days of Bloodshed in Moscow







V. I.  

      Lenin
Days of Bloodshed in Moscow[2]




Published:

      First published in 1926 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 336-341.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Geneva, October 10 (September 27), 1905


A new outbreak of the workers’ insurrection—a mass strike and street
fighting in Moscow. On January 9 the first peal of revolutionary action by the
proletariat thundered forth in the capital. The rumbling of this thunderclap
reverberated throughout Russia, and with unparalleled rapidity roused over a
million proletarians to titanic battle. St. Petersburg was followed by the
outlying regions, where oppression of local nationalities had rendered the
already insufferable political yoke still more intolerable. Riga, Poland,
Odessa, the Caucasus—all in turn became centres of insurrection which
spread and gained in intensity with every month, with every week. It has now
reached the centre of Russia, the heart of the “true Russian”
regions, whose stability had longest been movingly eulogised by the
reactionaries. A number of circumstances explain this relative stability, i.e.,
backwardness, in the Russian central regions. These are: the less developed
forms of big industry which involves masses of workers but is less divorced from
the land and has in less measure concentrated proletarians in intellectual
centres; the greater distances from foreign countries; the absence of national
discord. The labour movement, which manifested itself with such great force in
this region as far back as 1885-86, seemed to have died down for a long time,
and the obstacles presented by the particularly difficult local conditions of
work frustrated the efforts of the Social-Democrats scores of times.


But at last things began to move in the central areas too. The
Ivanovo-Voznesensk strike[3]

has revealed an unexpectedly

    

high degree of political maturity in the workers. Ever since this
strike the entire central industrial region has been in a state of unrest, which
has been steadily developing, gaining in intensity and sweep. This unrest has
now begun to manifest itself openly in the form of an uprising. Without any
doubt the outbreak was intensified by the revolutionary students in Moscow, who
have just passed a resolution, quite analogous to the St. Petersburg resolution,
branding the State Duma, calling for a struggle on behalf of a republic and for
the establishment of a provisional revolutionary government. The
“liberal” professors, who had just selected a most liberal rector,
the notorious Mr. Trubetskoi, closed the University under the pressure of police
threats; as they themselves said, they were afraid of a repetition of
the Tiflis shambles[4]

within the University walls. They thereby merely
precipitated bloodshed in the streets, outside the University.


As far as we can judge from the brief telegrams in the foreign press, the course
of events in Moscow was the “customary” one, which has, so to speak,
become the regular thing ever since January 9. It began with a compositors’
strike, which spread rapidly. On Saturday, September 24 (October 7), the
printing-shops, electric trains, and tobacco factories were already at a
standstill. No newspapers appeared, and a general strike of factory and railway
workers was expected. In the evening big demonstrations were held, attended,
besides the compositors, by workers of other trades, students, and so on. The
Cossacks and gendarmes dispersed the demonstrators time and again, but they kept
reassembling. Many policemen were injured; the demonstrators used stones and
revolvers; an officer in command of the gendarmes was severely injured. One
Cossack officer and one gendarme were killed, and so on.


On Saturday the bakers joined the strike.


On Sunday, September 25 (October 8), events at once took an ominous turn. From
11 a. m. workers began to assemble in the streets—especially on Strastnoi
Boulevard and elsewhere. The crowd sang the Marseillaise.
Printing-shops which refused to go on strike were wrecked. It was only after
overcoming stubborn resistance that the Cossacks managed to disperse the
demonstrators.

 

A crowd of about 400, consisting chiefly of bakery apprentices assembled in
      front of Filippov’s shop, near the Governor General’s residence. The crowd
      was attacked by Cossacks. The workers made their way into houses, climbed
      on to roofs, and showered the Cossacks with stones. The Cossacks opened
      fire at the roofs and, unable to dislodge the workers, resorted to a
      regular siege. One house was surround ed. A detachment of police and two
      companies of grenadiers made a flank movement, penetrated into the house
      from the rear and finally occupied the roof too. One hundred and
      ninety-two apprentices were arrested. Eight of them were injured and two
      workers were killed (we repeat that these are all telegraphic reports in
      the foreign press, of course, far from complete and providing only an
      approximate idea of the scale of the fighting). A reputable Belgian
      newspaper has published a report that janitors were busy cleaning the
      streets of traces of blood. This minor detail, it says, testifies to the
      seriousness of the struggle more than lengthy reports can.


St. Petersburg papers seem to have been allowed to write about the massacre in
Tverskaya Street. However, on the very next day the censor became frightened of
publicity, so that official reports as of Monday, September 26 (October 9)
stated that there had been no serious disturbances in Moscow. A different story
was contained in telephone messages reaching St. Petersburg newspapers. It
appears that the crowd reassembled near the Governor General’s house, where
sharp clashes took place. The Cossacks opened fire several times. As they
dismounted to fire, their horses trampled on many people. In the evening crowds
of workers thronged the boulevards, shouting revolutionary slogans and holding
red banners aloft. The crowd wrecked bakers and gunsmiths’ shops. They were
finally dispersed by the police. Many were injured. A company of soldiers are
standing guard at the Central Telegraph office. The bakers’ strike has become
general. Unrest among the students is still mounting, their assemblies growing
ever larger and more revolutionary. The St. Petersburg correspondent of The
Times reports that leaflets with a call to fight have been circulated in
St. Petersburg, that unrest is rife among the bakers there, that a demonstration
has been fixed for

    

Saturday, October 1(14), and that the public are greatly alarmed.


Meagre as this information is, it nevertheless leads us to the conclusion that
the insurrectionary outbreak in Moscow is not a relatively high stage of the
movement, compared with the others. No previously trained and well-armed
revolutionary contingents were in evidence; no section of the troops went over
to the side of the people, nor was wide use made of bombs, the “new”
type of popular armament (which created such panic among the Cossacks and
soldiers in Tiflis on September 26 [October 91). In the absence of any of these
conditions, it was impossible to count either on the arming of a large number of
workers, or on the victory of the uprising. As we have already pointed out, the
Moscow events are of moment for quite a different reason: they mark the baptism
of fire of a big centre, the involvement of an enormous industrial region in a
serious struggle.


The uprising in Russia does not and cannot, of course, advance at an even and
regular rate. The outstanding feature of the St. Petersburg events of January 9
was the rapid and unanimous movement of huge masses, unarmed and not out for
battle, who nevertheless received a great lesson in the struggle. In Poland and
in the Caucasus the movement is characterised by great stubbornness and the
relatively more frequent use of arms and bombs by the population. The events in
Odessa were distinguished by the fact that part of the troops went over to the
rebels. In all cases and at all times, the movement has been essentially
proletarian, inseparably merged with the mass strike. In Moscow the movement
proceeded along the same lines, as was the case in a number of other and smaller
industrial centres.


The question which naturally arises now is: will the revolutionary movement stop
at the stage of development it has already reached, a stage which has become
“customary” and familiar, or will it advance to a higher level? If
we venture into the field of appraisal of such intricate and incalculable events
as those of the Russian revolution, we shall inevitably arrive at the conclusion
that the second alternative is infinitely the more probable. True, even the
present form of struggle, already rehearsed if we may use such an
expression—guerilla warfare, constant strikes,

    

wearing down the enemy in street fighting, now in this part of the country, now
      in another—this form of struggle has also yielded and continues to
      yield very important results. No state is able to withstand
      à la

     longue[1]

a stubborn struggle of this sort, which brings industrial life
    to a standstill, introduces utter demoralisation into the bureaucracy and
    the army, and spreads dissatisfaction with the existing state of affairs
    among all sections of the people. Still less is the Russian autocratic
    government capable of enduring such a struggle. We may be quite confident
    that a persistent continuation of the struggle, even in forms that have
    already been created by the working-class movement, will inevitably bring
    about the collapse of tsarism.


However, it is highly improbable that the revolutionary movement in present-day
Russia will halt at the stage it has already reached. On the contrary, all the
facts indicate rather that this is only an initial stage in the struggle. Far
from all the consequences of the shameful and ruinous war have as yet been felt
by the people. The economic crisis in the cities and famine in the villages are
exacerbating public feeling. Judging by available information, the Manchurian
army is in an extremely revolutionary temper, and the government is afraid to
bring it back—yet it is impossible not to bring it back in view of the
danger of new and even more serious uprisings. Never before has political
agitation among the workers and peasants in Russia been so wide spread, so
methodical, or so far-reaching. The State Duma farce inevitably entails fresh
defeats for the government, and fresh ill-will in the population. Within the
last ten months or so, the insurrection has grown tremendously before our very
eyes, and the conclusion that the uprising will soon reach a new and higher
stage, wherein fighting detachments of revolutionaries or of mutinous military
units will come to the assistance of the multitude, helping the masses to
procure arms, and introducing the greatest vacillation into the ranks of the
“tsarist” (still tsarist, but already far from wholly tsarist)
troops, wherein the uprising will lead to an important victory which
tsarism will be unable to recover from—this conclusion is not a figment of
the

    

imagination or a piece of wishful thinking, but one that stems directly and
necessarily from the facts of the mass struggle.


The tsar’s troops were victorious over the workers in Moscow. This victory has
not enfeebled the vanquished, but has only welded them more closely together,
deepened their hatred, and brought them closer to the practical tasks of a
serious struggle. It is one of those victories that cannot fail to introduce
vacillation in the ranks of the victors. Only now are the troops beginning to
learn, and to learn not only by looking up laws but from their own experience,
that they are being mobilised wholly and exclusively to fight the “enemy
at home”. The war with Japan is over, but mobilisation continues,
mobilisation against the revolution. Such
mobilisation holds no terrors
for us, nor do we hesitate to welcome it, for the greater the number of soldiers
called upon to wage a systematic struggle against the people, the more rapidly
will the political and revolutionary education of these soldiers proceed. By
mobilising ever new military units to wage war on the revolution, tsarism is
delaying the issue, but such delay is of the greatest advantage to us, for in
such protracted guerilla warfare the proletarians will learn how to fight, while
the army will inevitably be drawn into political life, and the call of that
life, the militant call of young Russia, is penetrating even the tightly locked
doors of the army barracks, is awakening even the most ignorant, the most
backward, and the most cowed.


An insurrectionary outbreak has once more been sup pressed. Once more we say:
Hail the insurrection!

 

Notes
 

[1]

For a long time.—Ed.
 



[2]

Days of Bloodshed in Moscow is a draft of the
article “The Political Strike and the Street Fighting in Moscow”,
which is published in this volume on pages 347-55.





[3]

The Ivanovo-Voznesensk strike, which began at the
end of May and lasted till early August in 1905, involved about 70,000 workers
of both sexes. Leadership was provided by the Northern Committee of the
Bolsheviks. During the strike the workers formed a Council of Workers’
Representatives which in fact was one of the earliest Soviets of Workers’
Deputies in Russia.





[4]

The police fired on Tiflis workers who had gathered on August 29
(September 11), 1905 in the building of the City Council to
discuss the elections to the State Duma. By order of the tsarist authorities,
the police and the Cossacks surrounded the building, broke into the hall where
over 2,000 persons were assembled, and fell upon them. Sixty people were killed
and about 300 injured.


All over the Caucasus—in Tiflis, Kutaisi, Sukhumi, etc.— political
demonstrations and strikes took place in protest against the crimes perpetrated
by the tsarist regime. Leaflets calling for an armed uprising against the
autocracy were published by the Tiflis Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and No. 18 of
Proletary dated September 26 (13), 1905 carried a special bulletin
signed by the Caucasian League Committee regarding the events in
Tiflis.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Bourgeoisie Awakened from its Slumber









Lenin: The Bourgeoisie Awakened from its Slumber







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Bourgeoisie Awakened from its Slumber




Written: Written late in September 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1926 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 342-343.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

Subject for an Article

Imagine a small number of people fighting against a crying and hideous evil, of
which the masses of sleeping people are unaware or to which they are
indifferent. What should the fighters do first?

1) awaken as many of the
sleepers as possible;

2) enlighten them as to the aims of their struggle, and
its conditions;

3) organise them into a force capable of achieving victory;

4)
teach them to make the proper use of the fruits of their victory.


Naturally, point

1 must precede points 2 to 4, which
are impossible without

1.


And so we have a small number of people waking every body, shaking up
one and all.


Owing to the course taken by events, their efforts have been crowned with
success. The masses have been awakened. Now it seems that a section of those who
have been awakened is interested in preserving the evil, and intends
either consciously to uphold it or else to preserve such of its features or
parts as are of advantage to the given groups of the awakened.


Is it not natural, then, that the fighters, the heralds of battle, the
awakeners, the bell-ringers of the revolution, should turn against
these awakened ones, whom they themselves have roused? Is it not
natural that the fighters should then no longer waste their energies on
stirring up “one and all”, but rather transfer the main attention to
those who have proved capable

1) of awakening—in the first place;

2) of assimilating the ideas of consistent struggle—in the second place;

3) of fighting in earnest and to the end—in the third place?

 

Such has been the Russian Social-Democrats’ attitude
to the liberals in 1900-02 (they did the rousing), in 1902-04
(they drew distinctions among the awakened), and in 1905
(they fought against the awakened ... traitors).

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## To the Combat Committee of the St. Petersburg Committee









Lenin: To the Combat Committee of the St. Petersburg Committee







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Combat Committee of the St. Petersburg Committee




Published:

      First published in 1926 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 344-346.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

October 16, 1905


Dear Comrades,


Many thanks for sending

1) the report of the Combat Committee and

2) a
memorandum on the organisation of preparations for insurrection

+3) 

a scheme
of the organisation. After reading these documents, I think it my duty to write
directly to the Combat Committee for a comradely exchange of opinions. I need
hardly say that I do not undertake to judge of the practical side of the matter;
there can be no doubt that everything possible is being done under the difficult
conditions in Russia. However, judging by the documents, the whole thing
threatens to degenerate into office routine. All these schemes, all these plans
of organisation of the Combat Committee create the impression of red tape—
forgive me my frankness, but I hope that you will not suspect me of
fault-finding. Schemes, and disputes and discussions about the functions of the
Combat Committee and its rights, are of the least value in a matter like
this. What is needed is furious energy, and again energy. It horrifies me—
I give you my word—it horrifies me to find that there has been talk about
bombs for over six months, yet not one has been made! And it is the
most learned of people who are doing the talking.... Go to the youth, gentlemen!
That is the only remedy! Otherwise—I give you my word for it—you
will be too late (everything tells me that), and will be left with
“learned” memoranda, plans, charts, schemes, and magnificent
recipes, but without an organisation, without a living cause. Go to the
youth. Form fighting squads at once everywhere,

    

among the students, and especially among the workers, etc., etc. Let
groups be at once organised of three, ten, thirty, etc., persons. Let them arm
themselves at once as best they can, be it with a revolver, a knife, a rag
soaked in kerosene for starting fires, etc. Let these detachments at once select
leaders, and as far as possible contact the Combat Committee of the
St. Petersburg Committee. Do not demand any formalities, and, for heaven’s sake,
forget all these schemes, and send all “functions, rights, and
privileges” to the devil. Do not make membership in the R.S.D.L.P. an
absolute condition—that would be an absurd demand for an armed
uprising. Do not refuse to contact any group, even if it consists of only three
persons; make it the one sole condition that it should be reliable as far as
police spying is concerned and prepared to fight the tsar’s troops. Let the
groups join the R.S.D.L.P. or associate themselves with the
R.S.D.L.P. if they want to; that would be splendid. But I would consider it
quite wrong to insist on it.


The role of the Combat Committee of the St. Petersburg Committee should be to
help these contingents of the revolutionary army, to serve as a
“bureau” for contact purposes, etc. Any contingent will willingly
accept your services, but if in such a matter you begin with
schemes and with talk about the “rights” of the Combat Committee,
you will ruin the whole cause; I assure you, you will ruin it irreparably.


You must proceed to propaganda on a wide scale. Let five or ten people make the
round of hundreds of workers’ and students’ study circles in a week,
penetrate wherever they can, and everywhere propose a clear, brief, direct, and
simple plan: organise combat groups immediately, arm yourselves as best you can,
and work with all your might; we will help you in every way we can, but do
not wait for our help; act for yourselves.


The principal thing in a matter like this is the initiative of the mass of small
groups. They will do everything. With out them your entire Combat Committee is
nothing. I am prepared to gauge the efficiency of the Combat Committee’s work by
the number of such combat groups it is in contact with. If in a month or two the
Combat Committee does not have a minimum of 200 or 300 groups in St. Petersburg,
then it is a dead Combat Committee. It will have to be

    

buried. If it cannot muster a hundred or two of groups in seething times like
      these, then it is indeed remote from real life.


The propagandists must supply each group with brief and simple recipes for
making bombs, give them an elementary explanation of the type of the work, and
then leave it all to them. Squads must at once begin military training
by launching operations immediately, at once. Some may at once undertake to kill
a spy or blow up a police station, others to raid a bank to confiscate funds for
the insurrection, others again may drill or prepare plans of localities,
etc. But the essential thing is to begin at once to learn from actual practice:
have no fear of these trial attacks. They may, of course, degenerate into
extremes, but that is an evil of the morrow, whereas the evil today is our
inertness, our doctrinaire spirit, our learned immobility, and our senile fear
of initiative. Let every group learn, if it is only by beating up policemen: a
score or so victims will be more than compensated for by the fact that this will
train hundreds of experienced fighters, who tomorrow will be leading hundreds of
thousands.


I send you warm greetings, comrades, and wish you success. I have no desire to
impose my views on you, but I consider it my duty to tender my word of
advice.


Yours,


Lenin

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Political Strike and the Street Fighting in Moscow









Lenin: The Political Strike and the Street Fighting in Moscow







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Political Strike and the Street Fighting in Moscow




Published:
Proletary, No. 21, October 17 (4), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 347-355.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The revolutionary events in Moscow have been the first flashes of lightning in a
thunderstorm and they have lit up a new field of battle. The promulgation of the
State Duma Act and the conclusion of peace have marked the beginning of a new
period in the history of the Russian revolution. Already weary of the workers’
persistent struggle and disturbed by the spectre of “uninterrupted
revolution”, the liberal bourgeoisie has heaved a sigh of relief and
joyously caught at the sop thrown to it. All along the line a struggle has begun
against the idea of a boycott, and liberalism has turned openly towards the
right. Unfortunately, even among the Social-Democrats (in the
new-Iskra camp) there are unstable people who are prepared on
certain terms to
support these bourgeois traitors to the revolution, and to take the State Duma
“seriously”. The events in Moscow, it may be hoped, will put the
sceptics to shame, and will help the doubters to make a proper appraisal of the
state of affairs on the new field of battle. Anaemic intellectuals’ dreams of
the possibility of popular elections under the autocracy, as well as illusions
harboured by dull-witted liberals regarding the State Duma’s crucial importance,
vanished into thin air at the very first major revolutionary action by the
proletariat.


Our information on the Moscow events is as yet (October 12, N. S.) very
meagre. It is confined to brief and often contradictory reports in foreign
newspapers, and to censor screened accounts of the beginning of the movement,
published in the legal press. One thing is certain: in its initial stage the
Moscow workers’ struggle proceeded along lines that have become customary
during the past revolutionary year. The

    

working-class movement has left its imprint on the entire Russian
      revolution. Starting with sporadic strikes it rapidly developed into mass
      strikes, on the one hand, and into street demonstrations, on the other. In
      1905 the political strike has become an established form of the movement,
      developing before our eyes into insurrection. Whereas it took the entire
      working-class movement of Russia ten years to reach its present (and of
      course far from final) stage, the movement in certain parts of the
      country has progressed in a few days from a mere strike to a tremendous
      revolutionary outbreak.


The compositors’ strike in Moscow, we are informed, was started by politically
backward workers. But the movement immediately slipped out of their control, and
became a broad trade union movement. Workers of other trades joined in. Street
demonstrations by workers, inevitable if only for the purpose of letting
uninformed fellow-workers learn of the strike, turned into political
demonstrations, with revolutionary songs and speeches. Long suppressed
bitterness against the vile farce of “popular” elections
to the State Duma
came to the surface. The mass strike developed into a mass mobilisation of
fighters for genuine liberty. The radical students appeared on the scene, who
in Moscow passed a resolution absolutely analogous to that of the St. Petersburg
students. In the language of free citizens, not of cringing officials, this
resolution very properly branded the State Duma as brazen mockery of the people,
and called for a struggle for a republic, for the convocation of a genuinely
popular and genuinely constituent assembly by a revolutionary provisional
government. The proletariat and progressive sections of the revolutionary
democrats began street fighting against the tsarist army and police.


This is how the movement developed in Moscow. On Saturday, September24 (October
7), the compositors were no longer alone—the tobacco factories and
electric trains were also at a standstill, and a bakers’ strike had begun. In
the evening big demonstrations were held, attended, besides workers and
students, by very many “outsiders” (revolutionary workers and
radical students no longer regarded each other as outsiders at open actions by
the people). The Cossacks and gendarmes did their utmost to disperse the
demonstrators,

    

who kept reassembling. The crowd offered resistance to the police and the
Cossacks; revolver shots were fired and many policemen were wounded.


On Sunday, September 25 (October 8), events at once took a formidable turn. At
11 a. m. workers began to assemble in the streets, with the crowd singing the
Marseillaise. Revolutionary mass meetings were held, and printing-shops
whose staff refused to strike were wrecked. Bakeries and gunsmiths’ shops were
attacked, for the workers needed bread to live and arms to fight for freedom
(just as the French revolutionary song has it). It was only after stub born
resistance that the Cossacks managed to disperse the demonstrators. There was a
regular battle in Tverskaya Street, near the Governor General’s house. In front
of the Filippov bakery a crowd of bakers’ apprentices assembled. As the
management of the bakery subsequently declared, they were going out peacefully
into the street, after stopping work in solidarity with the other strikers. A
Cossack detachment attacked the crowd, who made their way into a house, climbed
on to the roof and into the garrets, and showered the soldiers with
stones. There began a regular siege of the house, with the troops firing on the
workers. All communication was cut. Two companies of grenadiers made a flank
movement, penetrated into the house from the rear, and captured the enemy’s
stronghold. One hundred and ninety-two apprentices were arrested, of whom eight
were injured; two workers were killed. There were injured among the police and
the troops, a captain of gendarmes sustaining fatal injuries.


Naturally, this information is extremely incomplete. According to private
telegrams, quoted in some foreign newspapers, the brutality of the Cossacks and
soldiers knew no bounds. The Filippov bakery management has protested against
the unprovoked outrages perpetrated by the troops. A reputable Belgian newspaper
has published a report that janitors were busy cleaning the streets of traces of
blood. This minor detail—it says—testifies to the seriousness of the
struggle more than lengthy reports can. On the basis of information from private
sources that has found its way into the press,
Vorwärts[1]

has stated that in Tverskaya Street 10,000 strikers clashed with an
infantry battalion, which

    

fired several volleys. The ambulance service had its hands full. It is estimated
      that no less than 50 people were killed and as many as 600 injured. The
      arrested are reported to have been taken to army barracks, where they were
      mercilessly and brutally manhandled, being made to run the
      gauntlet. It is further reported that during the street fighting the
      officers distinguished themselves by their inhuman brutality, even towards
      women (a St. Petersburg cable from the special correspondent of the
      conservative bourgeois Temps, dated October 10 [September 27]).


Information on the events of the subsequent days is more and more scanty. The
workers’ wrath mounted frightfully, the movement gathering momentum. The
government took all measures to ban or slash all reports. Foreign newspapers
have openly written of the contradiction between the reassuring news from the
official agencies (which at one time were believed) and the news transmitted to
St. Petersburg by telephone. Gaston Leroux wired to the Paris Matin
that the censorship was performing prodigies by way of preventing the spread of
news that might be in the least alarming. Monday, September 26 (October 9), he
wrote, was one of the most sanguinary days in the history of Russia. There was
fighting in all the main streets and even near the Governor General’s
residence. The demonstrators unfurled a red flag. Many were killed or injured.


The reports in other papers are contradictory. Only one thing is
certain—the strike is spreading and has been joined by most workers
employed at the big factories, and even in the light industries. The railwaymen
too have stopped work. The strike is becoming general. (Tuesday, October 10
[September 271, and Wednesday.)


The situation is extremely grave. The movement is spreading to St. Petersburg:
the workers of the San-Galli Works have already downed tools.


This is as far as our information goes to date. Any complete appraisal of the
Moscow events on the strength of such information is, of course, out of the
question. One still cannot say whether these events are a full-scale rehearsal
for a decisive proletarian onslaught on the autocracy, or whether they are
actually the beginning of this onslaught; whether they are only an extension of
the “usual” methods of struggle

    

described above to a new area of Central Russia, or whether they are destined
to mark the beginning of a higher form of struggle and of a more decisive
uprising.


To all appearances, the answer to these questions will be forthcoming in the
near future. One thing is certain:

before our very eyes, the insurrection is spreading, the struggle is becoming
ever more widespread, and its forms ever more acute. All over Russia the
proletariat is pressing onward with heroic efforts, indicating now here, now
there, in what direction the armed uprising can and, undoubtedly, will
develop. True, even the present form of struggle, already created by the
movement of the working masses, is dealing very telling blows at tsarism. The
civil war has assumed the form of desperately stubborn and universal guerilla
warfare. The working class is giving the enemy no respite, disrupting industrial
life, constantly bringing the entire machinery of local government to a
standstill, creating a state of alarm all over the country, and is mobilising
ever new forces for the struggle. No state is able to hold out for long against
such an onslaught, least of all the utterly corrupt tsarist government, from
which its supporters are falling away one by one. And if the liberal-monarchist
bourgeoisie finds the struggle at times too persistent, if it is terrified by
the civil war and by the alarming state of uncertainty which has gripped the
country, the continuation of this state of affairs and the prolongation of the
struggle is a matter of the utmost necessity to the revolutionary
proletariat. If, among ideologists of the bourgeoisie, people are beginning to
appear who are set on smothering the revolutionary conflagration with their
sermons on peaceful and law-abiding progress, and are concerned with blunting
the political crisis instead of making it more acute, the class-conscious
proletariat, which has never doubted the treacherous nature of the bourgeois bye
of freedom, will march straight ahead, rousing the peasantry to follow it, and
causing disaffection in the tsar’s army. The workers’ persistent struggle, the
constant strikes and demonstrations, the partial uprisings—all these, so
to say, test battles and clashes are inexorably drawing the army into political
life and consequently into the sphere of revolutionary problems. Experience in
the struggle enlightens more rapidly and more profoundly than years of
propaganda

    

under other circumstances. The foreign war is over, but the government is
      obviously afraid of the return home of war prisoners and of the army in
      Manchuria. Reports of the revolutionary temper of the latter are coming in
      thick and fast. The proposed agricultural colonies in Siberia for officers
      and men of the army in Manchuria cannot but increase the unrest, even if
      these plans remain on paper. Mobilisation has not ceased, though peace
      has been concluded. It is becoming increasingly obvious that the army is
      needed wholly and exclusively against the revolution. Under such
    circumstances, we revolutionaries do not in the least object to the
    mobilisation; we are even prepared to welcome it. In delaying the denouement
    by involving ever more army units in the struggle, and in getting more and
    more troops used to civil war, the government is not doing away with the
    source of all crises, but, on the contrary, is extending the field for
    them. It is winning some respite at the price of the inevitable extension of
    the field of battle and of rendering the struggle more acute. It is stirring
    to action the most backward people, the most ignorant, the most cowed, and
    the politically inert—and the struggle will enlighten, rouse, and
    enliven these people. The longer the present state of civil war lasts, the
    more inevitably will large numbers of neutrals and a nucleus of champions of
    revolution be drawn from the ranks of the army of counter-revolution.


The entire course of the Russian revolution during the last few months shows
that the stage now reached is not, and cannot be, the peak stage. The movement
is still on the upgrade, as it has been ever since January 9. It was then that
for the first time we saw a movement that amazed the world with the unanimity
and solidarity of the huge masses of workers who had risen to advance political
demands. This movement was still quite devoid of revolutionary consciousness,
and helpless as regards arms and military preparedness. Poland and the Caucasus
have provided an example of struggle on a higher plane; there the proletariat
has partly begun to fight with weapons, and hostilities have assumed a
protracted form. The Odessa uprising was marked by a new and important factor
needed for victory—part of the forces went over to the side of the
people. It is true that this did not bring immediate success; the difficult task
of “co-ordinating

    

operations of land and sea forces” (a most difficult task even for a
regular army) had not yet been accomplished. But the problem was posed, and by
all tokens the Odessa events will not remain an isolated incident. The Moscow
strike shows us the spread of the struggle to a “genuinely Russian”
region, whose reliability had so long delighted the hearts of the
reactionaries. The revolutionary action that has started in this region is of
enormous significance even if only for the fact that proletarian masses here,
who are receiving their baptism of fire, have been most inert and at the same
time are concentrated in a relatively small area in numbers unequalled in any
other part of Russia. The movement started in St. Petersburg, spread through all
the marginal regions of Russia, and mobilised Riga, Poland, Odessa, and the
Caucasus; the conflagration has now spread to the very heart of Russia.


The disgraceful farce of the State Duma appears all the more contemptible in
comparison with this genuinely revolutionary action by a class ready for battle
and truly progressive. The union of the proletariat and revolutionary democracy,
which we have spoken of on more than one occasion, is becoming a fact. The
radical students, who both in St. Petersburg and in Moscow adopted the slogans
of revolutionary Social-Democracy, are the vanguard of all the democratic
forces. Loathing the baseness of the “Constitutional Democratic”
reformists who have accepted the State Duma, these forces gravitate towards a
real and decisive struggle against the accursed enemy of the Russian people
rather than towards a policy of bargaining with the autocracy.


Look at the liberal professors, rectors, vice-rectors, and the entire company
of Trubetskois, Manuilovs, and their like. These people are the finest
representatives of liberalism and the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the most
enlightened, the best educated, the most disinterested, the least affected by
the direct pressure and the influence of the money-bag. And how do these best
people behave? What use did they make of the first authority they obtained,
authority they were invested with by election, their authority over the
universities? They are already afraid of the revolution, they fear the
aggravation and the extension of the movement, they are already trying to
extinguish the fire

    

and bring about tranquillity, thereby earning well-merited insults in the form
      of praise from the Princes Meshchersky.


And they were well punished, these philistines of bourgeois science. They
closed Moscow University, fearing a shambles on its premises. They merely
succeeded in precipitating incomparably greater slaughter in the streets. They
wanted to extinguish revolution in the University, but they only kindled it in
the streets. They got into a quandary, along with the Trepovs and the Romanovs,
whom they now hasten to persuade that freedom of assembly is needed:

If you shut the University—you open the way for street fighting. If you
open the University—you provide a platform for revolutionary mass
meetings which will train new and even more determined champions of liberty.


How infinitely instructive is the instance of these liberal professors for an
appraisal of our State Duma! Is it not clear now, from the experience of the
universities, that the liberals and the Constitutional-Democrats will tremble
for the “fate of the Duma” just as much as these miserable knights
of cheap-jack science tremble for the “fate of the universities”? Is it
not now clear that the liberals and the Constitutional-Democrats cannot use the
Duma in any other way save the purpose of still more extensive and still more
evil-smelling preaching of peaceful and law-abiding progress? Is it not clear
now how ridiculous are the hopes of transforming the Duma into a revolutionary
assembly? Is it not clear that there is only one method of
“influencing”—not specifically the Duma or specifically the
universities but the whole of the old autocratic regime—the method of
the Moscow workers, the method of insurrection by the people? It is this
alone that will not merely force the Manuilovs in the universities to ask for
freedom of assembly, and the Petrunkeviches in the Duma to ask for liberty for
the people, but will win genuine liberty for the people.


The Moscow events have shown the real alignment of social forces: the liberals
scampered from the government to the radicals, urging the latter to desist from
the revolutionary struggle. The radicals fought in the ranks of the
proletariat. Let us not forget this lesson: it also bears directly on the State
Duma.

 

Let the Petrunkeviches and the other Constitutional-Democrats play at
parliamentarianism in autocratic Russia—the workers will wage a
revolutionary struggle for genuine sovereignty of the people.


Irrespective of how the insurrectionary outbreak in Moscow ends, the
revolutionary movement will in any case emerge even stronger than before, will
spread to a wider area, and gather new forces. Let us even assume that the
tsarist troops are now celebrating a complete victory in Moscow—a few more
such victories and the utter collapse of tsardom will become a fact. This will
then be the actual, genuine collapse of the entire heritage of serf-ownership,
autocracy, and obscurantism—not the flabby, craven, and hypocritical
patching up of tattered rags, with which the liberal bourgeois are trying to
delude themselves and others. Let us even assume that tomorrow’s post will bring
us the sad news that the insurrectionary outbreak has been crushed once
again. We shall then exclaim: once again—hail insurrection!

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Vorwärts—central organ of German
Social-Democracy, was published from 1876 onwards, under the editorship of
Wilhelm Liebknecht and others. In its columns Frederick Engels waged a struggle
against all manifestations of opportunism. From the middle nineties, after the
death of Engels, the paper began systematic publication of writings by the
opportunists dominant in German Social-Democracy and the Second
International.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Latest in Iskra Tactics, or Mock Elections as a New Incentive to an Uprising









Lenin: The Latest in Iskra Tactics, or Mock Elections as a New Incentive to an Uprising







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Latest in Iskra Tactics, or Mock Elections as a New Incentive to an Uprising




Published:
Proletary, No. 21, October 17 (4), 19O5.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 356-373.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We have spoken many times already about the inefficacy of the
Iskra tactics in the “Duma” campaign. The two main lines of
this tactics—the urge to support the Osvobozhdeniye League which
wants to enter the Duma on the strength of certain revolutionary pledges and the
release of a slogan calling for “revolutionary self-government of
citizens” and for popular elections to a constituent assembly under the
autocracy—are both unsound. In the resolution of the Mensheviks’
“Southern Constituent [?] Conference” we at last
have an attempt to formulate the Iskra tactics accurately and
officially. At this Conference the best of the new-Iskra forces in
Russia were represented. The resolution is an attempt at a business-like
exposition of purely practical advice addressed to the proletariat. That is why
a careful analysis of this resolution is so essential, both for the purpose of
evolving a definite line of practical activity and for an appraisal of
Iskra’s tactical stand as a whole.


We quote the full text of the resolution:



Resolution on the State Duma
Adopted by the Constituent Conference of the Southern Organisations


Whereas,


we see the only way out of the present difficult conditions, compatible with
the interests of the whole people, in the convocation of a constituent assembly
elected on the basis of universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and a
secret ballot, for the purpose of abolishing the autocratic regime, and
establishing a democratic republic necessary in the first place to the
proletariat in its struggle against all the foundations of the bourgeois system
and for the achievement of socialism; and whereas,

 

1) the system of elections to the State Duma does not enable the whole
people to participate in them, the proletariat being excluded from the elections
by reason of the high property qualification fixed for urban dwellers, while the
peasantry—a mere section of it at that— will vote on the basis of a
four-stage system, which provides the authorities with every opportunity for
exerting pressure on them; and whereas,


2) the whole of Russia is still deprived of all essential civil liberties, in
   the absence of which there can be no election campaign and, consequently, no
   elections conducted with any degree of fairness, and whereas, on the
   contrary, at the present time the authorities’ arbitrary procedure is
   everywhere becoming worse than ever before, and vast areas are one after the
   other placed under martial law; and, finally, whereas,


3) a system of representation which is even more of a travesty is
being worked out for all the marginal regions; —


the Conference urges all organisations to build up a most
energetic campaign of agitation to expose the entire travesty of representation
by which the autocratic government proposes to deceive the people, and declares
deliberate traitors to the people all those who are prepared to content
themselves with the State Duma, and who will not at this decisive moment set
themselves the task of supporting by their actions and tactics the revolutionary
people’s demand for the convocation of a constituent assembly elected on the
basis of universal and equal suffrage, direct elections and a secret ballot.


To achieve the speediest possible realisation of the said demand, the Southern
Conference recommends the following tactics to the Party organisations:


1) The launching of an energetic agitation campaign among the industrial
proletariat and the peasant masses for the creation of comprehensive democratic
organisations and their amalgamation in an all-Russia organisation with the
purpose of waging an energetic struggle against the State Duma and for the
establishment of a popular constituent assembly with the immediate introduction
of freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, of association, and the right
to strike. The establishment of this all-Russia people’s organisation should
proceed through the formation of agitation committees elected

by the workers

at their respective factories, and the amalgamation agitation committees;
through the creation of similar agitation committees among the peasantry;
through the establishment of closer ties between the urban and rural committees;
through the setting up of gubernia committees and the establishment of contact
between them.


2) If this organisation proves sufficiently strong, and the working masses’
   temper appropriate, the inauguration of the election campaign should be used
   to organise nation-wide popular elections to a constituent assembly, bearing
   in mind the prospect that the organised movement of the people, aimed at
   getting these elections held, may naturally lead to the whole people rising
   against tsarism, since inevitable resistance by the latter and the clash with
   it on the occasion

    

of the elections will provide the rising with new incentives, while the people’s
      preliminary organisation will give the rising universality and unity.


3) In addition, the Conference proposes that efforts be made to secure freedom
   of election meetings and recommends energetic intervention in the election
   campaign, intervention by the people in electors’ meetings, and public
   discussion of the tasks confronting representatives elected to the State
   Duma, these discussions to be conducted by electors at mass meetings. At the
   same time, the Social-Democratic Party must induce those sections of the
   population with the right to vote in the State Duma elections, to take to the
   road of revolution. This may find expression either in their joining an
   uprising led by the democratic organisations of the people, or, in the
   absence of such, in their striving to transform the incipient State Duma into
   a revolutionary assembly that will convoke a popular constituent assembly, or
   facilitate its convocation by the democratic organisations of the people.


4) Preparations should be made for exerting pressure on the State Duma along the
   same lines, should the mass movement fail to have brought about the overthrow
   of the autocracy and the establishment of a constituent assembly by the time
   the Duma is finally convened. Preparations should be made for an ultimatum to
   the State Duma demanding the convocation of a constituent assembly and the
   immediate introduction of freedom of speech, assembly, the press and
   association, and the arming of the people. Preparations should be made to
   back up this ultimatum with a political strike and other mass action by the
   people.


5) All this tactics shall be approved at general mass meetings, organised prior
   to and during the election campaign among the proletariat
   and the peasantry.



We shall not dwell on the shortcomings in the redaction of the resolution which
is far too wordy. Let us deal with its fundamental mistakes.


1. The preamble speaks of the only way out of the present situation. In this
connection the entire stress is placed on the idea of a constituent
assembly, and not a word is said as to who is to call it, so that the
“way out” should be not merely on paper, but in actual
fact. Silence on this score amounts to Social-Democrats yielding to the
Osvobozhdeniye gentry. As we have repeatedly pointed out, it
is the interests of the monarchist-liberal bourgeoisie that oblige the
Osvobozhdeniye gentry to limit themselves to the convocation of a
popular constituent assembly, and pass over in silence the question of
who is to call it. This, as we have repeatedly pointed out, is the very question
that the developing revolution has brought into the forefront, and herein

    

at present lies the fundamental difference between the bourgeoisie’s opportunist
(“compromise”) tactics and the proletariat’s revolutionary tactics. By
their resolution the new-Iskra supporters have furnished documentary
proof of their incurable blindness in fundamental questions of tactics, and of
their relapsing into Osvobozhdeniye slogans.


In the succeeding sections the resolution still more confuses the question of
the convocation of a popular constituent assembly. Propaganda which proclaims
confidence in the State Duma on this score is downright reactionary, while to
say that a constituent assembly should be convened by a “democratic
organisation of the people” is much like proposing to call a constituent
assembly through a committee of friends of the people living on the planet
Mars. At their all-Russia Conference the new-Iskrists committed an unpardonable
error in placing the convocation of a popular constituent assembly by a
revolutionary government on a par with its convocation by a
representative institution. The new-Iskrists have now gone even farther in
reverse:

they have not even mentioned a revolutionary provisional government. Why? On
what grounds? In what respect have their views changed? All this remains a
mystery. Instead of developing tactical directives, the Mensheviks’ conferences
merely provide exhibitions of plunges and vacillations now to the right, now to
the left.


2. To call “deliberate traitors to the people all those who are prepared
   to content themselves with the State Duma”, etc., is just such a plunge
   ostensibly to the left, but one that is not towards a genuinely revolutionary
   path, but rather towards revolutionary phrase-mongering. In the first place,
   what is the point of the stinging adjective “deliberate”
   (traitor)? Was Johann Jacoby, who entered the State Duma or the United
   Landtag in 1847 as a bourgeois liberal, and went over to the Social-Democrats
   after the war of 1870- 71, a deliberate traitor to the people? Will any
   peasant who goes into the Duma and is “prepared” to content
   himself with very, very little be a deliberate traitor? Secondly, is it
   reasonable to establish as criteria of treachery things like:

"whoever is prepared to content himself”, “whoever
does not set himself the task”, etc.? Row does one reveal one s
“being prepared” and “setting oneself the task”—in word,

    

or in deed? If in word, then it is necessary to obtain from those C.D.s
      ("Constitutional-Democrats”, as the Osvobozhdeniye
    gentry now call themselves) who are entering the State Duma, a written
    promise or revolutionary pledge (Parvus, Cherevanin, Martov). In that case
    the resolution should express this idea clearly instead of being so vague
    about it. On the other hand, if being “prepared” is proved in
    deed, then why does the resolution not state openly and straightforwardly
    what “actions” It considers proof of this preparedness?
    The reason is because the resolution reflects the fundamental error of the
    new Iskra, which is unable to distinguish between revolutionary
    democracy and liberal-monarchist democracy. Thirdly, is it rational for a
    militant party to talk in general about persons (“all who”) instead of
    speaking concretely about trends or parties? At present it is of particular
    importance for us to expose to the proletariat that trend—the Party of
    Constitutional-Democrats—whose “actions” have already
    shown us what demands it supports, and how it does so. Addressing the
    workers in the name of Social-Democratic organisations, speaking to them
    about entrants into the Duma, and about Duma electors, etc., while keeping
    silent about the Constitutional-Democratic Party (i.e., the
    Osvobozhdeniye people) means either shilly-shallying and scheming
    (coming to terms on the sly with the Osvobozhdeniye people to
    support them on conditions stipulated by Parvus or Cherevanin), or
    unwittingly spreading corruption among the workers and giving up the
    struggle against the Constitutional-Democrats.


Besides the historical facts regarding the activity of Osvobozhdeniye,
its adherents, the Zemstvo members, and all other Constitutional-Democrats, we
have no important data for gauging the “preparedness” of democrats
from among the bourgeoisie to fight together with the people. The new-Iskrists
ignore these facts and dismiss the matter with meaningless phrases. Yet
Plekhanov is still trying to convince us that the organisational vagueness in
Iskra’s views is not supplemented by vagueness in tactics!


The Iskra supporters have in fact not only shut their eyes to the
Constitutional-Democrats’ “preparedness” to commit treachery, proved
by their obvious and universally noted turn to the right during the period
between the July

    

and September Zemstvo congresses, but have even assisted these
Constitutional-Democrats by fighting, against the boycott! The Iskrists are
threatening hypothetical Osvobozhdeniye adherents ("all those who
are prepared”, etc.) with “frightfully terrifying” words, but
by their tactics they are assisting the genuine Osvobozhdeniye
adherents. This is wholly in the spirit of Rodichev, one of the Constitutional-
Democratic leaders, who thunders: “We will not accept liberty from hands
steeped in the blood of the people !" (this statement of Rodichev’s,
uttered at a private meeting and directed against William Stead, is now making
the rounds of the entire foreign press)—and in the same breath demands
that those very hands convoke a popular constituent assembly.


3. The next fundamental error in the resolution is the slogan for “the
   creation of comprehensive democratic organisations and their amalgamation in
   an all-Russia organisation”. The frivolity of the Social-Democrats who
   advance such a slogan is simply staggering. What does creating comprehensive
   democratic organisations mean? It can mean one of two things: either the
   socialists’ organisation (the R.S.D.L.P.) being submerged in the democrats’
   organisation (and the new-Iskrists cannot do that deliberately, for it would
   be sheer betrayal of the proletariat)—or a temporary alliance between
   the Social-Democrats and certain sections of the bourgeois democrats. If the
   new-Iskrists want to advocate such an alliance, why do they not say so
   frankly and openly? Why do they hide behind the word “creation”? Why do
   they not specify the exact trends and groups in the bourgeois-democratic
   camp, with which they are urging the Social-Democrats to unite? Is this not a
   fresh example of impermissible vagueness of tactics, which in
   practice inevitably transforms the working class into an appendage to the
   bourgeois democracy?


The resolution’s only definition of the nature of these comprehensive democratic
organisations” consists of a statement of the two aims set them: 1) a
struggle against the State Duma, and 2) a struggle for a popular constituent
assembly. The latter aim, as lamely formulated by Iskra, i.e., without
any indication of who is to convene the popular constituent assembly, has been
fully endorsed by the

    

Constitutional-Democrats. Does this mean that the Iskrists advocate an alliance
      between the Social-Democrats and the Constitutional-Democrats, but are
      ashamed to say so openly? The former aim is formulated with an obscurity
      we are accustomed to seeing only in Russian laws, which are deliberately
      designed to deceive the people. What is meant by a struggle against the
      State Duma? If we take the expression literally—assuming the authors
      of the resolution want to express themselves unequivocally—it means
      a boycott of the Duma, for to fight against an institution that
    does not yet exist means opposing its establishment. But we know that the
    Iskrists are opposed to the boycott, we see from the resolution itself that
    further on they no longer talk of a struggle against the State
    Duma, but of exerting pressure on the State Duma, of a striving to
    transform it into a revolutionary assembly, etc. This means that the words
    “struggle against the State Duma” should not be taken literally,
    or in their narrow sense. But in that case, how should they be taken?
    Perhaps, as understood by Mr. M. Kovalevsky, who reads papers criticising
    the State Duma? What constitutes a struggle against the State
    Duma? That remains a mystery. Our muddle-heads have said nothing precise on
    this score. Aware of the class-conscious workers’ mood, which is definitely
    opposed to the tactic of agreements with the Constitutional-Democrats, the
    tactic of supporting the Duma on certain conditions, our new-Iskrists have
    cravenly taken a middle course: on the one hand, they repeat the slogan
    “Struggle against the State Duma” which is popular among the
    proletariat and, on the other hand, they are depriving this slogan of any
    exact meaning, are throwing dust into the eyes of the people, are
    interpreting the struggle against the Duma in the sense of exerting pressure
    on the Duma, etc. And this wretched muddle is being advanced by the most
    influential of the new-Iskra organisations at a time the
    Osvobozhdeniye gentry are loudly protesting for the world to hear
    that they are entering the State Duma only in order to carry on a struggle
    and exclusively for the struggle, that they are “prepared” to
    make a complete break with the government!


We ask the readers: has more disgraceful vacillation in tactics ever been seen
anywhere in the Social-Democratic movement? Is it possible to imagine anything
more ruinous

    

to Social-Democracy than this advocacy of “creating comprehensive
democratic organisations” together with the Osvobozhdeniye people
(for the Constitutional-Democrats are in agreement with the aims of such
organisations as set forth by Iskra), but without mentioning these
people by name??


And Plekhanov, who has degraded himself in the eyes of all Russian revolutionary
Social-Democrats by defending Iskra’s “organisational
vagueness” for almost two years, will now try to assure us that
this new-Iskra tactic is good!...


4. Further. It is most unwise to call an alliance of comprehensive (and
   amorphous) democratic organisations “an all-Russia people’s
   organisation” or “a democratic organisation of the
   people”. First of all, this is incorrect theoretically. As we know, the
   Economists erred by confusing party with class. Reviving old mistakes the
   Iskrists are now confusing the sum of democratic parties or organisations
   with an organisation of the people. That is empty, false, and harmful
   phrase-mongering. It is empty because it has no specific meaning whatever,
   owing to the absence of any reference to definite democratic parties or
   trends. It is false because in a capitalist society even the proletariat, the
   most advanced class, is not in a position to create a party embracing the
   entire class—and as for the whole people creating such a party, that is
   entirely out of the question. It is harmful be cause it clutters up the mind
   with bombastic words and does nothing to further the real work of explaining
   the actual significance of actual democratic parties, their class basis, the
   degree of their closeness to the proletariat, etc. The present, the period of
   a democratic revolution, bourgeois in its social and economic content, is a
   time when bourgeois democrats, all Constitutional-Democrats, etc., right down
   to the Socialist-Revolutionaries, are revealing a particular inclination to
   advocate “comprehensive democratic organisations” and in general
   to encourage, directly or indirectly, overtly or covertly, non-partisanship,
   i.e., an absence of any strict division between the
   democrats. Class-conscious representatives of the proletariat must fight this
   tendency resolutely and ruthlessly, for it is profoundly bourgeois in
   essence. We must bring exact party distinctions into the fore ground, expose
   all confusion, show up the falsity of phrases about allegedly united, broad,
   solid democratism, phrases

    

our liberal newspapers are teeming with. In proposing an alliance with certain
      sections of the democrats for the achievement of definite tasks, we should
      single out only revolutionary democrats—particularly at
    a time like this; we should indicate what most clearly distinguishes those
    “prepared” to fight (right now, in the ranks of the
    revolutionary army) from those who are “prepared” to bargain
    with the autocracy.


To bring home their mistake to the Iskrists, let us take a very simple
example. Our programme speaks of peasant committees. The resolution of the Third
Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. defines their role more precisely by calling them
revolutionary peasant committees (in this respect the new Iskra
Conference agreed, in essence, with the Third Congress). We have set them the
task of bringing about democratic reforms in general and agrarian reforms in
particular, going as far as the confiscation of the landed estates by
revolutionary action. The Iskra resolution now recommends a
new kind of “agitation committees among the peasantry”. Such advice
is worthy not of socialist workers but of liberal bourgeois. Had they been
formed, such “peasant committees of agitation” would play right into
the hands of the Osvobozhdeniye gentry, for their revolutionary
character would be supplanted by liberalism. We have already pointed out that
the content of the agitation of these committees, as defined by Iskra
(the struggle “against” the State Duma and for a popular constituent
assembly), does not exceed the limits set by the Osvobozhdeniye
programme. Is it now clear to the new-Iskrists that by supplementing the slogan
of revolutionary peasant committees with one calling for
“peasant
committees of agitation” it is transforming Social-Democratic slogans into
Osvobozhdeniye slogans?


5. Finally, we reach the main task of this “all-Russia people’s
organisation”—the organisation of nation-wide popular elections to a
   constituent assembly. Nation-wide popular elections with the autocracy left
   intact! And “clashes” with the autocracy provide “new
   incentives for an uprising”.... Mock elections as a new incentive for
   an uprising is what this amounts to!


The slogan calling for “revolutionary self-government”, and the
theory of the “spontaneous generation” of a

    

constituent assembly could not but lead to this absurdity, which is destined to
become classical. To speak of nation wide popular elections under the rule of
the Trepovs, i.e., before the victory of the uprising, before the actual
overthrow of the tsarist government, is the height of Manilovism, and can serve
only to spread incredible political corruption among the workers. Only people
attuned to phrase mongering by the new Iskra can accept such slogans,
which crumble to dust at the merest contact with sober criticism. One has only
to reflect a little on precisely what is meant by nation-wide popular
elections, if the term be taken seriously; one has only to remember that they
imply freedom of agitation, keeping the entire population informed, and
recognition b.y the entire population of the centre or local centres that will
register the entire population, and canvass literally everyone, with no
exceptions—one has only to give such things a little thought to realise
that the “nation wide popular elections” proposed by Iskra
would amount to a nation-wide joke or a nation-wide swindle. Not a
single deputy who could claim to have been “elected by the entire
people”, i.e., who has had 50,000 to 100,000 votes freely and consciously
cast for him—not one such deputy can be elected anywhere in Russia
“in the inauguration of the election campaign”.


The Iskra resolution advises the proletariat to stage a
farce, and no reservations or excuses can change the farcical import of
this resolution. We are told that elections can be carried out only “if
this organisation proves sufficiently strong”, only when
“preliminary organisation will give the rising universality and
unity”. Our answer to this is that strength is revealed in action, not in
word. Prior to the victory of an uprising it is ridiculous to talk of a force
that will be able, without evoking laughter, even to proclaim “nation-wide
popular elections”, let alone conduct them. No organisation, no matter how
universal or united, can ensure the victory of an uprising unless

1) this organisation consists of people who are really capable of
insurrection (and we have seen that the resolution advocates merely
“comprehensive”, organisations, i.e., actually
organisations of the Osvobozhdeniye type which would
undoubtedly betray an uprising once it had started); and unless

2) there exist forces

    

for the victory of the uprising (and to achieve victory, the material force of a
      revolutionary army is needed, besides the moral force of public opinion,
      the people’s welfare, etc.). To put the main stress on this moral force
      and on high-sounding phrases about “the whole people”, while
    maintaining silence, in a call to arms, about the actual material
    force, is to reduce the revolutionary slogans of the proletariat to
    bourgeois-democratic phrase-mongering.


Mock elections do not constitute a “natural transition to an
uprising”, but rather an artificial transition invented by a
handful of intellectuals. The fabrication of such artificial transitions is
absolutely similar to Nadezhdin’s old occupation—the concoction of
“excitative” terrorist acts. In the same way, the new-Iskrists want
to “excite” the people to insurrection artificially—an idea
that is basically false. We cannot create an organisation that will really em
brace the whole people; any elections we would take it into our heads to appoint
under the autocracy would inevitably be a farce, and to utilise such a
fabricated pretext for an uprising is just like decreeing an uprising
at a moment when the people are not genuinely roused. Only people who
have no faith in the proletariat’s revolutionary activity, only intellectuals
who are fond of using fancy words, could start inventing “new incentives
for an uprising”, in September 1905. One might think that we in Russia
lack genuine incentives for an uprising and need farcical ones, that
there are so few cases of genuine unrest among the masses that such a
sentiment has to be staged or faked! Mock elections will never rouse the
masses. However, a strike, a demonstration, mutiny in the armed forces, a
serious students’ outbreak, famine, mobilisation, or a conflict in the State
Duma, etc., etc., etc., can really rouse the masses, constantly, at any
hour. Not only is it the crassest stupidity to think of concocting “new
incentives for an uprising”, but the very thought of indicating in advance
that this and no other will be the real incentive for the masses would be
foolish. People who have the slightest degree of self-respect, who are in the
least earnest in what they say, would never allow themselves to concoct
“new incentives for an uprising”.


What is lacking is not “new incentives”, my most esteemed Manliovs,
but a military force, the military force of

    

the revolutionary people (and not the people in general), consisting of 1) the
armed proletariat and peasantry, 2) organised advance detachments of
representatives of these classes, and 3) sections of the army that are prepared
to come over to the side of the people. It is all this taken together that
constitutes a revolutionary army. To talk of an uprising, of its force,
of a natural transition to it, and to say nothing of a revolutionary army is
folly and muddle headedness—and the greater the degree of the counter
revolutionary army’s mobilisation, the more that is so. To invent “new
incentives for an uprising” at a time of uprisings in the Caucasus and on
the Black Sea, in Poland and Riga means deliberately withdrawing into one’s
shell and isolating oneself from the movement. We are witnesses of the greatest
unrest among the workers and peasants, of a series of insurrectionary outbreaks
which have been steadily and with enormous speed spreading and becoming more
forceful and more stubborn ever since January 9. No one can guarantee that
these outbreaks will not repeat themselves tomorrow in any big city, or any
military camp, or any village. On the contrary, everything goes to show that
such outbreaks are probable, imminent, and inevitable. Their success depends,
first of all, on the success of revolutionary agitation and
organisation—revolutionary and not the “comprehensively
democratic” agitation and organisation that Iskra prattles of,
since among democrats there are many non-revolutionaries. In the second place,
success depends on the might and preparedness of the revolutionary army. The
first condition has long been acknowledged by all, and is being applied
throughout Russia by all revolutionaries, at literally all meetings of study
circles, group gatherings, impromptu and mass meetings. The second condition is
as yet very little recognised. By reason of its class stand, the liberal
bourgeoisie does not care to recognise it, and cannot afford to do so. As for
the revolutionaries, only those who are hopelessly plodding along in the wake of
the monarchist bourgeoisie are silent about it.


"Insurrection” is an important word. A call to insurrection is an
extremely serious call. The more complex the social system, the better the
organisation of state power, and the more perfected the military machine, the
more

    

impermissible is it to launch such a slogan without due thought. And we have
      stated repeatedly that the revolutionary Social-Democrats have long been
      preparing to launch it, but have launched it as a direct call only when
      there could be no doubt whatever of the gravity, widespread and deep roots
      of the revolutionary movement, no doubt of matters having literally come
      to a head. Important words must be used with circumspection. Enormous
      difficulties have to be faced in translating them into important deeds. It
      is precisely for that reason that it would be unpardonable to dismiss
      these difficulties with a mere phrase, to use Manilovist inventions to
      brush aside serious tasks or to put on one’s eyes the blinkers of
      sweet dreams of so-called “natural transitions” to these
      difficult tasks.


A revolutionary army are also important words. The creation of a revolutionary
army is an arduous, complex, and lengthy process. But when we see that it has
already begun and is proceeding on all sides—though desultorily and by
fits and starts—when we know that a genuine victory of the revolution is
impossible without such an army, we must issue a definite and direct
slogan, advocate it, make it the touchstone of the current political tasks. It
would be a mistake to think that the revolutionary classes are invariably strong
enough to effect a revolution whenever such a revolution has fully matured by
virtue of the conditions of social and economic development. No, human society
is not constituted so rationally or so “conveniently” for
progressive elements. A revolution may be ripe, and yet the forces of its
creators may prove insufficient to carry it out, in which case society decays,
and this process of decay sometimes drags on for very many years. There is no
doubt that Russia is ripe for a democratic revolution, but it still remains to
be seen whether the revolutionary classes have sufficient strength at present
to carry it out. This will be settled by the struggle, whose crucial moment is
approaching at tremendous speed—if the numerous direct and indirect
indications do not deceive us. The moral preponderance is indubitable—the
moral force is already overwhelmingly great; without it, of course, there could
be no question of any revolution whatever. It is a necessary condition, but it
is not sufficient. Only the outcome

    

of the struggle will show whether it will be translated into a material force
sufficient to smash the very serious (we shall not close our eyes to this)
resistance of the autocracy. The slogan of insurrection is a slogan for deciding
the issue by material force, which in present-day European civilisation can only
be military force. This slogan should not be put forward until the general
prerequisites for revolution have matured, until the masses have definitely
shown that they have been roused and are ready to act, until the external
circumstances have led to an open crisis. But once such a slogan has been
issued, it would be an arrant disgrace to retreat from it, back to moral force
again, to one of the conditions that prepare the ground for an uprising, to a
“possible transition”, etc., etc. No, once the die is cast, all
subterfuges must be done with; it must be explained directly and openly to the
masses what the practical conditions for a successful revolution are at the
present time.



We have by no means exhausted the list of mistakes in the Iskra
resolution, which—to people who think and who do not confine themselves to
“clutching at opportunities — will long remain a sad memento of a
vulgarisation of Social-Democracy’s tasks. It seems to us more important to
investigate the underlying source of the errors rather than to enumerate all,
including even the comparatively petty manifestations of the basic fallacy. We
shall therefore only note, in passing, the absurdity and reactionary nature of
the idea of presenting “ultimatums” (a military term, which in the
absence of a trained military force, sounds like vulgar bragging) to the
Duma, of the endeavour to transform this Duma into a
revolutionary

      assembly,[1]

and will

    

pass on to the general meaning of the slogan: “revolutionary
      self-government of the people”.


This slogan or rather its conversion into the focal slogan is at the root of all
Iskra’s shilly-shallying. Iskra has attempted to defend it by
referring to “dialectics”—the very same Plekhanov dialectics, by
virtue of which Iskra’s “organisational vagueness” was
first defended by Plekhanov, and then exposed by him!


Revolutionary self-government of the people, we have said, is not a prologue to
an uprising, nor is it a “natural transition to it”, it is its
epilogue. There can be no serious talk of genuine and complete self-government
unless the uprising is victorious. And we have added that the very idea of
placing the main emphasis on state administration rather than on state
organisation is reactionary, that to identify revolutionary self-government with
a revolutionary army is the height of absurdity, that a victorious
revolutionary army necessarily presupposes a revolutionary self-government,
whereas a revolutionary self-government does not necessarily include a
revolutionary army.


Iskra tried to defend the confusion in its deliberately chosen slogans
by referring to the “dialectics” of the unconscious and spontaneous
process. Life, it says, knows of no sharply defined boundaries. Labour exchanges
exist even now (Sotsial-Demokrat,[3]

No. 12)—here you
have the elements of self-government. In a dialectical process of development,
the prologue and the epilogue often inter twine, it says.


The latter consideration is quite true. Yes, the process of actual development
is always tangled, with bits of the epilogue emerging before the true
prologue. But does this mean that it is permissible for a leader of a
class-conscious party to jumble the tasks of the struggle, to confuse
the prologue with the epilogue? Can the dialectics of a jumbled and spontaneous
process justify confusion in the logic of conscious Social-Democrats? Does not
this imply substitution of dialectics d la Plekhanov for Marxist
dialectics?

 

To make our idea clearer, let us take an example. Let us assume that we are
discussing not a democratic but a socialist revolution. The crisis is maturing,
the epoch of the dictatorship of the proletariat is approaching. At this point
the opportunists make the establishment of consumers’ societies their central
slogan, while the revolutionaries advance a slogan calling for the conquest of
political power by the proletariat. The opportunists argue that consumers’
societies constitute a real force for the proletariat, the conquest of a real
economic position, and a genuine bit of socialism; you revolutionaries do not
understand dialectical development, the evolution of capitalism into socialism,
the penetration of nuclei of socialism into the very heart of capitalism, the
purging of capitalism by giving it a new socialist content.


Yes, the revolutionaries answer, we agree that in a way consumers’ societies do
constitute a bit of socialism. In the first place, socialist society is one big
consumers’ society with production for consumption organised according to
plan. In the second place, socialism cannot be achieved without a powerful,
many-sided working-class movement, and consumers’ societies will inevitably be
one of these many sides. But that is not the point at all. While power remains
in the hands of the bourgeoisie, consumers’ societies will remain a paltry
fragment, ensuring no serious changes what ever, introducing no decisive
alterations whatever, and some times even diverting attention from a serious
struggle for revolution. No one disputes the fact that the habits acquired by
the workers in consumers’ societies are very useful. But only transfer of power
to the proletariat can give full scope to these habits. Then the system of
consumers’ societies will have surplus value at its disposal; at present the
scope of this useful institution is bound to be paltry by reason of the paltry
wages. Then it will become a consumers’ union of really free workers; at present
it is a union of wage-slaves, oppressed and stifled by capitalism. Thus the
consumers’ societies are a fragment of socialism. The dialectical process of
development really does intrude elements of the new society, elements both
material and spiritual, even under capitalism. But socialists should be able to
distinguish the part from the whole; they should demand the whole in
their

    

slogan, and not a part; they must contrapose to bits of patch work, which often
      divert fighters from the truly revolutionary path, the basic requisites
      for a real revolution.


What is Iskra’s opinion, who is right in this dispute?


It is the same
with the slogan calling for “revolutionary
self-government” in the period of a democratic revolution. We are not
against revolutionary self-government, we long ago gave it a certain modest
place in our minimum programme (see the paragraph on extensive local
self-government). We agree that it is a fragment of a democratic revolution, as
has already been stated in No. 15 of

  Proletary[2]

with reference to the
Smolensk Municipal Council. A democratic revolution would be impossible without
a powerful and many-sided democratic movement, and the movement for self-
government is one of those many sides. However, the democratic revolution would
likewise be impossible without, for example, revolutionary schools, which are as
much an indubitable sign of tsarism’s actual disintegration as are labour
exchanges, which exist despite the police ban, as the unrest among the clergy,
as local self-government instituted in violation of the law, etc. Comrades of
the Iskra, consider what conclusion should be drawn from all this! Is
it that all these elements of disintegration should be summed up in an integral
slogan of insurrection? Or that the slogan of insurrection should be mutilated
by tying it down to one of the elements, namely, self-government?


"The organisation of revolutionary self-government, or, what amounts to the
same, the organisation of popular forces for an uprising,” wrote the audacious
Iskra (No. 109, page 2, line 1). That is just like saying that
organising revolutionary schools means organising forces for an uprising, that
organising unrest among the clergy means organising forces for an uprising, or
that organising consumers’ societies means organising forces for a socialist
revolution. No, you are poor dialecticians, comrades of the Iskra. You
are unable to reason dialectically, although you are very well able to twist and
squirm, like Plekhanov, when it comes to the question of the organisational and
tactical vagueness of your views. You have overlooked the fact that,

    

given victory of the uprising, all these fragments of revolution will inevitably
merge in an integral .and complete “epilogue” to the uprising,
whereas if the uprising is not victorious these fragments will remain fragments,
paltry, changing nothing, and satisfying only the philistines.


The moral is:

1) Both on the eve of a socialist revolution and on the
eve of a democratic revolution, opportunists in the Social-Democratic movement
have a bad habit of working themselves up over a single petty fragment of a big
process, exalting this fragment to the status of the whole, and subordinating
the whole to this fragment, thereby mutilating the whole, and thereby
themselves becoming toadies to the inconsistent and cowardly
reformists.

2) The
dialectics of the spontaneous process, which is always and necessarily confused,
does not justify confusion in logical conclusions and political slogans which
are quite often (but not necessarily) confused.



P. S. This article was already in the page proofs when we received the
resolutions of the Southern Constituent Conference, published abroad by
Iskra. The text of the resolution on the State Duma differs somewhat
from the one published in Russia, which we have reproduced above. But these
differences are not essential, and do not affect our criticism in any way.

 

Notes
 

[1]

If we prove strong in the impending decisive conflict with tsarism, the
State Duma will inevitably turn to the left (at least its liberal section
will do so—we are not speaking about its reactionary section), but to
attempt to influence the State Duma seriously without destroying
the rule of the tsar would be just as stupid as for Japan to present
“ultimatums” to China or to attach much weight to Chinese assistance
without destroying the military might of Russia. After March 18,
1848, the Prussian State Duma (the United Landtag) immediately affixed its
signature to a paper providing for the convocation of a constituent
assembly, but until that all “ultimatums”

   

of the revolutionaries, all their “endeavours” to influence the State
Duma, all their threats, were hollow phrases to the Petrunkeviches,
Rodichevs, Milyukovs, and their like, who sat in that State Duma.—Lenin

[2]

See pp. 221-22 of this volume.—Ed.
 



[3]

Sotsial-Demokrat (The Social-Democrat)—a
Menshevik news paper published in Geneva from October 1904 till October 1905.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Note to M. Borisov's Article “On the Trade Union Movement and the Tasks of Social-Democracy”









Lenin: Note to M. Borisov's Article 'On the Trade Union Movement and the Tasks of Social-Democracy'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Note to M. Borisov’s Article “On the Trade Union Movement and the Tasks of Social-Democracy”[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 21. October 17 (4), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 374.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It is with pleasure that we publish this article by a comrade engaged in
practical work in Russia, since an all- round discussion of the trade union
question is now on the order of the day. Only the experience of the whole Party,
constantly illuminated by the theory of Marxism, can help work out the forms of
Social-Democratic trade unions most suited to Russian conditions. It is likewise
necessary to learn from the lessons given us by our enemies. The bourgeoisie of
the whole world was jubilant over the “craft union” tendencies of
the Cologne Congress, hoping to divert the workers from socialism to
“pure”, i.e., bourgeois, trade- unionism. In Russia, even
Moskovskiye Vedomosti has learned to sing this tune. And once the
bourgeoisie begins to praise any one of us for having “seen the
light” or for “zeal” in respect of a “rational”
trade union movement, it is a sure sign that there are shortcomings in our
work. This is just how Comrade M. Borisov puts the question, namely, that we
should fulfil our socialist duty in every respect, and by no means allow such
shortcomings.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The article signed M. Borisov was first published
in Proletary, and then republished in the St. Petersburg Bolshevik
    newspaper Novaya Zhizn (New Life), No. 7 of November 8 (21),
    1905.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the Death of Trubetskoi









Lenin: On the Death of Trubetskoi







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Death of Trubetskoi




Written: Written in mid—October 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1926 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 375.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The liberal Frankfurter Zeitung was highly indignant at the
consistently revolutionary resolution adopted by the Moscow students, who
demanded that a constituent assembly be convened not by the tsar, not by the
State Duma, and not even (let not the comrades of the new Iskra get
wrathful at this!) by a “democratic organisation of the people”,
but by a provisional revolutionary government. In this connection the liberal
German stockbrokers bewailed the immaturity” of the students, etc. This
very same paper now carries a telegram about Trubetskoi’s death
(Abendblatt, October 13) and remarks: “It is possible that they
had treated him (.Trubetskoi) to a scene at the Ministry of Public Education.”


Poor Trubetskoi! To aim at liberty for the people and to die of a
“scene” in a tsarist minister’s antechamber.... We are prepared to
admit that this is too cruel a punishment even for a Russian liberal. Only,
would it not be better and more dignified, gentlemen, for the supporters of
popular liberty to discontinue all dealings with the government of butchers and
spies? Is it not better to fall in a straightforward, honest, open street
fighting—fighting which enlightens and educates the people—against
vipers without whose destruction genuine liberty is impossible, rather than to
die of “scenes” while con versing with the Trepovs and their contemptible
lackeys?

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Lessons of the Moscow Events









Lenin: The Lessons of the Moscow Events







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Lessons of the Moscow Events




Published:
Proletary, No. 22, October 24 (11), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 376-387.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The rising tide of revolutionary enthusiasm among the Moscow proletariat, so
vividly expressed in the political strike and in the street fighting, has not
yet subsided. The strike continues. It has to some extent spread to St. Peters
burg, where the compositors are striking in sympathy with their Moscow
comrades. It is still uncertain whether the present movement will subside and
await the next rise of the tide, or whether it will be of a sustained
character. But certain results of the Moscow events, and very instructive ones
at that, are already apparent, and it would be worth while to dwell on them.


On the whole, the movement in Moscow did not attain the pitch of a decisive
battle between the revolutionary workers and the tsarist forces. It consisted
only of small skirmishes at the outposts, part perhaps of a military
demonstration in the civil war, but it was not one of those battles that
determine the outcome of a war. Of the two suppositions we advanced a week ago,
it is apparently the first that is being justified,, namely, that what we are
witnessing is not the beginning of the decisive onslaught, but only a
rehearsal. This rehearsal has nevertheless fully revealed all the characters in
the historical drama, thus spotlighting the probable—and in part even
inevitable— development of the drama itself.


The Moscow events were inaugurated by incidents which at first glance appear to
have been of a purely academic character. The government conferred partial
“autonomy”, or alleged autonomy, on the universities. The
professorate were granted self-government, and the students were granted the
right of assembly. Thus a small breach was

forced in the general system of autocratic-feudal oppression. New revolutionary
currents immediately swept into this breach with unexpected force. A miserable
concession, a paltry reform, granted with the object of blunting the edge of the
political antagonisms and of “reconciling” robbers and robbed,
actually served to stimulate the struggle tremendously, and increase the number
of its participants. Workers flocked to the students’ gatherings, which began to
develop into popular revolutionary meetings, where the proletariat, the foremost
class in the struggle for liberty, predominated. The government was
outraged. The “respectable” liberals who had received professorial
self-government began to scurry back and forth between the revolutionary
students and the government of police rule and the knout. The liberals made use
of liberty in order to betray liberty, restrain the students from extending and
intensifying the struggle, and appeal for “order”—this in the face
of the bashi-bazouks and Black Hundreds, the Trepovs and the Romanovs! The
liberals made use of self-government so as to do the work of the butchers of the
people, and to close the University, that holy sanctuary of
“science” permitted by the knout-wielders, which the students
defiled by allowing the “rabble” to enter it for discussion of
questions “unauthorised” by the autocratic gang. The self-governing
liberals betrayed the people and liberty, because they feared carnage in the
University. They were punished in exemplary fashion for their contemptible
cowardice. By closing the revolutionary University they opened the way to
revolution in the streets. Wretched pedants that they are, they were ready to
jubilate in concert with rascals like Glazov over the fact that they had managed
to extinguish the conflagration in the school. But as a matter of fact they only
started a conflagration in a huge industrial city. These manikins on stilts
forbade the workers to go to the students, but they only drove the students to
the revolutionary workers. They appraised all political matters from the
standpoint of their own chicken coop, which reeks of age-old hidebound
officialism. They implored the students to spare this chicken coop. The first
fresh breeze—the manifestation of the free and youthful revolutionary
elements—was enough for the chicken coop to be forgotten, for the breeze
freshened and grew into a

    

blast against the tsarist autocracy, the prime source of all officialism and all
the humiliations heaped upon the Russian people. And even now, when the
      first danger has passed and the storm has clearly subsided, the lackeys of
      the autocracy still quake at the mere recollection of the chasm that
      yawned before them during the days of bloodshed in Moscow. “It is
      not yet a conflagration, but that it is arson is already beyond question,”
      mutters Mr. Menshikov in the servile Novoye Vremya (of September
    30). “It is not yet a revolution... but it is already the prologue to
    a revolution.” “‘It is on the move,’ I [Mr. Menshikov] argued in
    April. And what frightful strides ‘it’ has since made! The popular element
    has been stirred to its very depths....”


Yes, the Trepovs and the Romanovs, together with the treacherous liberal
bourgeoisie, have got themselves into a predicament. Open the
University—and you provide a platform for popular revolutionary meetings,
and render invaluable service to the Social-Democrats. Close the University
down—and you open the way for a street struggle. And so our knights of the
knout dash to and fro, gnashing their teeth. They reopen Moscow University,
pretending that they want to allow the students to maintain order them selves
during street processions; they turn a blind eye to revolutionary
self-government of the students, who are dividing into Social-Democrats,
Socialist-Revolutionaries, etc., thus bringing about proper political
representation in the student “parliament” (and, we are confident,
will not confine themselves to revolutionary self-government, but will
immediately and in dead earnest set about organising and equipping contingents
of a revolutionary army). Together with Trepov, the liberal professors are
dashing to and
fro, hastening one day to persuade the students to be more moderate, and
the next day to persuade the knout-wielders to be more lenient. The scurryings
of both of these give us the greatest satisfaction; they show that a fine
revolutionary breeze must be blowing if the political-commanders and the
political turncoats are staggering about on the upper deck in such a lively
manner.


But besides legitimate pride and legitimate satisfaction, true revolutionists
must derive something else from the Moscow events—an understanding of the
social forces operating

    

 in the Russian revolution and just how they operate, and a clearer idea of
the forms they take when they operate. Call to mind the political sequence of
the Moscow events, and you will see a remarkably typical picture of the whole
revolution, one that is characteristic of the class relation ships. Here is the
sequence: a small breach is forced in the old order; the government tries to
mend the breach with petty concessions, illusory “reforms”, etc.;
instead of calming down, the struggle becomes even more acute and wide spread;
the liberal bourgeoisie wavers and dashes from one thing to another, urging the
revolutionists to desist from revolution, and the police to desist from
reaction; headed by the proletariat, the revolutionary people arrive on the
scene, and the open struggle gives rise to a new political situation; the
conflict shifts to the newly won battlefield—a more elevated and broader
field—a new breach is made in the enemy strongholds, and in that way the
movement proceeds to an ever higher plane. A general retreat on the part of the
government is taking place before our eyes, as Moskovskiye Vedomosti
aptly remarked recently. A certain liberal newspaper[1]

rather
cleverly added: a retreat under cover of rearguard action. On October 3 (16) the
St. Petersburg correspondent of the liberal Berlin Vossische Zeitung
wired to his paper about his interview with Trepov’s chef de cabinet.
As the police underling told the correspondent: “You cannot expect the
government to follow a consistent plan of action, since every day brings with it
events that could not have been foreseen. The government is obliged to
manoeuvre. Force cannot crush the present movement which may last for two months
or two years.


Indeed the government’s tactics have now become quite clear. They indubitably
lie in manoeuvring and retreating under cover of rearguard action. Such tactics
are quite correct from the standpoint of the autocracy’s interests. It would be
a grievous error and a fatal illusion for revolutionists to forget that the
government can still continue to retreat for a very long time to come, without
losing what is most essential. The example of the abortive, unfinished
semi-revolution in Germany, in 1848—an example to which we shall return in
the next issue of Proletary, and which we shall never tire of
recalling—shows

    

that even if it retreats so far as to convoke a (nominally) constituent
    assembly, the government will still retain sufficient strength to defeat the
    revolution in the final and decisive battle. That is why, in studying the
    Moscow events, the most recent in a long series of conflicts in our civil
    war, we must soberly consider the developments, prepare with the maximum of
    energy and persistence for a long and desperate war, and be on our guard
    against such allies that are already turncoat allies. When absolutely
    nothing decisive has as yet been won, when the enemy still has an enormous
    area. for further advantageous and safe retreats, when battles are becoming
    ever more serious—confidence in such allies, attempts to conclude
    agreements with them or simply to support them on certain conditions may
    prove not only stupid but even treacherous to the proletariat.


Indeed, was the liberal professors’ behaviour before and during the Moscow
events fortuitous? Was it an exception, or is it the rule for the entire
Constitutional-Democratic Party? Does this behaviour express the
individual peculiarities of a given group of the liberal bourgeoisie,
or does it express the fundamental interests of this entire class in
general? Among socialists there can be no two opinions on these
questions, but not all socialists know how to consistently pursue
genuinely socialist tactics.


For a clearer understanding of the gist of the matter, let us take the liberals’
own exposition of their tactics. They avoid coming out against the
Social-Democrats or even speaking directly about them in the columns of the
Russian press. But here is an interesting report in the Berlin Vossische
Zeitung, which undoubtedly is more outspoken in its expression of the
liberals’ views:



"Extremely stormy student disturbances have reoccurred both in
St. Petersburg and in Moscow since the very beginning of the academic year,
although autonomy has been granted—belatedly, it is true—to the
universities and other higher educational institutions. Moreover, in Moscow
these disturbances are accompanied by a wide spread workers’ movement. These
disturbances indicate that a new phase has begun in the Russian revolutionary
movement. The course of the student meetings and their resolutions show that the
students have adopted the watchword of the Social-Democratic leaders to convert
the universities into popular meeting places, and thus spread

    

revolution among wide sections of the population. The Moscow students have
already shown how this is being put into effect: they invited to the University
premises such large numbers of workers and other persons who have no connection
with the University that the students themselves were in a minority. It stands
to reason that such a state of affairs cannot go on for long under the existing
conditions. The government will close the universities rather than tolerate such
meetings. This is so obvious that at first glance it appears inconceivable that
the Social-Democratic leaders could have issued such a watchword. They knew
perfectly well what this would lead to, but what they wanted was for the
government to close the universities. For what purpose? Simply because they
intend to hinder the liberal movement by all available means. They
admit that they are not strong enough to effect any major political action with
their own forces; therefore the liberals and radicals must not do anything
either, for that would allegedly only harm the socialist proletariat. The latter
must win its rights for itself. The Russian Social-Democratic Party may take
great pride in these ’inflexible’ (unbeugsame) tactics, but they must
appear very short-sighted to any unprejudiced observer; they will scarcely lead
Russian Social-Democracy to victories. It is quite incomprehensible what it will
gain by the closing of the universities, which is inevitable if the present
tactics continue. On the other hand, it is of the utmost importance to all
progressive parties that there should be no interruption in the work of the
universities and higher schools. The protracted strikes of students and
professors have already caused great damage to Russian culture. It is imperative
that academic work be resumed. Autonomy has enabled the professors to conduct
their classes freely. That is why the professors of all universities and higher
schools are agreed that it is necessary to start tuition once more and in
energetic fashion. They are exerting all their influence to persuade the
students to abandon their efforts to
give effect to the Social-Democratic watchword.”



Thus, the struggle between bourgeois liberalism (the Constitutional-Democrats)
and the Social-Democrats has taken definite shape. Do not hinder the liberal
movement! Such is the slogan so splendidly expressed in the article quoted
above. What does this liberal movement amount to? It is a retrograde
movement, for the professors use and desire to use the freedom of the
universities not for revolutionary propaganda, but for
counter-revolutionary propaganda; not to fan the conflagration, but to
extinguish it; not to extend the field of battle, but to draw the masses away
from decisive struggle and induce them to collaborate peacefully with the
Trepovs. With the struggle becoming more acute, the “liberal”
movement (as we have seen in practice) has become marked by desertion from
revolution to reaction. Of course,

    

the liberals are, in a way, useful to us, since they introduce vacillation into
      the ranks of the Trepovs and other lackeys of Romanov. This good, however,
      will’ be outweighed by the harm they cause by bringing vacillation into
      our ranks, unless we make a clean break with the
      Constitutional-Democrats, and brand every hesitant step they
      take. Their knowledge, or,
      more frequently, their sense of their dominant position in the existing
      economic system has led the liberals to aspire to dominate the revolution
      as well. They say that each step aimed at continuing, extending
      and intensifying the revolution and taking it farther than the most ordinary
      patchwork is a “hindrance” to the liberal
    movement. Fearful for the fate of the so-called freedom of the universities
    granted by Trepov, they are today fighting against revolutionary
    freedom. Fearful for the legal “freedom of assembly” which the
    government will grant tomorrow in a police-distorted form, they will hold us
    back from using these assemblies for genuinely proletarian aims. Fearful for
    the fate of the State Duma, they already displayed wise moderation at the
    September Congress, and continue to display it now by combating the idea of
    a boycott; why, they say, you must not hinder us from getting things done in
    the State Duma!


It must be confessed that, to the shame of Social-Democracy, there have been
opportunists in its ranks who fell for this bait by reason of their doctrinaire
and lifeless distortion of Marxism! They argue that the revolution is a
bourgeois one and therefore ... therefore we must retrace our steps in the
measure the bourgeoisie succeeds in obtaining concessions from tsarism. To this
day the new Iskrists have not seen the real significance of the State Duma,
because they are themselves drawing back and therefore naturally do not notice
the Constitutional-Democrats’ regression. That the Iskrists have already
retraced their steps since the promulgation of the State Duma Act is an
indisputable fact. Prior to the State Duma Act they never thought of placing the
question of an agreement with the Constitutional-Democrats on the order of the
day. After the State Duma Act they (Parvus, Cherevanin and Martov) raised this
question, and not merely as a matter of theory, but in an immediately practical
form. Prior to the State

    

Duma Act they presented quite stringent conditions to the democrats (right up to
co-operation in arming .the people, etc.). After the State Duma Act they
immediately reduced the conditions, confining themselves to a promise to convert
the Black-Hundred or the liberal Duma into a revolutionary one. Prior to the
State Duma Act the reply their official resolution gave to the question as to
who should convoke the popular constituent assembly was: either, a provisional
revolutionary government or a representative institution. After the State Duma
Act they deleted the provisional revolutionary government, and they now say:
either “democratic” (like the Constitutional-Democrats?)
“organisations of the people” (?), or ... or the State Duma. We thus
see in fact how the new-Iskrists are guided by their magnificent
principle: the revolution is a bourgeois revolution—therefore, comrades,
watch out lest the bourgeoisie recoil!


The Moscow events, which for the first time since the State Duma Act have shown
the real nature of the Constitutional-Democrats’ tactics at grave
political junctures, have also shown that Social-Democracy’s opportunist
appendage, which we have described, is inevitably being transformed into a mere
appendage to the bourgeoisie. We have just said: a Black-Hundred or a liberal
State Duma. To an Iskra supporter these words would appear monstrous,
for he considers distinction between a Black-Hundred State Duma and a liberal
State Duma highly important. But these selfsame Moscow events have disclosed the
fallaciousness of this “parliamentary” idea, which had been so
inappropriately advanced in a pre-parliamentary period. The Moscow events have
shown that the liberal turncoat has actually played the part of a Trepov. The
closing of the University, which would have been decreed by Trepov yesterday,
has been carried out today by Messrs. Manuilov and Trubetskoi. Is it not clear
that the “Duma” liberals will also scurry back and forth between
Trepov and Romanov, on the one hand, and the revolutionary people on the other?
Is it not clear that the slightest support for liberal turncoats is something
befitting only political simpletons?


Under a parliamentary system it is often necessary to support a more liberal
party against a less liberal one. But during a revolutionary struggle for a
parliamentary system it

    

is treachery to support liberal turncoats who are “reconciling”
      Trepov with the revolution.


The events in Moscow have revealed in practice the alignment of social forces
that Proletary has spoken of so many times: the socialist proletariat
and the vanguard of revolutionary bourgeois democracy have waged a
struggle, while the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie has conducted
negotiations. Therefore, fellow-workers, study the lessons of the Moscow
events, and do so most attentively. For it is in this way, and inevitably so,
that matters will take their course throughout the whole of the Russian
revolution. We must rally more solidly than ever in a genuinely socialist party,
which shall consciously express the interests of the working class, and not
drift along in the wake of the masses. In the struggle we must place reliance
only on revolutionary democrats, permit agreements with them alone, and carry
out these agreements only on the field of battle against the Trepovs and
Romanov. We must bend every effort to rouse, in addition to the students, who
are the vanguard of revolutionary democracy, also those broad masses of the
people whose movement is not only democratic in a general way (today every
turncoat calls himself a democrat), but a genuinely revolutionary
movement—namely, the masses of the peasantry. We must remember that the
liberals and Constitutional-Democrats, who are bringing vacillation into the
ranks of supporters of the autocracy, will inevitably strive in every way to
bring vacillation into our ranks as well. Only an open revolutionary struggle
which consigns all liberal chicken coops and all liberal Dumas to the rubbish
heap will be of serious and decisive consequence. There fore, prepare for ever
new battles, without losing a single moment! Arm as best you can; immediately
form squads of fighters who will be prepared to battle with devoted energy
against the accursed autocracy; remember that tomorrow or the following day
events will certainly call you to rise in revolt, and the question now is only
whether you will be able to take prepared and united action, or whether you will
be caught off your guard and disunited!


The events in Moscow have once again and for the hundredth time confuted the
sceptics. They have shown that we are still inclined to underestimate the
revolutionary

    

activity of the masses. They will bring round many of those who have already
      begun to waver, who have begun to lose faith in the idea of an uprising
      after the conclusion of peace and the granting of a Duma. No, it is
      precisely now that the uprising is gaining ground and increasing in
      intensity with unparalleled rapidity. Let us all be at our posts when the
      imminent explosion comes, one in comparison with which both January 9 and
      the memorable Odessa days will seem mere child’s play.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The reference is to the liberal-bourgeois newspaper
Rus which
came out at intervals in St. Petersburg between 1903 and 1908
under various names, such as Bus (Russia),
Molva (Hearsay),
and Dvadtsaty Vek (The Twentieth Century).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “The Struggle of the Proletariat”









Lenin: 'The Struggle of the Proletariat'







V. I.  

      Lenin
“The Struggle of the Proletariat”[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 22, October 24 (11), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 388.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In the article “Reply to Sotsial-Demokrat” we should like
to mention the splendid way in which the problem of the celebrated
“introduction of a consciousness from without” had been posed. The
author divides the problem into four independent parts:

1) The philosophical problem of the relation of man’s consciousness to
   his social being—social being determines
   consciousness. Corresponding to the existence of two classes, two
   kinds of consciousness are evolved—the bourgeois and the
   socialist. Socialist consciousness corresponds to the position of
   the proletariat.

2) “Who can and does evolve this socialist consciousness
   (scientific socialism)?” “Contemporary socialist
   consciousness can arise only on the basis of profound scientific
   knowledge” (Kautsky), i.e., its evolution “is a matter
   for a few Social-Democratic intellectuals who possess the necessary
   means and time”.

3) How does this consciousness penetrate into the proletariat? “It is
   here that Social-Democracy (and not only Social-Democratic intellectuals)
   comes in, and introduces socialist consciousness into the working-class
   movement.”

4) What does Social-Democracy meet with when it comes to the proletariat with
   the message of socialism? It meets with an instinctive urge towards
   socialism. “Together with the proletariat, a tendency towards socialism
   is of necessity engendered both among the proletarians themselves, and among
   those who adopt the viewpoint of the proletariat; this accounts for the birth
   of an urge towards socialism” (Kautsky). From this the Menshevik draws
   the following ridiculous conclusion: “Hence it is clear that socialism
   is not introduced into the proletariat from without, but, on the contrary,
   comes from the proletariat and enters the minds of those who adopt the views
   of the proletariat”!

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

No. 22 of Proletary, October 24 (11), 1905 carried
a review of No. 3 of the Russian language edition of Borba
Proletariata, organ of the Caucasian League of the R.S.D.L.P. Part of the
review published in this volume was written by Lenin, and contains an appraisal
of the article by J. Stalin entitled “Reply
to Sotsial-Demokrat”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Youth Abroad and the Russian Revolution









Lenin: The Youth Abroad and the Russian Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Youth Abroad and the Russian Revolution




Published:
Proletary, No. 22, October 24 (11), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 389.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The letter from an out-of-the-way place, calling upon all to return to Russia
from abroad (Proletary, No. 19) has evoked a reply from Comrade
“Revolutionary”, writing t& Proletary from
Berne. Comrade “Revolutionary” insists on, importance of theory in
the movement, the need to study, and the like. We of course fully agree with him
in the matter, and that was just the sense of our reservation regarding the
above-mentioned letter.[1]

Comrade “Revolutionary”
advises the Party to organise at some place, for example in Geneva, something in
the nature of a university, for the youth to be able to engage in serious
studies. There have been many such plans, but their implementation meets with
too many practical difficulties.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

No. 19 of Proletary, October 3 (September 20),
1905 published “An Open Letter to Comrades Abroad” from a group of
Social-Democrats working in Kazan, Simbirsk and Nizhni-Novgorod gubernias. The
letter described the difficult conditions of under ground work in Russia and the
shortage of Party forces, and called upon the youth to remain in Russia to work
there. The letter was accompanied by the following editorial note: “We are
publishing this statement by ’comrades from out-of-the-way places’ so as to
enable them to express in our columns their frame of mind and their opinion of
Party work. While we do not share the author’s too extreme opinion regarding the
uselessness of ’studies’ abroad we do however think it necessary more often to
remind our comrades abroad and the Party as a whole of the out-of-the-way
places in Russia.” It has not been established who used the pseudonym
 of “Revolutionary”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to the International Socialist Bureau









Lenin: A Letter to the International Socialist Bureau







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to the International Socialist Bureau




Published:

      First published in 1929 in the second and third editions of V. I. Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol. 8.

      Published according to the text in the second and third editions of the Collected Works, which has been checked against a French typewritten copy of the text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 390-391.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Geneva, October 27, 1905


Dear Comrade,


On June 28 you sent us Comrade Bebel’s proposal concerning the differences in
our Party.


On July 24 I wrote to

 you[1]

that I could not give you a reply on behalf of the
Central Committee of our Party, as I am only one of the members of the
Committee, and asked the Bureau to clear up a few points for me. In reply I
received a letter from Citizen Huysmans, dated August 5, in which he writes that
the Executive Committee’s intervention is directed only towards moral
suasion. I immediately informed the Central Committee of our Party of the exact
nature of Bebel’s proposal. I am now in receipt of a reply from the Central
Committee, which accepts your offer and appoints as its representatives Comrades
Vasilyev, Schmidt,[2]

and Lenin. Comrade Schmidt is in Russia. We
must there fore be informed in advance of the date fixed for the conference (at
least three weeks ahead of time).


The other two delegates are in Switzerland.


Accept, etc.


V. Ulyanov (Lenin)


P. S. I have just received another letter informing me that
Comrade Schmidt will soon leave for abroad (arriving probably in
November) in order to settle a number of matters pertaining to our
Party. It is therefore of the utmost importance

    

for me to obtain as
soon as possible the reply of the other section of our Party
concerning the date for the conference. It is extremely difficult for
members of our Party working in Russia to go abroad, which makes it
desirable that the date on which the conference is to be convened
should be fixed now, in other words, that the other section and the
members of the International Bureau advise us as early as possible
when they propose to call this conference.

 

Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 142-45 of this volume.—Ed.
 



[2]

Vasilyev—the Bolshevik F. Leagnik;
Schmidt—the Bolshevik P. Rumyantsev. The latter left the Party
during the period of the
 Stolypin reaction.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The All-Russia Political Strike









Lenin: The All-Russia Political Strike







V. I.  

      Lenin
The All-Russia Political Strike




Published:
Proletary, No. 23, October 31 (18), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 392-395.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Geneva, October 26 (13)


The barometer indicates a storm—that is what is stated in today’s foreign
newspapers, which carry telegraphic dispatches on the mighty growth of the
all-Russia political strike.


Nor is it only the barometer that indicates a storm:

everything has been dislodged by the mighty whirlwind of a concerted proletarian
onslaught. The revolution is progressing at astonishing speed, unfolding an
amazing wealth of events, and if we wanted to give our reader a detailed account
of the last three or four days, we should have to write a whole book. However,
we shall leave it to future generations to write detailed history. We are
witnesses of thrilling scenes of one of the greatest of civil wars, wars for
liberty, mankind has ever experienced, and we must live at higher tempo so as to
devote all our energies to this war.


The storm has burst—and how insignificant do the liberal and democratic
speeches, suppositions, conjectures and plans about the Duma seem now. How
out-of-date have all our disputes about the Duma already become—in the
space of a few days, a few hours! Some of us doubted whether the revolutionary
proletariat was sufficiently strong to frustrate the infamous farce staged by
police ministers; some of us were afraid to speak with all boldness
about boycotting the elections. But, as it turns out, elections have not yet started
everywhere, and already a mere wave of the hand has been enough to rock the
whole house of cards. A mere wave of the hand has forced not only the liberals
and

    

the craven Osvobozhdeniye gentry, but even Mr. Witte, head of the new
“liberal” tsarist government, to talk (true, so far only to
talk) of reforms that would undermine all the artful devices of the
entire Bulygin farce.


This hand, whose wave brought such an upheaval in the Duma question, is that of
the Russian proletariat. A German socialist song runs as follows: “All
the wheels stand still if your mighty arm so will.” This mighty arm has now
been raised. Our indications and predictions on the political mass strike’s
enormous importance to the armed uprising have been strikingly borne out. The
all-Russia political strike has this time really involved the whole
country, uniting all the peoples of the accursed Russian
“Empire” in the heroic rising of a class that is the most oppressed
and the most advanced. Proletarians of all nations of this empire of oppression
and violence are now mustering in a great army— an army of liberty and an
army of socialism. Moscow and St. Petersburg share the honour of having taken
revolutionary proletarian initiative. Both capitals have gone on strike. Finland
is striking. Headed by Riga, the Baltic provinces have joined the
movement. Heroic Poland has again joined the ranks of the strikers, as if in
mockery of the impotent rage of her enemies, who imagined that they could crush
her with their blows and have, instead, only welded her revolutionary forces
more closely together. The Crimea is rising (Simferopol), and also the
South. In Ekaterinoslav barricades are being erected, and blood is being
shed. The Volga region (Saratov, Simbirsk, Nizhni-Novgorod) is on strike, and
the strike is spreading both to the central agricultural provinces (Voronezh)
and to the industrial Centre (Yaroslavl).


A modest delegation of the Railwaymen’s Union has taken the lead of this army of
workers, many million strong and speaking many languages. On a stage where
political comedies were played by the liberals, with their highflown and
cowardly speeches to the tsar, and with their smirking and scraping to
Witte—on this stage a worker suddenly makes an appearance and presents his
ultimatum to Mr. Witte, the new head of the new “liberal”
tsarist government. The railway workers’ delegation refused to await that
“board of burghers”, the State Duma. The workers’ delegation did not
even care to waste valuable time on

    

"criticism” of this Punch-and-Judy show. The workers’ delegation
      first prepared criticism by deeds—the political
    strike—and then declared to the buffoon of a minister:

"There can be only one solution—the convocation of a constituent
assembly, elected on the basis of universal and direct suffrage.”


The buffoon-minister spoke, to use the apt expression of the railway workers
themselves, “like a real hidebound bureaucrat, hedging as usual, and not
committing himself to anything definite”. He promised decrees on freedom
of the press, but rejected universal suffrage; according to foreign press
reports, he declared a constituent assembly “impossible at present”.


The workers’ delegation called a general strike. After leaving the Minister the
workers’ delegation went to the University, where political meetings attended by
some ten thousand people were taking place. The proletariat made good use of the
platform placed at its disposal by the revolutionary students. At the first
systematic and free political mass meetings held in Russia, in all cities, at
schools and factories, and in the streets, the answer given by the
buffoon-minister was discussed, and speeches centred around the task
of waging a
resolute armed struggle, which would make the convocation of a constituent
assembly both “possible” and necessary. The foreign
bourgeois press, including even the most liberal newspapers, is horrified by the
“terroristic and seditious” slogans proclaimed by speakers at the
free popular meetings, as though the tsar’s government, by all its policy of
oppression, had not itself made insurrection imperative and inevitable.


The uprising is drawing near, is evolving from the all-Russia political strike
before our very eyes. The appointment of a buffoon-minister, who assures the
workers that a popular constituent assembly is impossible “at
present” clearly shows the growth of the revolutionary forces, and the
decline of the forces of the tsar’s government. The autocracy is no
longer strong enough to come out against the revolution openly. The
revolution is not yet strong enough to deal the enemy a decisive
blow. This fluctuation of almost evenly balanced forces inevitably engenders
confusion among the authorities, makes for transitions from repression to

    

concession, to laws providing for freedom of the press and freedom of assembly.


Forward, then, to a new, still more widespread and persistent
struggle—the enemy must not be given a chance to pull himself together!
The proletariat has already performed wonders for the victory of the
revolution. The all-Russia political strike has brought this victory
tremendously closer, causing the enemy to toss about on his death-bed. However,
we are very far indeed from having done everything that we can and must do for
final victory. The struggle is approaching, but has not yet reached its real
climax. At this very moment the working class is rising, mobilising and arming,
on a scale hitherto unparalleled. And it will finally sweep away the abhorrent
autocracy, send all the buffoons of ministers packing, set up its own
provisional revolutionary government, and show all the peoples of Russia how
“possible” and necessary it is, just “at present”, to
convoke a truly popular and truly constituent assembly.

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The First Results of the Political Alignment









Lenin: The First Results of the Political Alignment







V. I.  

      Lenin
The First Results of the Political Alignment




Published:
Proletary, No. 23, October 31 (18), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary as verified against the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 396-404.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The account of the Conference of Social-Democratic Parties and Organisations in
Russia published in our previous issue affords an opportunity of drawing certain
conclusions, at least preliminary, regarding the present-day political
alignment. The Conference of Social-Democratic Parties and Organisations (the
Central Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, the Bund, the
Lettish Social-Democratic Labour Party, the Polish Social-Democratic Party, and
the revolutionary Ukrainian Party) unanimously accepted the tactic of an active
boycott of the State Duma. The necessity for increased agitation against the
State Duma in the direct sense of that word, the necessity to agitate against
all parties favouring participation in the State Duma, and, finally, the
imperativeness of preparing for armed uprising have now, it may be said without
exaggeration, been recognised by the entire revolutionary Social-Democratic
movement, irrespective of national distinctions. The principles underlying the
tactics adopted by the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. and advocated by us in
Proletary, beginning with No. 12 of our paper, i.e., for the last two
and a half months, now underlie the tactics of practically the entire
Social-Democratic movement in Russia, with one lamentable exception.


This exception, as the reader knows, is the Iskra and the
“Minority”, which has seceded from the R.S.D.L.P. The
“Organising Committee”—its practical centre—was represented
at the Conference. We do not know how its delegate voted, but it is a fact that
the Organising Committee refused to endorse the Conference’s resolution. This
was to

    

be expected after the Southern “Constituent” Conference of
new-Iskrists adopted its extremely unwise and fundamentally opportunist
resolution on the State Duma, which we analysed in detail in Proletary,
No.

 21.[1]


In this way, the political alignment is quite clear. The question of the
attitude towards the State Duma has occasioned what is probably the first joint
discussion of political tactics by the opposition and the revolutionary parties,
by the legal and the illegal press. This is a giant stride forward in comparison
with the previous period in the movement. Formerly, a gulf separated the
opposition from the revolutionaries, legal work from illegal work. The movement
has made such tremendous progress during the last ten months or so that the gulf
has in considerable measure been removed. The revolutionary struggle has carried
the “legal” opposition on to the crest of the wave, almost to
recognising that a revolution is on. Hitherto, strictly speaking, we could not
even discuss tactics or the behaviour of political parties with representatives
of the legal opposition, for in fact there were no parties except the
revolutionary and illegal, and “political activities” coincided
fully with those of “political offenders”, if one disregards the
“activities” of the autocracy and its henchmen. Now, the State Duma
has naturally and inevitably become a subject of discussion for the mass of the
people—for people of all shades of opinion, all tendencies and
parties. The revolutionary struggle has cleared the road for revolutionary
discussion in the legal press, at Zemstvo meetings, student assemblies, and
workers’ mass meetings.


Practically the first to start the discussion on the attitude to the State Duma
were the Zemstvos and the radical intelligentsia, who are most directly
concerned with the sop thrown by the tsar, and who were best informed of
it—even prior to the publication of the Manifesto of August 6. The
discussion then spread to the whole political press in Russia, both the free
(i.e., illegal) press which gave frank and full expression to all its arguments
and slogans, and to the legal press, which wrote in Aesopian language for a
boycott, and openly against it.

 

The political alignment, that precursor of a demarcation between the political
      parties and classes of all the peoples of Russia, began to take shape on
      the boycott issue. Should the Duma be entered, or not? Should the Duma be
      nipped in the bud, or accepted? Should the struggle be waged within the
      Duma, on the basis of the Duma, or outside the Duma, apart from the Duma,
      against the Duma? That was the inescapable issue both for the privileged
      handful of the electorate and for the masses, “who had no
      rights”. Today we have on this issue, which was of course tackled
      from a thousand various points of view and with thousands of variations
      and “dissenting opinions”, the returns
    supplied by a “canvass” of public opinion as
    presented by the entire press and by the aggregate of the declarations made
    by all the various political organisations, political meetings, assemblies,
    etc.


These returns are as follows:


Views on the Duma fall into three clearly defined main categories, which fully
correspond to the three main and basic social forces involved in the present
revolution: the views of the Black Hundreds (the autocracy), of the
liberals (the bourgeoisie), and of the revolutionaries (the
proletariat). The Black Hundreds seized on the Duma as the best means, most
likely the only possible or even conceivable means, of saving the autocracy. The
liberals criticised the Duma adversely, but accepted it, being irresistibly
drawn to lawful paths and to compromise with the tsar. Headed by the
proletariat, the revolutionary people, denounced the Duma, proclaimed an active
boycott of it, and by their deeds have already shown that they are striving to
convert this active boycott into an armed uprising.


It would be worth our while to dwell on these three main categories in somewhat
greater detail.


As regards the Black Hundreds, it might have been expected (and this expectation
was expressed by people inclined to take the Duma in all earnest, even, if we
are not mistaken, the Iskra group) that the supporters of the
autocracy would directly or indirectly sympathise with a boycott, or
absenteeism, as
our servile press frequently puts it. These people might have been expected to
say in effect:

Let them boycott the Duma; so much the better for us, for in that case the Duma
will be composed more completely of

    

Black-Hundred elements. Since there are conservative organs in Russia capable of
denouncing tsarist ministers for excessive liberalism, and voicing discontent
with “an excessively weak” government, such a view could easily be
expressed just as clearly as many views held by constitutionalists, or even
more clearly. But it was here that a mistake made itself felt, a mistake made by
people who took the Duma seriously, and began to talk of a struggle on the basis
of the Duma, of supporting a struggle in the Duma, etc. It could be seen
immediately that the autocracy was terribly in need of a legal Duma opposition,
that it was terribly afraid of a boycott. Why? The answer is very simple:
because it had become absolutely clear that it was utterly impossible to govern
the country without coming to terms with at least a section of the bourgeoisie
as a class. It was impossible to govern the country, to obtain money, or to
continue existing without coming to terms with the Right wing of the
bourgeoisie. Irrespective of our autocracy’s Asiatic savagery, and the many
features of antediluvian barbarism it has retained in such an unusually pure
form throughout the centuries, the autocratic government is nevertheless the
government of a capitalist country, linked with Europe, with international
markets and international capital by thousands of inseverable ties. The
dependence of the autocracy on the bourgeoisie of All Russia is a supreme
material dependence, which may be concealed behind hundreds of medieval annexes,
or weakened by millions of bribes doled out to individuals or groups by the
Court (titles, sinecures, concessions, sops, favours, etc., etc., etc.), but
at every crisis in the people’s life it must manifest itself with decisive
force.


It is not a matter of mere chance that we now see Mr. Witte currying favour with
the liberals, delivering liberal speeches, which are reported in the legal
press, conducting “informal negotiations with Mr. Gessen”, the
leader of the Constitutional-Democrats (the cable from the St. Petersburg
correspondent of The Times), or that we see the foreign press teeming
with news about the tsar’s liberal plans. Of course, there is no end of lies and
intrigues in all this, but then the tsarist government, and for that matter any
bourgeois government, cannot make a single step in its policies

    

without resorting to lies and intrigues. Of course, there is a great deal of the
      most shabby chicanery, occasioned by the arrival in St. Petersburg of
      representatives of French and German bankers to negotiate a new loan of
      500,000,000 rubles of which the tsarist government stands in dire
      need. But then the entire system of governmental dependence on the
      bourgeoisie inevitably engenders cases of chicanery in connection with all
      the various deals and trickery accompanying this dependence.


It is imperative for the autocracy to “make peace” with the
bourgeoisie, and it is obliged to exert itself to this end; naturally, in this
connection it wants to dupe public opinion in Europe and Russia. And the State
Duma is a splendid means for achieving this end. A legal bourgeois opposition in
the Duma is just the facade for a state system recognised by the bourgeoisie, a
fa&ctailade that might help the autocracy to extricate itself from its predicament.


This explains why Moskovskiye Vedomosti, that organ of conservative
opposition to the government, speaks of the Duma boycott not with malicious joy
or derision, but with a gnashing of teeth and the rage of despair. This explains
why Novoye Vremya, organ of the Black Hundreds, attacks the
“absentees” and tries to enlist even Bebel for the struggle against
the idea of a boycott (Proletary, No.

  20[2]

).

The Black Hundreds are
afraid of a boycott, and only the blind or those out to justify the
liberals can now deny that the boycott would be fully successful if it were
endorsed by the leading figures of the Zemstvo and municipal congresses.


But the gist of the matter is that the liberal bourgeoisie’s fundamental
interests as a class incline it towards the monarchy, a two-chamber system, law
and order, and moderation, towards a struggle against the “horrors”
of an “uninterrupted revolution”, the “horrors” of a
revolution after the French model.... The turn taken by the liberal bourgeoisie,
the Osvobozhdeniye adherents and the Constitutional-Democrats away from
radical phrases about a boycott towards a deter mined war against it, is the
first major political step by the Russian bourgeoisie as a class, a
step which reveals its treacherous nature, its “criminal intent”—to
perpetrate

    

treachery against the revolution. This is no mere intent (for which alone no law
can hold one accountable, as some smart lawyer among the Osvobozhdeniye
gentry would probably object), but an actual attempt to commit this crime, and
even a consummation of the crime. We are living at a very rapid pace now. The
times have long gone when it was necessary for us to rouse the
bourgeoisie to political awareness in general (though such times are quite
recent according to ordinary chronology, which is inapplicable to
revolution). Gone, even, are the times when it was necessary for us to
help the bourgeoisie to organise itself into a political opposition. They are
now awakened, have organised themselves, and an entirely different task stands
on the order of the day, a great task which only the tremendous strides of the
revolution have made real and possible—that of reaching an agreement with
the tsar (the task of capital) and that of neutralising treacherous capital (the
task of labour).


It is this task that the revolutionary proletariat, which is marching at t.he
head of the revolutionary people, has assumed, while remaining true to its duty
of awakening, encouraging and rousing its “mates” in the struggle
against medievalism and serfdom, and at the same time passing on from less
revolutionary to more revolutionary “mates”. It is not the Duma that
has been “taken in earnest” by the revolutionary proletariat under
the guidance of Social- Democracy, but those words, promises and slogans about a
Duma boycott which popped out of the mouths of the radical windbags of the
bourgeoisie by reason of their levity, extreme youthfulness and exuberance. The
proletariat has translated boycott talk into reality; it has done so by openly
and unequivocally raising the standard of armed uprising; it has done so by
inaugurating not only the broadest possible agitation, but open street fighting
as well (in Moscow); it has done so by fraternising with the radical youth, the
vanguard of the masses, the peasant masses in particular, whose class
characteristics have not yet fully taken shape, but which are infinitely
oppressed and exploited. Without entering into any agreements or concluding any
pacts, the socialist proletariat has united with the awakened sections of
revolutionary bourgeois democracy, for the accomplishment of a practical
militant task. During the great Moscow

    

events (great as a portent, not in themselves), the proletariat and the
      revolutionary democrats did the fighting, while the liberals, the
    Osvobozhdeniye people and the Constitutional-Democrats conducted
    negotiations with the autocracy.


The political alignment has become quite clear: for the Duma, to preserve the
autocracy; for the Duma, to limit the autocracy; against the Duma, to destroy
the autocracy. In other words: for the Duma, to suppress the revolution; for the
Duma, to halt the revolution; against the Duma, to bring the revolution to a
victorious conclusion.


There was an exception—a sad and regrettable
exception—which marred the distinctness of the class alignment
(thereby, like all
exceptions proving the general rule). This was the opportunist wing of the
Social-Democratic movement, as represented by the new Iskra. However,
this exception too—the narrow sphere of illegal organisations
abroad—stemmed from a very important and very instructive logical
development, which we predicted. The Conference which we mentioned above united
the revolutionary Social-Democrats. Iskra remained
united—not by virtue of an agreement, but by virtue of the course
of events— with Osvobozhdeniye. In the illegal press, the
revolutionary Social-Democrats and the extreme Left wing of the revolutionary
bourgeois democrats came out for an active boycott. It was the opportunist
Social-Democrats and the extreme Right wing of the bourgeois democrats who
declared against the boycott.


Thus we have confirmation of what was shown in the analysis of the most
important of the new-Iskra resolutions on tactics (see Lenin’s Two

    Tactics),[3]

namely, that Iskra is descending to the level of the
liberal landlords, whereas Proletary is raising the masses of the
peasants to its own level; Iskra is descending to the liberal
bourgeoisie, whereas Proletary is raising the revolutionary petty
bourgeoisie.


Anyone familiar with Social-Democratic literature knows the catch phrase long
ago launched by Iskra—the Bolsheviks and Proletary have
veered towards the Socialist-Revolutionaries,

    

towards the extreme bourgeois democrats. There is a grain of
truth in this, as there is in all catch phrases. It does not express mere
chagrin on the part of the Iskrists; it reflects an actual phenomenon, but does
so as a concave mirror would reflect an object. This actual phenomenon is the
fact that the Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks represent respectively the
opportunist and the revolutionary wings of the Russian Social-Democratic
movement. Since the Iskrists turned to opportunism, they were bound to arrive at
the conclusion that the Bolsheviks are “Jacobins” (to use a term of
eighteenth-century political divisions). These accusations merely
confirm our view on the Right and Left wings of the present-day
Social-Democratic movement. These accusations by the opportunists are just
as flattering to us as was the accusation hurled at us by Rabochaya
Mysl in 1900 to the effect that we were following in the footsteps of
Narodnaya Volya. The actual way in which political tendencies throughout Russia
are grouped politically on a major question of tactics has proved in practice
the correctness of our appraisal of Iskra’s stand ever since the Second
Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.


The alignment of illegal parties effected at the Conference of all
Social-Democrats thus naturally supplements the alignment of all parties on the
Duma question. If the Iskrists have proved a regrettable exception, the fact
that they are only an exception gives us new faith in the validity of the rule,
in the victory of revolutionary Social-Democracy, in the realisation of the
consistent slogans of the Russian revolution. Although the liberals’ banality
and the vulgarisation of Marxism by some Marxists may at moments of gloom seem
an omen that our revolution too will turn out to be a banal, abortive, and
incomplete revolution like the German Revolution of 1848, nevertheless the
vitality of the principles of revolutionary Social-Democracy inspires us with a
stimulating faith, and the actions of the heroic working class uphold that
faith. The revolution draws a splendid line of division between political
tendencies, serves as a splendid reductio ad absurdum of erroneous
opinions. So far the revolution in Russia has been progressing in such a way as
to justify the hopes for its complete victory inspired by the present situation
at home and abroad. And the

    

sight of the autocracy’s consternation and the liberals’ confusion, the sight of
      the bold revolutionary energy of the proletariat, which is taking the
      peasantry in tow, lead us to believe that “our train will go as the
      German never did”[4]

 

Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 356-73 of this volume.—Ed.

[2]

See p. 321 of this volume.—Ed.

[3]

See p. 47 of this volume.—Ed.
 



[4]

Lenin is quoting from the poem by N. Dobrolyubov In a
Prussian Railway Carriage, signed “Konrad Lilienschwager” and
published in 1862 in No. 8 of Svistok (The Whistle),
a supplement to
Sovremennik (The Contemporary) magazine.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Hysterics of the Defeated









Lenin: The Hysterics of the Defeated







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Hysterics of the Defeated




Published:
Proletary, No. 23, October 31 (18), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary as verified against the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 405-407.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Our article, “The First Results of the Political Alignment”, had
already been written when we received No. 112 of Iskra, which contains
a sort of overwrought, spiteful, tearful and fuming article full of conceits,
entitled “The Fruits of Parochialism”. What else can you call this
article but a fit of hysterics. It is quite impossible to discern even the
shadow of reasoning in this hysterical shriek. What has parochialism to
do with it, dear Iskra comrades, when you yourselves, of your own
free will, attended the Conference of the various Social-Democratic parties
and organisations in Russia? Just give the matter a little thought, if you have
not entirely lost the capacity to think; give it at least some thought when your
fit of hysterics is over! Surely if you consented to attend the Conference, if
your delegate was there, that means that you yourselves regarded this Conference
as a serious matter, a Party matter of the utmost importance to the
proletariat. You are only discrediting yourselves for good and all in the eyes
of intelligent workers when you start fulminating after being defeated
at a Conference you yourselves acknowledged as serious and necessary by your
voluntary participation!


You are displeased with the fact that the Conference, in your opinion, condemned
your tactics too sharply, by calling participation in the Duma treason to the
cause of liberty? But were you not aware, dear Iskra comrades, that you
were going to attend a Conference together with the Central Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P., and that Proletary, organ of this Central Committee, has
for ever so long, both in pamphlets and in articles, been showing up your
transformation

    

into toadies of the monarchist liberal party? You were perfectly well aware of
      that, dear Iskra comrades, and if you are now infuriated beyond
    all reason, we are really unable to help you. After all, it is an
    inescapable and indisputable fact that of all the illegal parties,
    organisations, tendencies and press organs of all the peoples of Russia,
    only you have remained in the company of Osvobozhdeniye. It is this
    fact that constitutes the severest indictment against you, an
    indictment so severe that history has rarely known its equal; yet you
    imagined that the words “treason to the cause of
    liberty” were the source of this severity!


You have lost your head so much that after your defeat at the Conference you
have raised a hullabaloo about the harmfulness of federalism in organisation,
such as is cherished by the Bund and other national Social-Democratic
groups. How unwise this is of you, dear Iskra comrades, for you are
thereby only stressing the gravity of your defeat. And, indeed, just
think, dear Iskra comrades, who is it that for two years has been
advocating organisational vagueness and amorphousness, the principles of
compromise and decentralisation? You yourselves, the new-Iskrists. And it was
the federalists of the Bund and of the Lettish and Polish Social-Democratic
Labour Parties who at the time played up in the press all your disorganising
catchwords against the so-called excesses of centralism, and so on and so
forth. And, it is likewise a fact, an inescapable and indisputable fact, that
all the federalists of the above-mentioned parties wrote and published
articles in the spirit of the Minority! Just see, dear Iskra comrades,
how inappropriately you have brought up the subject of federalism: you have
thereby stressed the fact that your erstwhile well-wishers of the
Social-Democratic Bund and the Lettish and Polish parties were forced to desert
you, being unable to put up with the utter banality of your Duma tactics! No,
dear Iskra comrades, if you just think matters over, after calming
down, you will yourselves see what is obvious to all—it is not the
“Majority” that has come over to federalism, but the Bund and the
Lettish and Polish Social-Democrats who, influenced by the objective logic of
the revolutionary events, have arrived at a standpoint that has always been
upheld by the “Majority”.

 

Of course, dear Iskra comrades, you have sustained a telling
defeat. That, however, is not due to any spiteful machinations on the part of
the Majority· or the Polish Social-Democrats, etc., but rather to the
hopeless muddle that manifested itself already in the resolutions on tactics
adopted by the All-Russia Conference of Mensheviks. So long as you stand on the
basis of these resolutions, you will inevitably find yourselves the
“sole companion” of Osvobozhdeniye, against all
Social-Democrats and even against all revolutionary democrats.

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Revolutionary Riga's Ultimatum









Lenin: Revolutionary Riga's Ultimatum







V. I.  

      Lenin
Revolutionary Riga’s Ultimatum




Published:
Proletary, No. 23, October 31 (18), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 408-409.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The German newspapers, which usually devote much attention to events in
the Baltic provinces, have reported the following instructive fact. Things are
happening at the Riga Polytechnic, as they are at all other higher educational
institutions: student assemblies have turned into political meetings. The
students are organising into a combatant force of the revolution. The liberal
bigwigs are turning up their noses and muttering under their breath about the
weakness of the government. But in Livonia, things have gone so hard with the
landed gentry that they have energetically set about organising armed protection
for their estates, with out relying on the government, which cannot do anything
with the peasants, or the workers, or the students. The Baltic barons are
organising civil war in earnest: they are hiring whole squads, arming them with
good magazine rifles, and posting them about their extensive estates. And now it
turns out that part of the members of the German student corporations in the
Baltic provinces have joined such squads! Naturally, the Lettish and Russian
students have not only proclaimed a boycott against these Black Hundreds in
student uniform, but have even appointed a special commission to investigate
the participation of students in the landlord Black-Hundred bands. Two members
of this commission were sent into the countryside to gather information from the
peasants. Both were arrested by the government and sent to prison in Riga.


The Lettish and Russian students then rose. They called a huge meeting which
passed a vigorous resolution. The head of the Polytechnic, who had been invited
to attend, was called upon to take immediate measures to secure the

    

release of the arrested. The resolution ended with a direct ultimatum: if within
three days the arrested persons were not released at the time fixed, the
students, with the aid of the Riga workers, would use every means in their power
to effect that release.


The Governor was away from Riga at the time, for he had gone to St. Petersburg
to obtain the powers of Governor General. The acting Governor funked, and
diplomatically wriggled out of the situation. He summoned (so the Vossische
Zeitung of October 20, N. S., reports) the head of the Polytechnic and the
two arrested students, and asked the latter whether they were aware that their
actions were unlawful. They, of course, replied that they saw nothing unlawful
in them. The acting Governor, a Riga newspaper is said to have stated, then
urged them to refrain from such unlawful acts, and—set both free.


“In the eyes of the students,” the correspondent, who feels for the Baltic
barons, gloomily adds, “and in the eyes of the masses who stand behind
them, the government has bowed to the ultimatum. And even a non-partisan must
have gained the same impression.”

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Plans of a Buffoon-Minister









Lenin: The Plans of a Buffoon-Minister







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Plans of a Buffoon-Minister




Published:
Proletary, No. 23, October 31 (18), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 410.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

To gain a better understanding of today’s politics, it is sometimes worth while
to look back at yesterday’s. Here is what the usually well-informed
correspondent of the London Times cabled from St. Petersburg on October
10 (23):



"From a high source I learn that the government has resolved to grant the
four liberties demanded by the reformers, subject, however, to restrictions. It
is hoped that this concession will rally the Moderates. Count Witte yesterday
had a long conference on the subject with the tsar. Mr. Goremykin is drafting a
measure for endowing peasants with state lands. This will be placed on the table
when the Duma meets. It is thereby hoped to conciliate the peasant vote.


"Such briefly is the government’s plan of campaign. It apparently excludes
the intention of voluntarily granting a constitution before the meeting of the
Duma, although some hope of this prevails among the
Constitutional-Democrats. One of the principal points to be discussed at their
Congress on Wednesday will be with regard to the action of the party in the
event of a constitution’s being granted on or before the assembling of the
Duma—namely, whether the party shall consent in that case to work in the
Duma or insist upon the convocation of a constituent assembly elected by
universal suffrage.


“The supporters of the bureaucracy hope that the concessions which will be
granted by the government will at last check the constitutional movement without
an extension of the suffrage or an endorsement of the legislative character of
the Duma, but all the indications are the other way.”



Indeed, the government’s “plan of campaign” is clear. Equally clear
to all people who have eyes to see is the “campaign” of the
Constitutional-Democratic gentry, who are bargaining with the
government. There is only one snag:
the working class is stirring, and stirring in such a way that all the ingenious
plans of both Mr. Witte and the Constitutional-Democrats are crumbling to dust.

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Aggravation of the Situation in Russia









Lenin: The Aggravation of the Situation in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Aggravation of the Situation in Russia




Published:
Proletary, No. 23, October 31 (18), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 411-412.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It is under this headline that the Berlin liberal Vossische Zeitung has
published the following interesting dispatch:



"It is with irresistible force that events are developing in the empire of
the tsars. To every impartial observer it must be obvious that neither the
government nor any of the opposition or revolutionary parties is in control of
the situation. The late Prince Trubetskoi and other professors of the higher
educational institutions made vain attempts to dissuade the Russian students
from the dangerous path, which they had taken when they decided to convert the
universities into places of political mass meetings. The students paid
enthusiastic homage to the memory of Trubetskoi, marched in masses in the
funeral procession, and turned the obsequies into an imposing political
demonstration, but they did not follow his advice to keep outsiders out of the
University. At the University of St. Petersburg, the Mining Academy and the
Polytechnic mammoth meetings are being held, at which the students are often in
the minority, and which last from early morning till late at night. Impassioned
and fiery orations are delivered and revolutionary songs are sung. Moreover, the
liberals are roundly berated at these meetings, especially for their
half-heartedness, which, it is claimed, is no accidental attribute of Russian
liberalism, but a quality that has been conditioned by eternal historical laws.


"There is something profoundly tragic in these reproaches, which, despite
the historical references adduced to substantiate them, are in fact absolutely
unhistorical, if only because the liberals in Russia have never had the
slightest opportunity of displaying any half heartedness that could in any way
prejudice the cause of emancipation which is so important for all parties. It is
not their deeds, but rather their sufferings that handicap the liberals in their
life course. The government is just as helpless [italics in the
original] in the face of these events as it is in the face of the labour
troubles and the general unrest. It is possible, of course, that it is planning
a new blood-bath, and is only waiting for the moment when the movement becomes
ripe for a Cossack attack. But even if that should be the case, none of the
powers that be is certain that it will not lead to a still more violent outbreak
of disaffection. Not even General Trepov has faith in his own cause. He does not
conceal from his friends that he considers

    

himself a doomed man, and that he expects no favourable results whatever from
      his administration. ’I am merely fulfilling my duty, and shall fulfil it
      to the end,’ he says.


"The tsar’s throne must he in a sad way indeed if the head of the police
arrives at such conclusions. And indeed it cannot hut be recognised that,
despite all of Trepov’s efforts, despite the feverish activity of endless
commissions and conferences, the tension has not only failed to relax since last
year, but has even become much more accentuated. Wherever one looks, the
position everywhere has become worse and more threatening, everywhere the
situation has become noticeably aggravated ."



There is a great deal of truth in this appraisal, but at the same time a great
deal of liberal stupidity. “The liberals could not display a
half-heartedness prejudicial to the cause.” Is that so? Why is it then that
these poor liberals could nevertheless come forward more openly and
freely than the other parties? No! The students are guided by a sound
revolutionary instinct, enhanced by their contact with the proletariat, when
they zealously disassociate themselves from the Constitutional-Democrats, and
discredit these Constitutional-Democrats in the eyes of the people. The morrow
will bring us great and epoch-making battles for liberty. It is possible that
the champions of liberty will yet suffer more than one defeat. But defeats will
only serve to stir up the workers and peasants ever more profoundly, will only
render the crisis more acute, and will only make more formidable the inevitable
ultimate victory of the cause of liberty. For our part, we shall bend every
effort to prevent the bourgeois leeches of monarchist landlord liberalism from
attaching themselves to this victory, and to prevent the gentlemen of the big
bourgeoisie from deriving the main benefit from this victory, as has happened
more than once in Europe. We shall bend all our efforts to bring this victory of
the workers and peasants to its consummation, to bring about the utter
destruction of all the loathsome institutions of autocracy, monarchy,
bureaucracy, militarism and serf-ownership. Only such a victory will put a real
weapon into the hands of the proletariat—and then we shall set Europe
ablaze, so as to make of the Russian democratic revolution the prologue to a
European socialist revolution.

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Notes on “The British Labour Movement and the Trade Union Congress”









Lenin: Notes on 'The British Labour Movement and the Trade Union Congress'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Notes on “The British Labour Movement and the Trade Union Congress”[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 23, October 31 (18), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 413.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

1

This is how the matter stood: the Taff Vale Railway sued the railway workers’
union for losses caused by the strike. Despite bitter resistance by the workers,
the bourgeois judges awarded damages to the capitalists! Court injunctions
instructing trade unions to compensate the capitalists for losses caused by a
strike means in fact destroying the right to strike. Judges who play the lackey
to the bourgeoisie know well how to nullify even constitutionally guaranteed
liberties, when it comes to the struggle between labour and capital.

2

Unfortunately, the British working-class movement promises to serve
for a long time to come as a sad example of how the labour movement’s
divorcement from socialism leads of necessity to its becoming shallow
and bourgeois in character.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The article “The British Labour Movement and the
Trade Union Congress” was published without the author’s signature in
No. 23 of Proletary, October 31(18), 1905. The manuscript of the
translation of this article was edited by Lenin, who attached two notes to
it—one on the Taff Vale case, mentioned in the article, and the second on
the concluding part of the article.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## An Equilibrium of Forces









Lenin: An Equilibrium of Forces







V. I.  

      Lenin
An Equilibrium of Forces[1]




Written: Written on October 17 (30), 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1928 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 414-415.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

1) The result to date (Monday, October 30 [17]) is an equilibrium of forces, as
   we already pointed out in Proletary,
   No. 23.


2) Tsarism is no longer strong enough, the revolution not yet
   strong enough, to win.


3) Hence the tremendous amount of vacillation. The terrific and enormous
   increase of revolutionary happenings (strikes, meetings, barricades,
   committees of public safety, complete paralysis of the government, etc.), on
   the other hand, the absence of resolute repressive measures. The troops
   are wavering.


4) The tsar’s Court is wavering (The Times and the Daily
Telegraph) between dictatorship and a constitution.


The Court is wavering and biding its time. Strictly speaking, these
are its correct tactics: the equilibrium of forces
compels it to bide its time, for power is in its hands.


The revolution has reached a stage at which it is disadvantageous for the
counter-revolution to attack, to assume
the offensive.


For us, for the proletariat, for consistent revolutionary democrats, this is
not enough. If we do not rise to a higher level, if we do not manage to
launch an independent offensive, if we do not smash the forces of tsarism, do
not destroy its actual power, then the revolution will stop half way, then the
bourgeoisie will fool the workers.


5) Rumour has it that a constitution has been decided upon. If that is
   so, then it follows that the tsar is heeding the lessons of 1848 and other
   revolutions: he wants to grant a constitution without a
   constituent assembly, before a constituent assembly, apart
   from a constituent assembly.

    

What kind of constitution? At best (for ’the tsar)=a Constitutional-Democratic
      constitution.


This implies: achievement of the Constitutional-Democrats’ ideal, skipping the
revolution; deceiving the people, for all the same there will be no
complete and actual freedom of elections.


Should not the revolution skip this granted constitution?

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

An Equilibrium of Forces was completed several
hours before the telegraph brought the news to Geneva that the tsar’s
Manifesto of

   

October 17 (30) has been made public. The questions touched upon in
An Equilibrium of Forces were developed in detail in the
article “The Denouement Is at Hand” (see pp. 447-54 of
this volume).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Social-Democratic Sweetheart









Lenin: A Social-Democratic Sweetheart







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Social-Democratic Sweetheart




Written: Written in October 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1926 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 416.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

To acclamation from Osvobozhdeniye, Comrade Starover
continues to repent in the new Iskra for the sins he committed
(unwisely) by participating in the old Iskra. Comrade Starover very
much resembles the heroine of a story by Chekhov entitled
“Sweetheart”. At first Sweetheart lived with an impresario and used
to say: “Vanichka and I are staging serious plays.” Later she lived with a
timber merchant and would say: “Vasichka and I are indignant at the high
duties on timber.” Finally, she lived with a veterinary surgeon and used to say:
“Kolechka and I doctor horses.”—It is the same with Comrade
Starover. “Lenin and I” abused Martynov. “Martynov and
I” are abusing Lenin. Charming Social-Democratic Sweetheart! In whose
embrace will you find yourself tomorrow?

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On P. B. Axelrod's Pamphlet The People's Duma and a Workers' Congress









Lenin: On P. B. Axelrod's Pamphlet The People's Duma and a Workers' Congress







V. I.  

      Lenin
On P. B. Axelrod’s Pamphlet The People’s Duma and a Workers’ Congress




Written: Written In October 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1926 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 417-419.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

Analysis of the Pamphlet[1]

In connection with P. B. Axelrod’s little pamphlet entitled The People’s
Duma and a Workers’ Congress, the following should be noted:


This is the prototype of all of Iskra’s follies — both
of a parallel parliament and a deal with the Constitutionalists Democrats.


By and large, it is all playing at parliamentarianism — in the
People’s Duma, and in arranging a deal with the Constitutionalists-Democrats
— in the parliamentary interpretation of a “Workers’
Congress” with illustrations “from Lassalle” (who was working
in conditions of a constitution ten years alter it had been
won by a revolution).


We have no end of ineptitudes here: “the first and primary
foundation” (page 13) “of serious negotiations and agreements
between our party and liberal organisations”... of action. What
kind?


{ { {
 Comrade P. B. Axelrod (is three years late! Can this
 be considered an agreement
 with a political party? It amounts to services
 rendered, technical in the first place, which were
 sufficient three years ago.


1) Material means...


2) premises...


3) arms “delivery”]


4) influence on public institutions, utilisation of connections


5) in the bureaucracy and the military, in the interests of open political action.


 “School-level pedagogy”: even if the convoking of a

People’s
Duma

and a Workers’ Congress is a failure

    

(page 12), “the agitation and organisational work done will not have
      been lost”.


Compare with an insurrection—can organisational work in one
“have been lost”? No. And agitation work? No, since an
insurrection is in progress, is a fact. As for the

People’s
Duma—that is a comedy, a phantom, a hollow
phrase.


A saccharine approach to the workers.


Page.7: “of a constituent popular assembly, i.e., a really
’People’s Duma’.”


{ Not “i.e.” and not “really"}


(page 7) "’The duties’ of the People’s Duma


1&degr 1) “to present to the State Duma the demand that a constituent
assembly be convened, and that it declare [?—and?] itself non-competent,
without the right to function.”


 2)

∼"∼



!! ha-ha! and what about
   the “right” to convene
   a constituent assembly?


11&degr 3) “to serve as the centre and spokesman of the will
of all democratic (page 7) sections of the population, and organiser of
defensive and offensive action by these sections against the government and its
allies.”


Compare this nonsense with a provisional revolutionary government as the organ
of insurrection.


 A spate of meaningless words, and the reality of revolution.

 The difficulty of an uprising=the difficulty of climbing Mt. Blanc.

 The difficulty of a “People’s Duma” under the
 autocracy=“the difficulty” of flying through the air on to the
 top of Mt. Blanc.


Note should be taken of confirmation of our Central Committee’s opinion, as
expressed in its leaflet, that Iskra’s plan is a piece of invention
coming from abroad. Axelrod wants to bring round to his point of view
his correspondent, who (a) (page 6) doubts whether the slogans of the People’s
Duma and a Workers’ Congress will win over the mass of the people; (b) (page 14)
has motivated the policy of an “active boycott” (page 15 and page 14
in fine).

 

Axelrod considers the policy of an active boycott reactionary and utopian


— reaction?—a conference of
Social-Democrats+Osvobozhdeniye
have settled this question. A coalition with the Black
Hundreds?—fear of Moskovskiye Vedomosti and Novoye Vremya.


— utopia? Two “utopias”:

insurrection

and

playing
at
parliamentarianism.


Which of these is being effected is shown by the general strike and
street fighting all over Russia.


The utter jumble of ideas about a “deal”, an “agreement”
(page7)

“with
the
central
organisations
of
liberal
democracy”.


Complete inability to single out

revolutionary

democracy and indicate

concrete

slogans on a political agreement with the latter. Axelrod’s
slogans are all of an
Osvobozhdeniye nature.


Regarding a “workers’ congress”.


The Third Congress: utilisation of open action so as to create points
d’appui for the Party.[2]


(Clear and precise.)


With P. B. Axelrod one cannot make out anything.


An All-Russia workers’ congress sans phrase (page 3)—or a

“phrase”?



Quid est?


It would be best to have

two
congresses


1) a “General Congress” (page 4)


2) a “Social-Democratic congress” ("of members of a
   General Congress


?|| who share our programme, plus representatives of our Party organisations,
for a reform of the whole Party”. Page 4)


|| The ridiculousness of a comparison with the Lassalle affair:

1) there was
already a

constitution

then.

2) Then Lassalle
was openly appealed to, and his appeal was an open
one.

3)
Then the formation of the Allgemeiner Deutscher Arbeiter-Verein was a
pretext for abuse of “workers’ independent activity”
against the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party.||

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Lenin’s pamphlet on this subject was not published.





[2]

The reference is to the resolution written by Lenin and
adopted by the Third Congress of the Party. It was worded, “On
the Question
of Open Political Action by the R.S.D.L.P.” (see present edition, Vol. 8,
pp. 377-78).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Tasks of Revolutionary Army Contingents









Lenin: Tasks of Revolutionary Army Contingents







V. I.  

      Lenin
Tasks of Revolutionary Army Contingents




Written: Written in late October 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1926 in Lenin Miscellany V.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 420-424.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

1. Independent military action.


2. Leadership of the mass.


The contingents may be of any strength, beginning with two or three people.


They must arm themselves as best they can (rifles, revolvers, bombs, knives,
knuckle-dusters, sticks, rags soaked in kerosene for starting fires, ropes or
rope ladders, shovels for building barricades, pyroxylin cartridges, barbed
wire, nails [against cavalry], etc., etc.). Under no circumstances should they
wait for help from other sources, from above, from the outside; they must
procure everything themselves.


As far as possible, the contingents should consist of people who either live
near each other, or who meet frequently and regularly at definite hours
(preferably people of both categories, for regular meetings may be interrupted
by the uprising). They must arrange matters so as to be able to get together at
the most critical moments,, when things may take the most unexpected
turns. Therefore, each group must work out beforehand ways and means of joint
action: signs in windows, etc., so as to find each other easily; previously
agreed upon calls or whistles so that the comrades recognise one another in a
crowd; previously arranged signals in the event of meetings at night, etc.,
etc. Any energetic person, with the aid of two or three comrades, could work out
a whole series of such rules and methods, which should be drawn up, learned and
practised beforehand. It must not be forgotten that the chances are 100 to lb
that events will take us unawares, and that it will be necessary to come
together under terribly difficult conditions.

 

Even without arms, the groups can play a most important part: 1) by leading the
mass; 2) by attacking, whenever a favourable opportunity presents itself,
policemen, stray Cossacks (as was the case in Moscow), etc., and seizing their
arms; 3) by rescuing the arrested or injured, when there are only few police
about; 4) by getting on to the roofs or upper storeys of houses, etc., and
showering stones or pouring boiling water on the troops, etc. Given sufficient
push, an organised and well-knit combat group constitutes a tremendous
force. Under no circumstances should the formation of the group be abandoned or
postponed on the plea of lack of arms.


As far as possible members of combat groups should have their duties assigned in
advance, leaders or chiefs of groups being sometimes selected in this way. It
would be unwise, of course, to play at conferring ranks, but the enormous
importance of uniform leadership and rapid and determined action should not be
forgotten. Determination and push are three-quarters of success.


As soon as the groups are formed—i.e., right now—they must get down
to comprehensive work—not only theoretical, but most certainly practical
work as well. By theoretical work we mean a study of military science, an
acquaintance with military problems, the arrangement of lecture meetings on
military questions, talks by military men (officers, non-commissioned officers,
etc., etc., including also workers who have served in the army); the reading,
discussion and assimilation of illegal pamphlets and newspaper articles on
street fighting, etc., etc.


Practical work, we repeat, should be started at once. This falls into
preparatory work and military operations. The preparatory work includes
procuring all kinds of arms and ammunition, securing premises favourably located
for street fighting (convenient for fighting from above, for storing bombs and
stones, etc., or acids to be poured on the police, etc., etc.; also suitable for
headquarters, for collecting information, for sheltering fugitives from the
police, for use as hospitals, etc., etc.). Further, preliminary activity
includes the immediate work of reconnaissance and gathering
information—obtaining plans of prisons, police stations, ministries, etc.,
ascertaining the routine in government

    

 offices, banks, etc., and learning how they are guarded, endeavouring to
      establish contacts which could be of use (with employees in police
      departments, banks, courts, prisons, post- and telegraph-offices, etc.),
      ascertaining the where abouts of arsenals, of all the gunsmiths’ shops in
      the city, etc. There is a great deal of this sort of work to be done,
      and—what is more—it is work in which even those who are quite
      incapable of engaging in street fighting, even the very weak, women,
      youngsters, old people, and so on, can be of immense service. Efforts
      should be made immediately to get into combat groups absolutely all those
      who want to take part in the uprising, for there is no
    such person, nor can there be one, who, provided he desires to work, cannot
    be of immense value, even if he is unarmed and is personally incapable of
    fighting.


Further, revolutionary army groups should under no circumstances confine
themselves to preparatory work alone, but should begin military action as soon
as possible so as to

1) train their fighting forces;

2) reconnoitre the enemy’s
vulnerable spots;

3) inflict partial defeats on the enemy;

4) rescue prisoners (the arrested);

5) procure arms;

6) obtain funds for the uprising (confiscation of government funds),
and so on and so forth. The groups can and should immediately take
advantage of every opportunity for active work, and must by no means
put matters off until a general uprising, because fitness for the
uprising cannot be acquired except by training under fire.


All extremes, of course, are bad. All that is good and useful, if carried to
extremes, may become—and beyond a certain limit is bound to
become—bad and injurious. Disorderly, unorganised and petty terrorist
acts may, if carried to extremes, only scatter and squander our forces. That is
a fact, which, of course, should not be forgotten. On the other hand, under no
circumstances should it be forgotten that a slogan calling for an uprising
has already been issued, that the uprising has already begun.
To launch attacks under favourable circumstances is not only every
revolutionary’s right, but his plain duty. The killing of spies, policemen,
gendarmes, the blowing up of police stations, the liberation of prisoners, the
seizure of government funds for the needs of the uprising—such operations
are already being carried

    

out wherever insurrection is rife, in Poland and in the Caucasus, and every
detachment of the revolutionary army must be ready to start such operations at a
moment’s notice. Each group should remember that if it allows a favourable
opportunity for such an operation to slip by today, it will be guilty of
unpardonable inactivity, of passivity—and such an offence is the
greatest crime a revolutionary can commit at a time of insurrection, the
greatest disgrace that can befall anyone who is striving for liberty in deed,
and not in word alone.


As for the composition of these combat groups, the following may be
said. Experience will show how many members are desirable in each group, and how
their duties should be distributed. Each group must itself begin to acquire this
experience, without waiting for instructions from outside. The local
revolutionary organisation should, of course, be asked to send a revolutionary
with military experience to deliver lectures, conduct discussions and give
advice, but if such a person is not available it is absolutely incumbent upon
the group to do this work itself.


As regards Party divisions, it is natural that members of the same Party will
prefer to belong to the same group. But there should be no hard and fast rule
debarring members of other parties from joining. It is precisely here that we
must put into practice the alliance, the working agreement (without any merging
of parties, of course), between the socialist proletariat and revolutionary
democracy. Who ever wants to fight for liberty and proves in fact his readiness
to do so may be regarded as a revolutionary democrat, and we must strive to
carry on with such people the work of preparing for the uprising (provided, of
course, the given person or group is quite trustworthy). All other
“democrats” should be emphatically rejected as quasi-democrats, as
liberal windbags who must not be relied on at all, and whom it would be criminal
for a revolutionary to trust.


It is, of course, desirable for combat groups to unite their activities. It
would be extremely useful to work out the forms and terms of joint action. Under
no circumstances, however, should this be carried to the extreme of inventing
complex plans and general schemes, or of postponing practical work for the sake
of pedantic concoctions, etc. The

    

uprising will inevitably take place under circumstances in which the unorganised
      elements will outnumber the organised thousands of times over; there will
      inevitably be cases when it will be necessary to take immediate action,
      right then and there, in twos or even singly—and one must be
      prepared to act on ones s own initiative, and at one’s own risk. All
      delays, disputes, procrastination and indecision spell ruin to the cause
      of the uprising. Supreme determination, maximum energy, immediate
      utilisation of each suitable moment, immediate stimulation of the
      revolutionary ardour of the mass and the direction of this ardour to more
      vigorous and the most determined action—such is the prime duty of a
      revolutionary.


The fight against the Black Hundreds is an excellent type of military action,
which will train the soldiers of the revolutionary army, give them
their baptism of fire, and at the same time be of tremendous benefit to the
revolution. Revolutionary army groups must at once find out who organises the
Black Hundreds and where and how they are organised, and then, without confining
themselves to propaganda (which is useful, but inadequate) they must act with
armed force, beat up and kill the members of the Black-Hundred gangs, blow up
their headquarters, etc., etc.

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## What the Liberals Expect of the Duma









Lenin: What the Liberals Expect of the Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
What the Liberals Expect of the Duma




Written: Written in late October 1905 

Published:

      First published in 1931 in Lenin Miscellany XVI.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 425-426.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The liberals are trying to make the public optimistic regarding the composition
of the Duma. Here is what the Frankfurter Zeitung correspondent wrote
from St. Peters burg on October 14 (New Style): “Consideration of the
results of the pre-election meetings now taking place leads one to the
conclusion that the composition of the Duma will not be as bad as it seemed
before. It may now be foretold with a certain degree of probability that
conservative elements proper will hardly make up one half of the Duma. The
moderate liberals and the liberals have the best chances of
being elected, whereas the radicals’ prospects are far less favour able, though
they may be called relatively good from the viewpoint of the pessimism with
which the radicals regarded the future as recently as in August. There can
hardly be any doubt that the radicals’ representation in the Duma will not be
too weak. The only question is in what degree they will be able to make the
liberals and the moderate liberals follow in their wake, since only if these
three elements present a solid front to the conservative core will a constituent
assembly be ensured.”


By radicals the correspondent undoubtedly means the
Constitutional-Democrats. Their candidates in St. Peters burg are Nabokov,
Kedrin, and Vinaver. The “moderate liberals” are not defined with
any precision, but among their candidates mention has been made of Fyodorov (a
conservative “proper”, but “one who might be supported by the
liberals as well”!), and Nikitin (a candidate of the Right, but at the same time
also a moderate-liberal candidate).

 

So a constituent assembly is “ensured”, with the liberals and
      moderate liberals subordinated to the leadership of the
      “radical” Osvobozhdeniye League members.... Indeed,
    here we have the liberal optimists “clutching at straws”. What
    is most curious is their failure to see that even should a Duma majority
    vote for a constituent assembly, it will not be the latter that will be
    “ensured” in actual fact, but only a determined revolutionary
    struggle for one. The Constitutional-Democrats would like to have two irons
    in the fire—to have dealings with the autocracy (legal opposition in a
    legal Duma), and with the revolution ("we have done our bit” for
    a constituent assembly).

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The First Victory of the Revolution









Lenin: The First Victory of the Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
The First Victory of the Revolution




Published:
Proletary, No. 24, November 7 (October 25), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary as verified against the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 427-434.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Geneva, November 1 (October 19)


Late Monday night the telegraph brought Europe the news of the tsar’s Manifesto
of October 17. The Times correspondent wired: “The
people have won the day. The Emperor has surrendered. The autocracy has ceased
to exist.” Friends of the Russian revolution living in distant Baltimore
(U.S.A.) expressed themselves differently in a cable they sent to
Proletary: “Congratulations on the first great victory of the
Russian revolution.”


The latter appraisal of the events is undoubtedly far more accurate. We have
every reason to be jubilant. The concession made by the tsar is indeed a great
victory for the revolution, but this victory is still a long way from deciding
the fate of the entire cause of liberty. The tsar is far from having
surrendered. The autocracy has by no means ceased to exist. It has merely
retreated, leaving the field of battle to the enemy; it has retreated after an
exceedingly heavy battle, but it has not yet been defeated by a long ways It is
mustering its forces, and the revolutionary people have still to solve many
important military problems before they will be able to carry the revolution to
real and final victory.


October 17 will go down in history as one of the great days of the Russian
revolution. On this day the nation-wide strike, the like of which the world had
never before seen, reached its climax. The mighty arm of the proletariat,
which. was raised in an outburst of heroic solidarity all over Russia, brought
the entire industrial, commercial and

    

administrative life of the country to a standstill. It was the lull before the
      storm. Reports, one more alarming than the other, began pouring in from
      various big cities. The troops were wavering. The government refrained
      from taking repressive measures, the revolutionaries had not yet launched
      any serious open attacks, but insurrection was erupting on all sides.


At the eleventh hour the tsarist government decided to yield, realising that an
explosion was inevitable, that already under no circumstances was it at all
capable of gaining a full victory, but was very likely to suffer complete
defeat. Trepov is reported as having said, “First there will be blood
shed, and then a constitution.” The inevitability of a constitution could no
longer be doubted, even if the uprising were suppressed, so the government
decided that it was better to avoid the risk of serious and general bloodshed,
for tsarist rule would be swept away altogether in the event of the victory of
the people.


We know only an infinitesimal portion of that information possessed by the
government on Monday, October 17, which compelled it to evade a desperate battle
and yield. The local and central authorities strained every effort to hold up or
curtail messages about the alarming progress of the uprising, but even the
scanty, random and curtailed reports that found their way into the European
press leave no doubt that this was a genuine uprising, capable of inspiring
mortal fear in the tsar and his ministers.


The forces of tsarism and of the revolution are equally balanced, we wrote a
week ago, on the basis of the first news of the country-wide political
strike. Tsarism was no longer strong enough to crush the revolution; the
revolution was not yet strong enough to crush tsarism. But with such an
equilibrium of forces, all delay was fraught with the greatest danger to
tsarism, for delay was bound to cause the troops to waver.


The uprising was spreading. Blood was already being spilt all over Russia. The
people were fighting at the barricades, from Revel to Odessa, from Poland to
Siberia. In isolated and small encounters the troops were victorious. but at the
same time tidings of a new and unprecedented phenomenon began to come in, a
phenomenon plainly testifying

    

to the military impotence of the autocracy. This was the news of the
negotiations between the tsarist troops and the insurgent people
(Kharkov), the news of the withdrawal of troops from cities (Kharkov,
Revel) as the only way to restore tranquillity. Negotiations with the
insurgent people, the withdrawal of troops—that is the beginning of the
end. Better than any arguments it proves that the military authorities were
aware of the extreme precariousness of their position. It shows that
disaffection among the troops has spread to a truly formidable extent. Scattered
news items and rumours seeped through to the foreign press. In Kiev soldiers who
had refused to fire were arrested. Similar cases occurred in Poland. In Odessa
the infantry were confined to their barracks, the authorities fearing to bring
the men out into the streets. In St. Petersburg unrest was beginning to manifest
itself in the navy, and it was re ported that the guards regiments were totally
unreliable. As for the Black Sea Fleet, it has been impossible to this very day
to ascertain the whole truth. On October 17, telegrams were already reporting
that rumours of a new mutiny in this fleet were very persistent, that all
telegrams were being intercepted by the authorities, who resorted to every
means in an attempt to prevent reports of the events from spreading.


If we bring together all these fragmentary reports we cannot but arrive at the
conclusion that even from a purely military standpoint the autocracy’s position
was desperate. It was still suppressing isolated outbreaks, its troops were
still taking barricades here and there, but these isolated encounters merely
served to inflame passions, merely in creased indignation, merely accelerated a
mightier general outbreak, which the government particularly dreaded, since it
could no longer rely on the army.


The Enemy declined a pitched battle. He retreated, abandoning the battlefield
to the revolutionary people—retreat ed to new positions, which he
considers better fortified, and where he hopes to rally more reliable forces,
weld them together and infuse a new spirit into them, and choose a better moment
for an offensive.


This appraisal of the great day of October 17 is confirmed by a number of
relatively “unbiased” reports in the European bourgeois press.

 

On the one hand, the European bourgeoisie is sighing with relief. The tsar’s
      Manifesto promises a regular constitution; the Duma is invested with
      legislative powers; no law can come into force prior to approval by the
      people’s representatives, ministerial responsibility has been granted;
      civil liberties have been granted—inviolability of the person,
      freedom of conscience, speech, assembly and association. The stock
      exchange is hastening to express fuller confidence in Russia’s
      finances. Russian securities, which have been falling for the last few
      days, are now going up. The foreign bankers who fled from revolutionary
      St. Petersburg are promising to return within a fortnight. In the
      constitution the European bourgeoisie sees a pledge of
      “peaceful” minor concessions, which will wholly satisfy the
      propertied classes without at the same time allowing the revolutionary
      proletariat to acquire “too much” freedom.


On the other hand, even the liberal bourgeois cannot but see that the tsar’s
Manifesto contains only hollow words, mere promises. Who nowadays will believe
promises alone? Are not all these phrases about inviolability of the person and
freedom of speech sheer mockery when the prisons are still packed with so-called
political offenders, and the censorship is still operating? What kind of people
will carry out the tsar’s promise? The Witte government, which is rumoured to
include Kuzmin-Karavayev, Kosich, Koni? This government will not even be one of
the liberal bourgeoisie. It will only be a government of the liberal
bureaucracy, which has so often been defeated by the reactionary Court
clique. Can it be that the people have spilt their blood in the struggle for
liberty only to have to rely on the liberal bureaucrats, who confine themselves
to mere words and promises?!


No, tsarism is still far from having surrendered. The autocracy has by no means
fallen as yet. Many great battles will still have to be fought by the
revolutionary proletariat, and the first victory will help it to rally its
forces and enlist new allies in the struggle..


“The very success of the cause of freedom,” The Times
correspondent wrote the day the Manifesto was proclaimed, “will only
stimulate the reactionary elements to greater activity, and so long as the army
remains under its present

    

chiefs Russia cannot be safe from the possibility of a
pronunciamento.” “It is ... doubtful whether the forced
surrender of the
government in the very midst of a revolutionary upheaval can be regarded
otherwise than as a signal for further strife.” “It is not known whether
the bureaucracy has been ousted from its citadel or whether it has merely
retreated from its advance positions,” say the bourgeois optimists, although
the facts show clearly that the “citadel” of the autocracy is still
quite intact.


The enforced nature of the concession is what most of all disturbs the moderate
bourgeois. Le Temps, organ of the ruling money-bags of France, waxed
highly indignant over “anarchy”, and showered abuse and slander on
the organisers of the all-Russia political strike and its participants. Though
satisfied by the tsar’s constitutional promises as such, this newspaper now
remarks with concern: “Instead of acting on his own initiative, the tsar
contended himself with signing the ’instructions’ of the liberal
opposition. This is a poor method, lending the subsequent reforms an enforced
nature, the nature of something fragmentary and sudden. This method places the
government at odds with itself and sets a premium on violence. Unfortunately, it
is only too clear that matters had reached a point where there was no other way
out of the impasse into which the government had been led. Let us pass a wet
sponge over the nature of this capitulation—capitulation not only to the
constitutionalists, moderate souls, who should have been heeded sooner, but
capitulation to a strike and revolution.”


No, gentlemen of the bourgeoisie, the workers will never forget the enforced
nature of the tsar’s capitulation! The workers will never forget that it was
only by force, by the force of their organisation, their unanimity and their
mass heroism, that they wrested from tsarism a recognition of liberty in a paper
manifesto; and only in this way will they win real liberty for themselves.


We stated above that the enemy retreated, abandoning the battlefield to the
revolutionary proletariat. We must add now: the retreating enemy is being hard
pressed. On Monday, October 17, the tsar’s Manifesto was issued. On Tuesday,
October 18, according to a Wolff Press Agency report, a Manifesto of the Russian
Social-Democratic Labour

    

Party was issued in St. Petersburg in a huge number of copies. It declares that
      the struggle of the proletariat will by no means cease as a result of the
      tsar’s Manifesto. It must be the proletariat’s tactics to take advantage
      of rights granted under the force of its blows, to arrange workers’
      meetings to decide the question of the continuation of the strike, to
      organise a militia to protect revolutionary rights, and to put forward the
      demand for a full amnesty. At mass meetings Social-Democratic speakers are
      urging the con vocation of a constituent assembly. According to telegrams,
      the Strike Committee[1]

is demanding an amnesty and the immediate
      convocation of a constituent assembly elected on the basis of universal
      and direct suffrage.


Their revolutionary instinct at once prompted the St. Petersburg workers to
adopt the right slogan—energetic continuation of the struggle, and
utilisation of the newly-won positions for a continued onslaught and the actual
destruction of the autocracy. The struggle continues. Meetings are being held
ever more frequently and are being attended by larger number of people. The joy
and the legitimate pride evoked by the first victory are not hampering the new
organisation of forces for the purpose of carrying the revolution to
completion. Its success depends on still broader sections of the people being
won over to the side of liberty, on their enlightenment and organisation. The
working class has shown its titanic might in the all-Russia political strike,
but there is still much to be done among the back ward sections of the urban
proletariat. While establishing a workers’ militia—the only bulwark of the
revolution— while preparing ourselves for new and even more determined
struggles, while upholding our old slogans, we must also pay special attention
to the army. The tsar’s enforced con cession was bound to give rise to the
greatest wavering in its ranks, and now we must attract the soldiers to workers’
meetings, intensify our agitation in the barracks, extend our liaisons with
officers, creating, alongside of the revolutionary army of workers, cadres of
class-conscious revolutionaries among the troops as well, troops which only
yesterday were most loyal to the tsar and are now on the verge of becoming a
people’s army.


The revolutionary proletariat has succeeded in neutralising

    

the army, after paralysing it in the great days of the general strike. It must
now work to bring the army completely over to the side of the people.


The revolutionary proletariat has brought about the first great victory of the
urban revolution. It must now broaden and deepen the foundations of the
revolution by extending it to the countryside. To raise the peasantry to the
level of conscious defence of the cause of liberty, to demand that serious
measures be taken in the interests of the peasantry, and to prepare in the
countryside a movement which, in conjunction with the advanced urban
proletariat, will deal the final blow at the autocracy and win complete and
genuine liberty—such is Russian Social-Democracy’s next task.


The success of the revolution depends on the size of the proletarian and peasant
masses that will rise in its defence and for its consummation. Revolutionary war
differs from other wars in that it draws its main reserves from the camp of its
enemy’s erstwhile allies, erstwhile supporters of tsarism, or people who blindly
obeyed tsarism. The success of the all-Russia political strike will have a
greater influence over the minds and hearts of the peasants than the confusing
words of any possible manifestoes or laws.


When the Russian revolution was just getting under way, the liberal bourgeoisie
occupied the whole political fore ground; such was the situation a year ago.


The revolution asserted itself when the urban working class appeared on the
scene on January 9.


The revolution won its first victory when the proletariat of all the nations of
Russia rose as one man and made the tsar’s throne tremble, the throne that had
caused such incalculable distress to all the nations, and most of all to the
toiling classes of all the nations.


The revolution will deal the enemy the final blow and sweep the throne of the
blood-thirsty tsar from the face of the earth, when the workers rise once more,
with the peasantry following their lead.


And further, the Russian revolution has another reserve. Gone are the times when
nations and states could live isolated from one another. Look—Europe is
already stirring. Its bourgeoisie is disconcerted and prepared to give millions

    

and billions to stop the conflagration in Russia. The rulers of the militarist
      European powers are contemplating military assistance for the tsar. Kaiser
      Wilhelm has already dispatched several cruisers and destroyers to
      establish direct links between the German militarists and
      Peterhof. European counter-revolution is holding out a hand to Russian
      counter-revolution.


Just you try, citizen Hohenzollern! We too have a European reserve of the
Russian revolution. This reserve is the international socialist proletariat, the
international revolutionary Social-Democratic movement. The workers of the
whole world are hailing the victory of the Russian workers with enthusiasm and,
conscious of the close links between the various contingents of the
international army of socialism, are themselves preparing for the great and
decisive struggle.


You are not alone, workers and peasants of all Russia! If you succeed in
overthrowing, crushing and destroying the tyrants of feudal, police-ridden,
landlord and tsarist Russia, your victory will serve as a signal for a world
struggle against the tyranny of capital, a struggle for the complete, economic
as well as political emancipation of the toilers, a struggle for the deliverance
of humanity from destitution, and for the realisation of socialism.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The reference is to the St. Petersburg Soviet of Workers’
Deputies, which arose as the united strike committee during the October
All-Russia political strike. On October 13 (26), St. Petersburg workers elected
their representatives to the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies so as to give
leadership to the strike. In point of organisation the Soviet took shape on
October 17 (30), when the provisional executive committee was elected.


The first Soviets of Workers’ Deputies arose out of the strike movement even
prior to the October general strike. In May 1905 a Soviet was formed in
Ivanovo-Voznesensk, and a month later in Kostroma, while in September Soviets of
Deputies were formed in Moscow by workers in individual trades, such as printers
and tobacco workers. These first Soviets were already marked by a trend towards
functions wider than those of strike committees, so that when the October strike
broke out and a Soviet was formed in St. Petersburg they gave an impetus to the
appearance of Soviets in other parts of the country. Shortly before the
December insurrection in Moscow, the Moscow Soviet of Workers’ Deputies came
into being, the example being followed in Kiev, Kharkov, Rostov-on-Don, Odessa,
Nikolayev, Ekaterinoslav, Vladikavkaz, Revel, Novoros siisk, Saratov, Chita,
Irkutsk, Krasnoyarsk, Baku, and elsewhere.


In defiance of all the institutions of the tsar’s government, the Soviets issued
their own decrees, orders and instructions, and on their own authority they
introduced the eight-hour working day and instituted democratic liberties.


The Bolsheviks everywhere entered the Soviets, and wherever they succeeded in
gaining dominant influence the Soviets became militant centres for the
mobilisation of revolutionary forces, where preparations for an insurrection
were made and carried out. Thus, the Moscow Soviet was the headquarters of the
December insur rection, and in Krasnoyarsk and Novorossiisk the Soviets took
over power. The St. Petersburg Soviet “was weakest as an organ of the new
power” (Lenin). Leadership in that Soviet was seized by the Mensheviks, so
that it could not perform its main task—become the organ of an armed
uprising and of the struggle for the overthrow of the autocracy.


Lenin, who developed the theory of the Soviets, regarded them as a mass
political organisation of the working class, as organs of insurrection, and
embryos of a new revolutionary system of rule.



The Bolsheviks differed sharply from the Mensheviks on the question of the role
      and significance of the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies. The Mensheviks
      belittled the role of the Soviets, reducing them merely to organs of local
      self-government. In their practical activities, the Mensheviks limited the
      functions of the Soviets to the defence of the workers’ economic
      interests.


The Soviets of 1905, one of the greatest historic gains of the working class,
were the prototype of Soviet power as established in 1917.


On the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies see the following articles by Lenin:
“Our Tasks and the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies”; “Resolution
of the Executive Committee of the St. Petersburg Soviet of Workers’ Deputies on
Measures for Counteracting the Lockout, Adopted on November 14 (27), 1905”;
“The Provocation that Failed”; “The Dying Autocracy and New
Organs of Popular Rule”; “Socialism and Anarchism”; “The
Socialist Party and Non-Party Revolutionism”; “The Victory of the
Cadets and the Tasks of the
Workers’ Party”, etc.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Latest News









Lenin: The Latest News







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Latest News




Published:

      First published in 1925 in the supplement to Issue VI of the newspapers Vperyod and Proletary, published by the History of the Party Institute of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks).

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      page 435.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Geneva, November 4 (October 22)


Nicholas the Bloodstained’s “Constitutional” Manifesto has been
followed by countless new killings organised by Trepov and his thugs. The
ferocity of the Cossacks, the anti-Jewish pogroms, the shooting down in the
streets of freshly “amnestied” political offenders, the pillage
conduct ed by the Black Hundreds with the aid of the police— everything
has been brought into play so as to crush the revolutionary struggle.


The tsar has given the revolutionaries excellent help by confirming their
appraisal of his false concession, their appraisal of the vile comedy of a
“liberal” manifesto. The tsar is out to provoke a new and determined
struggle. So much the better! All of Social-Democracy’s activities, the entire
energy of the proletariat will now be directed towards preparing for the next
onslaught and destroying the monster of tsarism, which, in its death throes, is
trying for the last time to arouse evil instincts in the ignorant mob. The
greater Trepov’s display of zeal, the more certain is the complete downfall of
the entire Trepov set-up and of all the Romanovs.

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Nikolai Ernestovich Bauman









Lenin: Nikolai Ernestovich Bauman







V. I.  

      Lenin
Nikolai Ernestovich Bauman




Published:
Proletary, No. 24, November 7 (October 25), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 436-437.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Today, November 3 (New Style), the news arrived by telegraph that N. E. Bauman,
veterinary surgeon and member of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, has
been murdered in Moscow by the tsar’s soldiers. A demonstration was held at his
graveside, at which the widow of the deceased, also a member of our Party,
delivered a speech calling on the people to rise in arms. We are unable as yet
to give a detailed biography of our fallen comrade. For the time being, we shall
merely enumerate the main events in his life. He started work in the
Social-Democratic organisation in St. Petersburg in the nineties. He was
arrested, spent twenty-two months in the Peter and Paul Fortress, and was then
exiled to Vyatka Gubernia. He escaped from his place of exile, went abroad, and
in 1900 participated in the organisation of Iskra. From its very
inception he was one of the principal practical leaders of this enterprise,
making frequent secret visits to Russia. He was arrested in February 1902 in
Voronezh (betrayed by a doctor) in connection with the organisation of
Iskra, and was imprisoned in Kiev. In August 1902, he escaped together
with ten other Social-Democratic comrades. He was a delegate of the Moscow
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. to the Second Congress of the Party (under the
assumed name of Sorokin). He took part in the Second Congress of the
League[1]

(under the assumed name of Sarafsky). Following this he
became a member of the Moscow Committee of the Party. He was arrested on June
19, 1904, and was held at Taganka Prison. He must have been released. from
prison only a few days ago.


May the memory of this fighter in the ranks of the Russian Social-Democratic
proletariat never die! May the memory

    

of this revolutionary, who has fallen in the first days of the victorious
      revolution, live for ever! May the honours paid to his remains by the
      people who have risen in revolt be a pledge of the complete victory of the
      uprising and the complete destruction of accursed tsarism!



The murder of N. E. Bauman clearly shows how correct the Social-Democratic
speakers in St. Petersburg were when they described the Manifesto of October 17
as a trap, and the conduct of the government after publication of the Manifesto
as provocative. What are all these promised liberties worth, so long as power
and armed force remain in the hands of the government? Is not this
“amnesty” actually a trap, when those who are released from, prison
are shot down in the streets by Cossacks?

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The Second Congress of the “League of Russian Revolutionary
Social-Democracy Abroad” was held on October 13-18 (26-31), 1903 in
Geneva. It was convened by demand of the Mensheviks, who wished to contrapose it
to the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. Expressing himself against the congress
of the League Abroad, Lenin wrote, “A League congress at present
will provide everything for a squabble but nothing for practical pur

poses, i.e.,
for work abroad” (see Collected Works, Vol. 34, “Letter to
G. D. Leiteizen”,
 October 10, 1903).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Petty-Bourgeois and Proletarian Socialism









Lenin: Petty-Bourgeois and Proletarian Socialism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Petty-Bourgeois and Proletarian Socialism[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 24, November 7 (October 25), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary as verified against the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 438-446.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription:
Workers’ Web ASCII Pamphlet Project
HTML Markup:
B. Baggins and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      marx.org 1997; marxists.org 1999

      (1997).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Of the various socialist doctrines, Marxism is now predominant in
Europe, the struggle for the achievement of a socialist order being almost
entirely waged as a struggle of the working class under the guidance of the
Social-Democratic parties. This complete predominance of proletarian socialism
grounded in the teachings of Marxism was not achieved all at once, but only
after a long struggle against all sorts of outworn doctrines, petty-bourgeois
socialism, anarchism, and so on. Some thirty years ago, Marxism was not
predominant even in Germany, where the prevailing views of the time were in fact
transitional, mixed and eclectic, lying between petty-bourgeois and proletarian
socialism. The most widespread doctrines among advanced workers in the Romance
countries, in France, Spain and Belgium, were Proudhonism, Blanquism and
anarchism, which obviously expressed the viewpoint of the petty bourgeois, not
of the proletarian.


What has been the cause of this rapid and complete victory of Marxism during
the last decades? The correctness of the Marxist views has been confirmed to an
ever greater extent by all the development of contemporary societies, both
politically and economically, and by the whole experience of the revolutionary
movement and of the struggle of the oppressed classes. The decline of the petty
bourgeoisie inevitably led, sooner or later, to the extinction of all kinds of
petty-bourgeois prejudices, while the growth of capitalism and the
intensification of the class struggle within capitalist society were the best
agitation for the ideas of proletarian socialism.

 

Russia’s backwardness naturally accounts for the firm footing that various
obsolete socialist doctrines gained in our country. The entire history of
Russian revolutionary thought during the last quarter of a century is the
history of the struggle waged by Marxism against petty-bourgeois Narodnik
socialism. While the rapid growth and remarkable successes of the Russian
working-class movement have already brought victory to Marxism in Russia too,
the development of an indubitably revolutionary peasant
movement—especially after the famous peasant revolts in the Ukraine in
1902—has on the other hand caused a certain revival of senile
Narodism. The Narodnik theories of old, embellished with modish European
opportunism (revisionism, Bernsteinism, and criticism of Marx), make up all the
original ideological stock-in-trade of the so-called
Socialist-Revolutionaries.
That is why the peasant question is focal in the Marxists’
controversies with both the pure Narodniks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries.


To a certain extent Narodism was an integral and consistent doctrine. It denied
the domination of capitalism in Russia; it denied the factory workers’ role as
the front-line fighters of the entire proletariat; it denied the importance of a
political revolution and bourgeois political liberty; it preached an immediate
socialist revolution, stemming from the peasant commune with its petty forms of
husbandry. All that now survives of this integral theory is mere shreds, but to
understand the controversies of the present day intelligently, and to prevent
these controversies from degenerating into mere squabbles, one should always
remember the general and basic Narodnik roots of the errors of our
Socialist-Revolutionaries.


The Narodniks considered the muzhik the man of the future in Russia, this view
springing inevitably from their faith in the socialist character of the peasant
commune, from their lack of faith in the future of capitalism. The Marxists
considered the worker the man of the future in Russia, and the development of
Russian capitalism in both agriculture and industry is providing more and more
confirmation of their views. The working-class movement in Russia has won
recognition for itself, but as for the peasant movement, the gulf separating
Narodism and Marxism is

    

to this day revealed in their different interpretations of this
    movement. To the Narodniks the peasant movement provides a refutation of
    Marxism. It is a movement that stands for a direct socialist revolution; it
    does not recognise bourgeois political liberty; it stems from small-scale,
    not large-scale, production. In a word, to the Narodnik, it is the peasant
    movement that is the genuine, truly socialist and immediately socialist
    movement. The Narodnik faith in the peasant commune and the Narodnik brand
    of anarchism fully explain why such conclusions are inevitable.


To the Marxist, the peasant movement is a democratic, not a socialist,
movement. In Russia, just as was the case in other countries, it is a necessary
concomitant of the democratic revolution, which is bourgeois in its social and
economic content. It is not in the least directed against the foundations of the
bourgeois order, against commodity



production, or against capital. On the contrary, it is directed against
the old, serf, pre-capitalist relationships in the rural districts, and against
landlordism, which is the mainstay of all the survivals of
serf-ownership. Consequently, full victory of this peasant movement will not
abolish capitalism; on the contrary, it will create a broader foundation for
its development, and will hasten and intensify purely capitalist
development. Full victory of the peasant uprising can only create a stronghold
for a democratic bourgeois republic, within which a proletarian struggle
against the bourgeoisie will for the first time develop in its purest form.


These, then, are the two contrasting views which must be clearly understood by
anyone who wishes to examine the gulf in principles that lies between the
Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Social-Democrats. According to one view, the
peasant movement is socialist, while according to the other it is a
democratic-bourgeois movement. Hence one can see what ignorance our
Socialist-Revolutionaries reveal when they repeat for the hundredth time (see,
for example, Revolutsionnaya Rossiya, No. 75) that orthodox Marxists
have ignored the peasant question. There is only one way of combating such crass
ignorance, and that is by repeating the ABC, by setting forth the old
consistently Narodnik views, and by pointing out for the hundredth or the

    

thousandth time that the real distinction between us does not lie in a desire or
the non-desire to reckon with the peasant question, in recognition or
non-recognition of it, but in our different appraisals of the
present-day peasant movement and of the present-day peasant question in
Russia. He who says that the Marxists ignore the peasant question in Russia is,
in the first place, an absolute ignoramus since all the principal writings of
Russian Marxists, beginning with Plekhanov’s Our Differences (which
appeared over twenty years ago), have in the main been devoted to explaining the
erroneousness of the Narodnik views on the Russian peasant question. Secondly,
he who says that the Marxists ignore the peasant question thereby proves his
desire to avoid giving a complete appraisal of the actual difference in
principles, giving the answer to the question whether or not the present-day
peasant movement is democratic-bourgeois, whether or not it is objectively
directed against the survivals of serfdom.


The Socialist-Revolutionaries have never given, nor will they ever be able to
give, a clear and precise answer to this question, for they are floundering
hopelessly between the old Narodnik view and the present-day Marxist view on the
peasant question in Russia. The Marxists say that the Socialist-Revolutionaries
represent the standpoint of the petty bourgeoisie (are ideologists of the petty
bourgeoisie) for the very reason that they cannot rid themselves of
petty-bourgeois illusions and of the Narodnik imaginings in appraising the peasant
movement.


That is why we have to go over the ABC once again. What is the present-day
peasant movement in Russia striving for? For land and liberty. What significance
will the complete victory of this movement have? After winning liberty, it will
abolish the rule of the landlords and bureaucrats in the administration of the
state. After securing the land, it will give the landlords’ estates to the
peasants. Will the fullest liberty and expropriation of the landlords do away
with commodity production? No, it will not. Will the fullest liberty and
expropriation of the landlords abolish individual farming by peasant households
on communal, or “socialised”, land? No, it will not. Will the
fullest liberty and expropriation of the landlords bridge the deep gulf that

    

separates the rich peasant, with his numerous horses and cows, from the
      farm-hand, the day-labourer, i.e., the gulf that separates the peasant
      bourgeoisie from the rural proletariat? No, it will not. On the contrary,
      the more completely the highest social-estate (the landlords) is
    routed and annihilated, the more profound will the class
    distinction between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat be. What will be the
    objective significance of the complete victory of the peasant uprising? This
    victory will do away with all survivals of serfdom, but it will by no means
    destroy the bourgeois economic system, or destroy capitalism or the division
    of society into classes—into rich and poor, the bourgeoisie and the
    proletariat. Why is the present-day peasant movement a democratic-bourgeois
    movement? Because, after destroying the power of the bureaucracy and the
    landlords, it will set up a democratic system of society, without, however,
    altering the bourgeois foundation of that democratic society, without
    abolishing the rule of capital. How should the class-conscious worker, the
    socialist, regard the present-day peasant movement? He must support this
    movement, help the peasants in the most energetic fashion, help them throw
    off completely both the rule of the bureaucracy and that of the
    landlords. At the same time, however, lie should explain to the peasants
    that it is not enough to overthrow the rule of the bureaucracy and the
    landlords. When they overthrow that rule, they must at the same time prepare
    for the abolition of the rule of capital, the rule of the bourgeoisie, and
    for that purpose a doctrine that is fully socialist, i.e., Marxist, should
    be immediately disseminated, the rural proletarians should be united, welded

    together,and 

    organised for the struggle against the peasant bourgeoisie and
    the entire Russian bourgeoisie. Can a class-conscious worker forget the
    democratic struggle for the sake of the socialist struggle, or forget the
    latter for the sake of the former? No, a class-conscious worker calls
    himself a Social-Democrat for the reason that he understands the relation
    between the two struggles. He knows that there is no other road to socialism
    save the road through democracy, through political liberty. He therefore
    strives to achieve democratism completely and consistently in order to
    attain the ultimate goal—socialism. Why are the conditions for the

    

democratic struggle not the same as those for the socialist struggle? Because
the workers will certainly have different allies in each of those two
struggles. The democratic struggle is waged by the workers together with a
section of the bourgeoisie, especially the petty bourgeoisie. On the other hand,
the socialist struggle is waged by the workers against the whole of the
bourgeoisie. The struggle against the bureaucrat and the landlord can and must
be waged together with all the peasants, even the well-to-do and the middle
peasants. On the other hand, it is only together with the rural proletariat that
the struggle against the bourgeoisie, and therefore against the well-to-do
peasants too, can be properly waged.


If we keep in mind all these elementary Marxist truths, which the
Socialist-Revolutionaries always prefer to avoid going into, we shall have no
difficulty in appraising the latter’s “latest” objections to
Marxism, such as the following:


“Why was it necessary,” Revolutsionnaya Rossiya (No. 75) exclaims,
“first to support the peasant in general against the landlord, and then
(i.e., at the same time) to support the proletariat against the peasant in
general, instead of at once supporting the proletariat against the landlord;
and what Marxism has to do with this, heaven alone knows.”


This is the standpoint of the most primitive, childishly naïve anarchism. For
many centuries and even for thousands of years, mankind has dreamt of doing
away “at once” with all and every kind of exploitation. These dreams
remained mere dreams until millions of the exploited all over the world began
to unite for a consistent, staunch and comprehensive struggle to change
capitalist society in the direction the evolution of that society is naturally
taking. Socialist dreams turned into the socialist struggle of the millions only
when Marx’s scientific socialism had linked up the urge for change with the
struggle of a definite class. Outside the class struggle, socialism is either a
hollow phrase or a naïve dream. In Russia, however, two different struggles of
two different social forces are taking place before our very eyes. The
proletariat is fighting against the bourgeoisie wherever capitalist relations of
production exist (and they exist—be it known to our
Socialist-Revolutionaries— even in the peasant commune, i.e., on the land
which from

    

their standpoint is one hundred per cent “socialised”). As a stratum of
      small landowners, of petty bourgeois, the peasantry, is fighting against
      all survivals of serfdom, against the bureaucrats and the landlords. Only
      those who are completely ignorant of political economy and of the history
      of revolutions throughout the world can fail to see that these are two
      distinct and different social wars. To shut one’s eyes to the diversity of
      these wars by demanding “at once”, is like hiding one’s head
      under one’s wing and refusing to make any analysis of reality.


The Socialist-Revolutionaries, who have lost the integrity of the old Narodnik
views, have even forgotten many of the teachings of the Narodniks themselves. As
the selfsame Revolutsionnaya Rossiya writes in the same article:
“By helping the peasantry to expropriate the landlords, Mr. Lenin is
unconsciously assisting in building up petty-bourgeois economy on the ruins of
the more or less developed forms of capitalist agriculture. Is not this a ’step
backward’ from the standpoint of orthodox Marxism?”


For shame, gentlemen! Why, you have forgotten your own Mr. V. V.! Consult his
Destiny of Capitalism, the Sketches by Mr. Nikolai
—on,[2]

and other sources of your wisdom. You will then recollect that
landlord farming in Russia combines within itself features both of
capitalism and of serf-ownership. You will then find out that there is
a system of economy based on labour rent, which is a direct survival
of the corvée system. If, moreover, you take the trouble to
consult such an orthodox Marxist book as the third volume of Marx’s
Capital, you will find that nowhere could the

corv6e 

system develop, and nowhere did it develop, and turn into capitalist
farming except through the medium of petty-bourgeois peasant
farming. In your efforts to scatter Marxism to the winds, you resort
to methods too primitive, methods too long ago exposed; you ascribe to
Marxism a grotesquely oversimplified conception of large-scale
capitalist farming directly succeeding to large-scale farming based on the
corvée system.  You argue that since the yield on the
landlords’ estates is higher than on the peasant farms the
expropriation of the landlords is a step backward. This argument is
worthy of a fourth-form schoolboy. Just consider, gentlemen: was it
not a “step backward” to separate the low-yielding

    

 peasant lands from the high-yielding landlords’ estates when serfdom
was abolished?


Present-day landlord economy in Russia combines features of both capitalism and
serf-ownership. Objectively, the peasants’ struggle against the landlords today
is a struggle against survivals of serfdom. However, to attempt to enumerate all
individual cases, to weigh each individual case, and to determine with the
precision of an apothecary’s scales exactly where serf-ownership ends and pure
capitalism begins, is to ascribe one’s own pedantry to the Marxists. We cannot
calculate what portion of the price of provisions bought from a petty
shopkeeper represents labour-value and what part of it represents swindling,
etc. Does that mean, gentlemen, that we must discard the theory of labour-value?


Contemporary landlord economy combines features of both capitalism and
serfdom. But only pedants can conclude from this that it is our duty to weigh,
count and copy out every minute feature in every particular instance, and
pigeon-hole it in this or that social category. Only utopians can hence conclude
that “there is no need” for us to draw a distinction between the two
different social wars. Indeed, the only actual conclusion that does follow is
that both in our programme and in our tactics we must combine the purely
proletarian struggle against capitalism with the general

’democratic 

(and general peasant) struggle against serfdom.


The more marked the capitalist features in present-day landlord semi-feudal
economy, the more imperative is it to get right down to organising the rural
proletariat separately, for this will help

’purely 

capitalist, or purely
proletarian, antagonisms to assert themselves the sooner, whenever confiscation
takes place. The more marked the capitalist features in landlord economy, the
sooner will democratic confiscation give an impetus to the real struggle for
socialism—and, consequently, the more dangerous is false idealisation
of the democratic revolution through use of the catchword of
“socialisation”. Such is the conclusion to be drawn from the fact
that landlord economy is a mixture of capitalism and serf-ownership relations.


Thus, we must combine the purely proletarian struggle with the general peasant
struggle, but not confuse the two.

    

We must support the general democratic and general peasant struggle, but not
      become submerged in this non-class struggle; we must never idealise it
      with false catchwords such as “socialisation”, or ever forget
      the necessity of organising both the urban and the rural
    proletariat in an entirely independent class party of
    Social-Democracy. While giving the utmost support to the most determined
    democratism, that party will not allow itself to be diverted from the
    revolutionary path by reactionary dreams and experiments in
    “equalisation” under the system of commodity production. The
    peasants’ struggle against the landlords is now a revolutionary struggle;
    the confiscation of the landlords’ estates at the present stage of economic
    and political evolution is revolutionary in every respect, and we back this
    revolutionary-democratic measure. However, to call this measure
    “socialisation”, and to deceive oneself and the people
    concerning the possibility of “equality” in land tenure under
    the system of commodity production, is a reactionary petty-bourgeois utopia,
    which we leave to the socialist-reactionaries.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The article “Petty-Bourgeois and Proletarian
Socialism” was reprinted in No. 9 of the Bolshevik newspaper Novaya
Zhizn of
 November 10 (23), 1905.





[2]

V. V.—pseudonym of V. Vorontsov,
author of the book The Destiny of Capitalism in Russia;
Nikolai—on—pseudonym of
N. Danielson, author of the book Sketches on
Our Post-Reform Social Economy. Both men were ideologists of liberal
Narodism of the 1880s and 1890s.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Denouement is At Hand









Lenin: The Denouement is At Hand







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Denouement is At Hand




Published:
Proletary, No. 25, November 18 (3), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 447-454.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The forces are in equilibrium, we wrote a fortnight

 ago,[1]

when the first news of
the all-Russia political strike came in, and it was becoming evident that the
government dare not make immediate use of its military forces.


The forces are in equilibrium, we repeated a week

ago,[2]

when the Manifesto of
October 17 was the latest in the political news, betokening to the
whole people and to the world at large that tsarism was in the grip of
irresolution, and was in retreat.


However, equilibrium of forces in no way precludes a struggle; on the contrary
it makes the struggle more acute. The sole purpose of the government’s retreat
is, as we have already said, to enable it to choose what it considers a new and
a more favourable situation for a battle. The proclamation of the
“liberties” that adorn the scrap of paper known as the Manifesto of
October 17 is merely an attempt to prepare the moral conditions for a
struggle against the revolution, while Trepov, at the head of the all-Russia
Black Hundreds, prepares the material conditions for that struggle.


The denouement is at hand, the new political situation is taking shape at
breath-taking speed, one that marks only revolutionary epochs. In words, the
government has begun to fall back, but in deed it has immediately begun to
prepare for an offensive. Promises of a constitution have been followed by the
most brutal and ugly acts of violence, which have seemed purposely designed to
give the people a still more striking object lesson of the real significance of
the

    

autocracy’s real power. The contrast between promises, words and scraps of
      paper, on the one hand, and the facts of reality on the other has become
      infinitely more manifest. Events have begun to provide telling
      confirmation of a truth we long ago proclaimed to our readers, and shall
      repeat over and over again, namely, that until tsarism’s actual power is
      overthrown, all its concessions, and even a constituent assembly, are a
      phantom, a mirage, a piece of deception.


The revolutionary workers of St. Petersburg made this perfectly clear in one of
those daily bulletins[3]

that have not yet reached us, but are being
referred to more and more frequently by foreign newspapers, astounded and
frightened by the might of the proletariat. “We have been granted freedom
of assembly,” the strike committee has written (we are translating from the
English back into the Russian, so some inaccuracy is of course inevitable in the
rendering), “but our meetings are surrounded by soldiers. We have been
granted freedom of the press, but censorship continues. Freedom of learning has
been promised, but the University is occupied by troops. Inviolability of the
person has been promised, but the prisons are packed with arrested people. We
have been granted Witte, but Trepov still exists. ’We have been granted a
constitution, but the autocracy still exists. We have been granted everything,
but we have nothing.”


The “Manifesto” has been suspended by Trepov. The constitution has
been held up by Trepov. The real significance of the liberties granted has been
clarified by the selfsame Trepov. The amnesty has been mangled by Trepov.


But who is this Trepov? Is he some extraordinary personality, whose removal is
of special significance? Nothing of the kind. He is just a most ordinary
policeman, who is doing the autocracy’s everyday work, with the military and the
police at his disposal.


Why is it that this most ordinary policeman and his routine “job”
have suddenly acquired such extraordinary importance? It is because the
revolution has made immense progress, and had brought the denouement
closer. Led by the proletariat, the people are becoming politically more mature
with every day, nay with every hour, or, if you will, not by the year but by the
week. While to a people that was

    

politically asleep, Trepov was just a most ordinary policeman, to a people that
has grown aware that it is a political force, he has become insufferable, for he
personifies all the brutality, criminality and senselessness of tsarism.


Revolution teaches. It provides all classes of the people and all the nations of
Russia with excellent object lessons on the subject of the nature of a
constitution. Revolution teaches by bringing to the fore the immediate and
pressing political tasks, in their most manifest and compelling forms; it
compels the masses to realise these tasks, and makes the people’s very existence
impossible, without fulfilment of these tasks; it unmasks the worthlessness of
all and sundry pretences, evasions, promises and acknowledgements. “We
have been granted everything, but we have nothing.” Indeed, we have been
“granted” only promises, since we have no real power. We have come
close to liberty, have compelled all and sundry, even the tsar, to acknowledge
the need for liberty. What we want, however, is not recognition of that need,
but liberty itself. What we want is not a scrap of paper with promises of
legislative powers for the people’s representatives, but actual sovereignty of
the people. The closer we approach that sovereignty, the more intolerable its
absence becomes. The more tempting the tsar’s manifestoes are, the more
unbearable is his rule.


The struggle is approaching its denouement, the answer to the question whether
actual power is to remain with the tsar s government. As for recognition of the
revolution, it has now been generally recognised. It was recognised quite long
ago by Mr. Struve and the Osvobozhdeniye gentry. It is now recognised
by Mr. Witte and by Nicholas Romanov. “I promise you anything you wish,”
says the tsar, “only let me retain power, let me fulfil my own promises.”
That is the gist of the tsar’s Manifesto, and it obviously had to spark off a
determined struggle. “I grant you everything except power,” tsarism
declares. “Everything is illusory except power,” the revolutionary people
reply.


The real significance of the seeming senselessness into which Russian affairs
have fallen lies in tsarism’s desire to deceive the people and evade revolution
by striking a bargain with the bourgeoisie. The tsar is making ever greater
promises to the bourgeoisie, in the hope that the propertied

    

classes, to the man, will at last turn towards “law and
      order”. However, whilst that “law and order” is
      exemplified in the excesses of Trepov and his Black Hundreds, the tsar’s
      appeal seems likely to remain a voice crying in the wilderness. The tsar
      stands in need of both Witte and Trepov in equal measure—Witte to
      attract some, and. Trepov to intimidate others; Witte for promises, and
      Trepov for action; Witte for the bourgeoisie, and Trepov for the
      proletariat. Before our eyes there is again unfolding, only this time on a
      far higher level of development, a scene the same as that witnessed at the
      beginning of the Moscow strikes—the liberals are doing the
      negotiating, while the workers are doing the fighting.


Trepov has an excellent understanding of his role and his real significance. He
may have been somewhat too precipitate for the diplomatic Witte, but then he has
been afraid of being left behind by the rapid development of the revolution. He
has been even obliged to make haste, for he realises that the forces at his
disposal are on the wane.


Simultaneously with its Manifesto on the Constitution, the autocracy has begun
to take steps to preclude a constitution. The Black Hundreds have got down to
work in a way Russia has never seen before. Reports of massacres, pogroms, and
acts of unparalleled brutality are pouring in from all parts of the country. The
white terror is rampant. Wherever they can, the police are inciting and
organising the dregs of capitalist society for pillage and violence, plying the
scum of the urban population with liquor, staging anti-Jewish pogroms,
exhorting to violence against “students” and rebels, and helping in
“giving a lesson” to Zemstvo members. Counter-revolution is working
at full blast. Trepov has proved worthy of his salt. Machine-guns are opening
fire (Odessa), eyes are being put out (Kiev), people are being hurled from the
upper storeys into the streets below, houses are being taken by assault and then
sacked, fires are started and nobody allowed to put them out, and those who dare
offer resistance to the Black Hundreds are being shot down. From Poland to
Siberia, from the shores of the Gulf of Finland to the Black Sea—the
picture is the same.


But simultaneously with this spate of Black-Hundred brutality, this orgy staged
by the autocracy, these last

    

convulsions of the tsarist monster, fresh onslaughts are being launched by the
proletariat, which, as always, only appears to quieten down after each upsurge
of the movement. In actual fact, it is only mustering its forces and preparing
to deal. a decisive blow. For reasons already mentioned, police atrocities in
Russia have acquired a character quite different from that of the past. Parallel
with the outbursts of Cossack vengeance and Trepov’s vindictiveness, the power
of the tsar is disintegrating apace. This is to be seen in the provinces, in
Finland, and in St. Petersburg; it is apparent in places where the people are
the most downtrodden and the least developed politically, in the marginal areas
with a non-Russian population, as well as in the capital, which promises to
become a scene of the revolution’s greatest drama.


Indeed, compare the following two telegraph messages, which we quote from a
Vienna bourgeois liberal newspaper[4]:

“Tver. The premises of the Zemstvo were attacked by a mob in the
presence of Governor Sleptsov. After a siege the mob set fire to the
building. The firemen refused to extinguish the flames, while the troops stood
by without taking any measures to curb the ruffians.” (Of course we cannot vouch
for the absolute accuracy of this particular report, but it is an undeniable
fact that similar things, and others a hundred times worse, are being
perpetrated on all sides.)

“Kazan. The police have been disarmed
by the people. Arms taken from the police have been distributed among the
population. A people’s militia has been set up. Perfect order prevails.”


Is not a comparison of these two reports instructive? In one case there is
vengeance, atrocities, and pogroms; in the other, the tsar’s authority has been
overturned and a victorious uprising organised.


Finland presents a similar picture, only on a far greater scale. The tsar’s
viceroy has been expelled, and the lackey senators removed by the people. The
Russian gendarmes are being driven out and are trying to take reprisals (a
telegram from Haparanda, dated November 4, N. S.) by damaging railway
communications. In such cases armed detachments of the people’s militia are sent
to arrest the disorderly gendarmes. A meeting of Tornio citizens has decided

    

to organise the import of weapons and free literature.

Thou sands 

and tens of
      thousands in town and countryside are enrolling in the Finnish
      militia. The Russian garrison of a strong fortress (Sveaborg) are reported
      to have expressed sympathy with the insurgents, and turned the fortress
      over to the people’s militia. Finland is rejoicing. The tsar is making
      concessions. He is prepared to summon the Diet, has repealed the unlawful
      manifesto of February 15, 1899, and has accepted the
      “resignation” of the senators ousted by the people. Meanwhile,
    Novoye Vremya is advising the government to blockade all Finnish
    ports, and to crush the uprising by armed force. According to foreign press
    reports, numerous Russian troops have been quartered in Helsingfors (it
    cannot be ascertained to what extent they can be relied on to crush the
    uprising). There are reports that Russian warships have entered the inner
    harbour of Helsingfors.


St. Petersburg. Here Trepov is wreaking vengeance for the rejoicings of the
revolutionary people (over the concessions wrested from the tsar). Atrocities
are being perpetrated by the Cossacks, and massacres are on the increase. The
police are openly organising the Black Hundreds. The workers intended to hold a
gigantic demonstration on Sunday, November 5 (October 23), to pay public homage
to their heroes, their comrades who had fallen in the struggle for liberty. For
its part, the government prepared a gigantic blood-bath. It was preparing for
St. Petersburg something similar to what had already taken place on a smaller
scale in Moscow (the massacre at the funeral of Bauman, the workers’
leader). Trepov wanted to take advantage of the situation before his forces were
weakened by part of them being dispatched to Finland, and while the workers
were preparing to demonstrate, not to fight.


The St. Petersburg workers saw through the enemy’s scheme, and the demonstration
was called off. The workers’ committee decided that the final battle should not
take place at the time Trepov deigned to choose. The committee were quite right
in thinking that a number of reasons (including the uprising in Finland) made
postponement of the struggle disadvantageous to Trepov and advantageous to
us. Meanwhile arming of the people has proceeded apace, and propaganda in the
army has met with remarkable

    

success. A hundred and fifty ratings of the 14th and the 18th Naval Depots are
stated to have been arrested, and during the last week and a half ninety-two
reports are said to have been submitted concerning sympathy for revolutionaries
shown by officers. Handbills calling on soldiers to go over to the side of the
people are being distributed even among patrols “guarding”
St. Petersburg. Freedom of the press, which was promised within limits
prescribed by Trepov, is being extended to a greater degree by the mighty arm of
the revolutionary proletariat. According to messages in the foreign press, only
those St. Petersburg newspapers came out on Saturday, October 22 (November 4),
which accepted the workers’ demand that they ignore the censorship. Two
St. Petersburg German-language papers that wished to remain “loyal”
(i.e., servile) could not come out. From the moment the St. Petersburg strikers’
union, but not Trepov, began to determine the bounds of legality, the
“legal” papers began speaking up in extremely bold tones. “The
strike has been only suspended,” reads a cable to the Neue Freie Presse
of October 23 (November 5). “The strike, it is reported, will be resumed
when the time for a final blow at the old order arrives. Concessions no longer
make the least impression on the proletariat. The situation is highly
dangerous. Revolutionary ideas are gaining an increasing hold on the
masses. The working class feels that it is master of the situation. Those who
are afraid of impending disaster are beginning to leave the city
[St. Petersburg].”


The denouement is at hand. The victory of the people’s uprising is not far off
now. Revolutionary Social-Democracy’s slogans are being put into effect with
unexpected rapidity. Let Trepov go on dashing to and fro between revolutionary
Finland and revolutionary St. Petersburg, between the revolutionary marginal
areas and the revolutionary provinces. Let him try to choose a single safe place
for untrammelled military operations. Let the tsar’s Manifesto be circulated
more widely; let the news of the events in the revolutionary centres become more
widespread—that will win us new supporters, and bring fresh vacillation
and disintegration into the dwindling ranks of the tsar’s adherents.


The all-Russia political strike has performed its tasks excellently by
furthering the uprising, by inflicting frightful

    

wounds on tsarism, and by frustrating the disgusting comedy of the disgusting
      State Duma. The general rehearsal is over. The indications are that we
      are now on the eve of the drama itself. Witte is wallowing in a spate of
      words, while Trepov is wallowing in rivers of blood. The tsar is running
      short of promises he might yet make, while Trepov is running short of
      Black-Hundred forces he might send into the final battle. The ranks of the
      army of revolution are swelling all the time. Its forces are being steeled
      in individual engagements, and the red flag is rising higher and higher
      over the new Russia.

 

Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 394-95 of this volume.—Ed.

[2]

See p. 428 of this volume.—Ed.
 



[3]

Lenin is referring to Izvestia Sovieta Rabochikh
Deputatov (Bulletin of the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies)—official
organ of the St. Petersburg Soviet of Workers’ Deputies, published from October
17 (30) till December 14 (27), 1905. It was made up and printed by the workers
at the print-shops of various bourgeois newspapers. In all, ten issues appeared,
the eleventh being confiscated by the police while it was being printed.





[4]

The reference is to the Neue Frete Presse, a
liberal-bourgeois newspaper, published in Vienna from 1864 onwards.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Inserts to V. Kalinin's Article “The Peasant Congress”









Lenin: Inserts to V. Kalinin's Article 'The Peasant Congress'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Inserts to V. Kalinin’s Article “The Peasant Congress”[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 25, November 16 (3), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary as verified against the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 455-456.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

1

We see, consequently, that consistent socialists must unequivocally support the
revolutionary struggle of any section of the peasantry, even the well-to-do,
against the bureaucracy and the landlords; however, consistent socialists must
make it clearly understood that the “general redistribution” desired
by the peasants is still not socialism. Socialism demands the abolition of the
power of the money-bag, the power of capital, the abolition of all private
ownership of the means of production, the abolition of commodity
economy. Socialism demands that the land and the factories should pass into the
hands of all the working people, who, following an all-over plan, will organise
large-scale— and not scattered and small-scale—production.


The peasants’ struggle for land and freedom is a big step towards socialism, but
one that is very, very far from socialism.

2

The resolution on tactics as adopted by the Congress is amazing in its
feebleness. We are inclined to think that here one of the peasantry’s
well-wishers (the liberals) has again been giving some kind of
“explanation”.


Here is the resolution:


"The activities of the Peasant Union may be public or secret (underground),
this depending on local conditions. All members of the Union must propagate
their views and give effect to their demands, making use of all available

    

methods, and disregarding opposition from Rural Superintendents, the police, or
      other authorities. It is also insistently advised that use be made of the
      right to draw up public resolutions at village and volost gatherings and
      private conferences, regarding improvements in the organisation of the
      State, and in the welfare of the people.”


A resolution like this is most unsatisfactory. Instead of the organisation of a
revolutionary party, the resolution organises merely an extension to the liberal
party. The course of the movement itself must of necessity and inevitably bring
about a split between the liberal landowners and the revolutionary peasants, and
we, Social-Democrats, will try to accelerate that split.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

This insert was written by Lenin while he was editing the
article, “The Peasant Congress” by V. Kalinin (pseudonym of
V. Karpinsky), which was published in No. 25 of Proletary, November
16(3), 1905.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Between Two Battles









Lenin: Between Two Battles







V. I.  

      Lenin
Between Two Battles




Published:
Proletary, No. 26, November 25 (12), 1905.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 9,

      pages 457-466.

      Translated: The Late Abraham Fineberg and Julius Katzer

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Geneva, November 15 (N. S.)


The big battle in which the proletariat has engaged tsarism is over. The
all-Russia political strike seems to have come to an end almost everywhere. The
enemy has made the biggest withdrawal on one flank (Finland), but he has dug
himself in on the other (martial law in Poland). In the centre, the enemy has
fallen back very little, but holds a strong new position, and is preparing for
an even more bloody and more decisive battle. Clashes are taking place along the
whole battle line. Both sides are hastening to make good their losses, rally
their ranks, get properly organised, and arm themselves as best they can for the
next battle.


Such, approximately, is the state of things at present in the theatre of the
struggle for freedom. Civil war naturally differs from other kinds of warfare in
that the forms of the fighting are far more varied, the strength and
the composition of the combatants on both sides are harder to estimate
and fluctuate far
more, and attempts to conclude peace, or at least an armistice do not originate
in those engaged in the fighting, and are most fantastically interwoven with the
pattern of military operations.


Lulls in the fighting have a most encouraging effect on the initiative of the
“conciliators”. Witte is doing his utmost to pose as such a
“conciliator”, both directly and through the agency of the servile
press, and is covering up in every possible way his role of tsarism’s diplomatic
servant. To the delight of naïve liberals, a government report has acknowledged
the participation of the police in Black-Hundred outrages. Press organs that
fawn upon the government (Novoye Vremya, for example) are making a
pretence of condemning the extremes the reactionaries have gone to, and, of
course, the “extremes” of the revolutionaries. Displeased

    

with the petty stakes involved, extremist representatives of reaction
      (Pobedonostsev, Vladimir, and Trepov) are leaving the scene. It is partly
      because of their obtuseness that these people do not realise the
      importance of this game for the preservation of the greatest power for
      tsarism, another reason is that they assume—and rightly so—
      that it is more convenient for them to acquire a free hand, and take part
      in the same game, but only in another role— that of
      “independent” fighters for the might of the monarchy, the role
      of “free” avengers for the “insulted national sentiments
      of the Russian people”—insulted by the revolutionaries— or, in
      other words, the role of leaders of the Black Hundreds.


Witte is rubbing his hands in delight at the sight of the “great”
successes of the amazingly shrewd game he is playing. He is preserving
liberalism’s innocence by pressing ministerial posts upon leaders of the
Constitutional-Democrats (even upon Milyukov, as telegraphed by the
Temps correspondent), by addressing in his own handwriting a letter to
Mr. Struve with an invitation to return to Russia, and by trying to present
himself as a “White”, who is equally far removed from both the
“Reds” and the “Blacks”. At the same time, he is
acquiring, together with innocence, a tidy amount of capital, for he remains
head of the tsar’s government, which retains full power and is only awaiting a
suitable opportunity to go over to a decisive offensive against the revolution.


Our qualification of Witte, as given in Proletary, is being borne out
in full. He is a minister-buffoon in his methods, “talents”, and the
ends to which he has been put. With regard to the real forces till now at his
disposal, he is a minister of the liberal bureaucracy, since he has
not

y9t 

been
able to strike a deal with the liberal bourgeoisie. True, the haggling is making
gradual progress. The chafferers are bawling out their rock-bottom prices,
calling it a deal, but putting off the final agreement until the Zemstvo
Congress, which is to meet in a few days, makes its decisions. Witte is trying
to win over the bourgeois intelligentsia by extending their voting rights in the
Duma elections, providing educational qualificalions and even making paltry
concessions to the workers (who are supposed to content themselves

    

with 21st place in the system of indirect elections “on behalf of the
workers”!!); he avers that if only the Duma meets, and if only that
body—or at least a minority in it— comes out for universal suffrage,
his support for this demand will be fully ensured.


Till now the haggling has led nowhere. The two sides are conducting their talks
with no regard for those who are doing the actual fighting, and this cannot but
paralyse the efforts of our “honest brokers”. For their own part,
the liberal bourgeoisie would willingly accept the State Duma— they were
willing to accept it even in a consultative” variant, and already in
September rejected an active boycott. However, the essence of the matter is that
the revolution has made a tremendous stride forward in the two months that have
since elapsed, the proletariat has given important battle, and at once scored
its first big victory. The State Duma, that vile and despicable travesty of
popular representation, has been buried. It was shattered by the first blow
delivered by the mighty onslaught of the proletariat. In the space of a few
weeks, the revolution has shown up the short-sightedness of those who wanted to
enter the Bulygin Duma, or support those who wanted to do so. The tactics of an
active boycott received the most striking confirmation that the tactics of
political parties can receive in the thick of a struggle—confirmation in
deed, verification in the course of events, recognition as an indubitable fact
of that which but yesterday seemed to short-sighted people and cowardly
chafferers to be too bold a “leap into the unknown.


The working class has given a good fright to the Duma comedians, such a fright
that the latter are afraid to set foot on this rickety and unreliable bridge,
are afraid even to test the strength of the “latest”, hasty repairs
made by the state botchers. The roles have changed somewhat. Only yesterday
Comrades Parvus, Cherevanin and Martov wanted to obtain a revolutionary pledge
from those who were about to mount this bridge—a pledge that, in the Duma,
they would demand a constituent assembly. Today the place of these
Social-Democrats has been taken by Count Sergei Yulyevich Witte, President of
the Council of Ministers, who is already giving a “revolutionary”
pledge to support

    

any deputy to the Duma, even if he is the only one, who will demand that a
      constituent assembly be convoked.


So disgraceful was the showing the liberal bourgeois— the
Constitutional-Democrats—made the first time that they were unwilling to
repeat the unpleasant experience. They had already got the “election
campaign” under way, had our good parliamentarians of
Osvobozhdeniye and Russkiye Vedomosti; they had already
elected a central commit tee to give guidance to that campaign; they had even
set up a law office to advise the public as to whether the Rural Superintendent
has the right to disperse peasant electors on his own initiative, or whether he
must first ask the governor for permission. In a word, they were making ready to
lay themselves down to sleep on the sofa graciously provided to all
Russian Oblomovs,[1]

when suddenly ...

when suddenly the proletariat squared its shoulders and impolitely shook off
the Duma and the entire Duma campaign. It is therefore not surprising that the
liberal bourgeois are now disinclined to give credence to “revolutionary
pledges” made by the suave Count. It is not surprising that they are even
less inclined to accept the hand the Count is holding out to them, that they are
more and more often glancing leftwards, though their mouths are literally
watering at the sight of the wonderful iced cake known as the Duma.


Without any doubt, Witte’s talks with leaders of the liberal bourgeoisie are of
serious political significance, but only in the respect that they reconfirm the
affinity of the would-be-liberal bureaucracy to those who are defending the
interests of capital—only in the respect that they once again show who is
out to bury the Russian revolution, and how. These negotiations and
deals, however, are not succeeding, for the simple reason that the revolution
lives on. The revolution is not only alive, but it is stronger than ever, and is
very, very far from having said its last word; it is only beginning to deploy
all the forces of the proletariat and the revolutionary peasantry. That is why
the buffoon-minister’s talks and deals with the bourgeoisie are so point less;
they cannot acquire serious significance at the height of the struggle, when the
hostile forces are confronting each other between two decisive battles.


At such a time, the policy of the revolutionary proletariat,

    

which is conscious of its historic aims, is striving not only for the political
but also for the economic emancipation of the working people, without, however,
forgetting its socialist aims—the policy of the proletariat must be most
firm, clear and definite. To the vicious lies of the minister-buffoon and the
obtuse illusions of the liberal and bourgeois democrats regarding a
constitution, it must contrapose, more resolutely than ever before, its slogan
of the over throw of the tsar’s rule by means of an armed uprising of the whole
people. The revolutionary proletariat abhors all cant, and is fighting
relentlessly against all and any attempts to obscure the actual state of
affairs. In present-day talk about a constitutional regime there is not a single
word but that reeks of cant, and not a single sentence that is not a repetition
of the old bureaucratic falsehood aimed at saving some remnant or other of the
autocratic, serf-owning Russia.


There is talk of liberty, of popular representation; some hold forth on a
constituent assembly, but what is being constantly, hourly and minutely lost
sight of is that, without serious guarantees, all these fine things are but
hollow phrases. A serious guarantee can be provided only by a
victorious rising of the people, only by the complete domination of the
armed proletariat and the peasantry over all representatives of tsarist power,
who, under pressure by the people, have retreated a pace but are far from having
yielded to the people, and far from having been overthrown by the people. Until
that aim is achieved there can be no real liberty, no genuine
popular representation, or a really constituent assembly with the power
to set up a new order in Russia.


What is a constitution? A sheet of paper with the people’s rights recorded on
it. What is the guarantee of these rights being really recognised? It lies in
the strength of those classes of the people that have become aware of
those rights, and have been able to win them. Let us then not allow words to
delude us—that befits only babblers for bourgeois democracy—let us
not for a moment forget that strength is proved only by
victory in the struggle, and that we are as yet far from having achieved
complete victory. Let us not believe handsome phrases, for we are living through
times when an open struggle is going on, when all phrases and promises at once
are tested in action, when words? manifestoes,

    

and promises of a constitution are being used to fool the people,
    weaken its forces, scatter its ranks, and induce it to disarm. Nothing can
    be more false than such promises and phrases, and it is with pride that we
    can say that the proletariat of Russia has matured for the struggle both
    against brute force and against liberal-constitutional cant. This is borne
    out by the appeal made by the railwaymen, recently reported in the foreign
    press (unfortunately we are not in possession of the
    original). “Collect arms, comrades,” the appeal says, “organise
    yourselves for the struggle tirelessly, with multiplied energy. It is only
    by arming and rallying our ranks that we shall be able to defend what has
    been won, and achieve complete satisfaction of our demands. The time will
    come when we shall again rise as one man in a new and still more stubborn
    struggle for full liberty.”


Such are our sole guarantees. Such is the only genuine constitution of
a free Russia! Indeed, consider the Manifesto of October 17 and the facts of
Russian life: can anything be more instructive than the contrast between this
recognition of a constitution by the tsar on paper, and the
actual “constitution”, the actual application of the tsar’s
power? On the face of it, the tsar’s Manifesto holds out promises of an
unequivocally constitutional character. But we have been shown the price of
these promises. The person of the individual has been declared inviolate, yet
those who are not to the liking of the autocracy remain in prison, in exile or
in banishment. Freedom of assembly has been declared, yet the universities,
which were the first to create actual freedom of assembly in Russia, have been
closed, and their entrances are under police and military guard. The press is
free, so therefore the newspaper Novaya Zhizn,[2]

spokesman for the interests of the workers, has been confiscated for
having published the programme of the Social-Democrats. The places of
Black-Hundred ministers have been taken by ministers who have declared that they
stand for the rule of law, yet the Black Hundreds are “operating”
ever more intensely in the streets with the aid of the police and the military,
and citizens of a free Russia who are not to the liking of the autocracy are
being shot, beaten up and mauled freely and with impunity.


With such edifying examples before one’s eyes, one must

    

be blind, or else blinded by class selfishness, to attach any really serious
significance at the present time to whether Witte promises universal suffrage,
or whether the tsar will sign a manifesto on the convocation of a
“constituent” assembly. Even if these “acts” were to
take place, they would not decide the outcome of the struggle; nor would they
create actual freedom of election agitation, or ensure that a popular assembly
of representatives would have a genuinely constituent character. A constituent
assembly should give legal shape and parliamentary form to the structure of a
new Russia, but before the victory of the new over the old can be consolidated,
and to give due form to this victory, actual victory has to be won, the power of
the old institutions has to be broken, and the latter have to be swept away, the
old edifice has to be levelled to the ground, and the possibility destroyed of
any serious resistance on the part of the police and its gangs.


Full freedom of election, and full power for a constituent assembly can be
ensured only by the complete victory of the uprising, the overthrow of tsarist
rule, and its replacement by a provisional revolutionary government. To this
end all our efforts must be directed; the organisation and preparation of an
uprising must absolutely stand in the foreground. Only in the measure in which
the rising is victorious and in which victory leads to the decisive destruction
of the enemy—only in that measure will an assembly of the people’s
representatives be a popular one not only on paper, and constituent not only in
name.


Down with all cant, all falseness, and all equivocation! War has been declared,
fighting has flared up, and what we are now experiencing is but a lull between
two battles. There is no half-way. The party of the “Whites” is
sheer deception. He who is not for revolution is one of the Black Hundreds. It
is not only we that say so. The designation has not been devised by us. The
blood-stained stones cry out these words in the streets of Moscow and Odessa, in
Kronstadt and the Caucasus, in Poland and Tomsk.


He who is not for revolution is one of the Black Hundreds. He who does not wish
to put up with Russian freedom becoming freedom for the police to use violence,
subornation, vodka, and treacherous attacks upon unarmed people,

    

must arm himself and immediately get ready for battle. We must win genuine
      freedom, not promises of freedom, not scraps of paper about freedom. We
      must achieve not merely humiliation of the tsar’s power, not only
      recognition of the people’s rights by that power, but the destruction of
      that power, since the power of the tsar means the power of the Black
      Hundreds over Russia. That conclusion does not belong to us either. It has
      been drawn by the facts of life itself; it is the lesson taught by the
      events of the times. It is the voice of those who till now have stood
      aside from any revolutionary doctrine and dare not make a single free step
      or say a single free word in the street, at a meeting, or at home, without
      running the imminent and terrible risk of being crushed, tormented or torn
      to pieces by some gang of adherents of the tsar.


Finally, the revolution has obliged this “popular force” to
come into the open—the force of the tsar’s adherents. It has revealed to
the general view whom the tsar’s rule banks on, and who really supports that
rule. There you have it, this army of ferocious policemen, martinet-trained,
half witted soldiers, priests run wild, brutal shopkeepers, and the vodka-dazed
riffraff of capitalist society. It is they that now reign in Russia,
with the connivance or direct support of nine-tenths of all our governmental
institutions. Here it is—the Russian Vendée,”[3]

which resembles
the French Vendée in the same measure that the “lawful” monarch
Nicholas Romanov resembles the adventurer Napoleon. Our Vendée has not yet said
its last word either—make no mistake on that score, citizens. It, too, is
just beginning to deploy its forces properly. It, too, has its “reserves
of combustibles”, accumulated during centuries of ignorance, oppression,
serfdom, and police omnipotence. It combines within itself unmitigated Asiatic
backwardness with all the loathsome features of the refined methods used to
exploit and stultify those that are most downtrodden and tormented by the
civilisation of the capitalist cities, and been reduced to conditions worse than
those of wild beasts. This Vendée will not vanish at any manifesto from the
tsar, or messages from the Synod, or at changes in the upper or lower ranks of
the bureaucracy. It can be smashed only by the strength of an organised and
enlightened proletariat, for only the proletariat,

    

 exploited as it is, is capable of rousing all that stand below it, awaken
In them a sense that they are human beings and citizens, and show them the path
of deliverance from all exploitation. Only the proletariat can create the
nucleus of a mighty revolutionary army, mighty both in its ideals, its
discipline, its organisation, and its heroism In the struggle, a heroism no
Vendée can stand up to.


Guided by Social-Democracy, the proletariat has every where begun forming that
revolutionary army. Its ranks should be joined by all who do not wish to be in
the army of the Black Hundreds. Civil war knows no neutrals. Those who stand
aside in it are thereby rendering support, by being passive, to the
jubilant Black Hundreds. The armed forces, too, are dividing into a Red army and
a Black army. Only a fortnight ago we wrote of the speed with which they are
being drawn into the struggle for freedom. The example of Kronstadt was ample
proof of this. The government of the scoundrel Witte may have put down the
Kronstadt mutiny[4];

it is now shooting down hundreds of sailors who
have again raised the red flag—but that flag will fly much higher, for it
is the flag of all working people and all the exploited the world over. Let the
servile press, like Novoye Vremya, bawl about the troops being neutral;
this foul and hypocritical lie will vanish like smoke at every misdeed of the
Black Hundreds. The troops cannot be, have never been, and will never be
neutral. Today, they are rapidly splitting up into troops that stand for
freedom, and troops that stand for the Black Hundreds. We shall accelerate the
process. We shall brand all those who are Irresolute and vacillating, all those
who balk at the Idea of the immediate formation of a people’s militia (according
to the latest reports in the foreign press, the Municipal Council of Moscow has
rejected plans for the creation of a people’s militia). We shall multiply our
agitation among the masses, and our organisational activities to set up
revolutionary detachments. Then the army of the conscious proletariat will merge
with the Red detachments of the Russian fighting forces—and then we shall
see whether the police’s Black Hundreds will be able to vanquish all the new,
young and free Russia!

 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Oblomov—the main character in the novel
Oblomov by the writer I. Goncharov. The name has come to signify
routine stagnation and incapacity for action.





[2]

Novaga Zhizn (New Life)—the first legal
Bolshevik newspaper, published as a St. Petersburg daily from October 27
(November 9) to December 3 (16), 1905. Lenin took over the editorship upon his
return to Russia in early November. Novaya Zhizn was the actual central
organ of the R.S.D.L.P. Closely associated with the paper were V. Vorovsky,
M. Olminsky, and A. Lunacharsky, while Maxim Gorky contributed articles and gave
the paper financial aid.


No. 9 of the paper, which appeared on November 10 (23), carried Lenin’s first
article “On the Reorganisation of the Party”, which was followed by
more than ten articles from his pen. The paper’s circulation reached 80,000,
though it was constantly persecuted. Of the 27 issues, 15 were confiscated. It
was banned after publication of No. 27 on December 2 (15), No. 28 coming out
illegally.





[3]

Vendée—a department in France where, during
the French bourgeois revolution, a counter-revolutionary insurrection of the
ignorant and reactionary peasantry took place, directed against the
revolutionary Convention. Staged under religious slogans, the uprising was
directed by the counter-revolutionary clergy and
 landlords.





[4]

The mutiny of soldiers and naval ratings in Kronstadt began
on October 26 (November 8), 1905. The following demands were put forward by the
rebels: convening of a constituent assembly on the basis of universal suffrage;
establishment of a democratic republic; freedom of speech, assembly and
association; improvement of the conditions of soldiers and ratings. The uprising
was put down on October 28 (November 10).











Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 9

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 





