# Volume 21

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 21







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 21




 
Lenin Collected Works: Volume 21
August 1914--December 1915


Preface




1914

The Tasks of Revolutionary Social-Democracy in the European War
16k
 The European War and International Socialism
31k
The War and Russian Social-Democracy
32k
 The Position and Tasks of the Socialist International
23k
Letter to Vorwärts and Wiener Arbeiter-Zeitung
4k
KARL 
    
(A Brief Biographical Sketch with an Exposition of
    Marxism) [Granat encyclopaedia article]

  
   

  ¶ Preface

  ¶ I
  Karl Marx

  ¶ II
  The Marxist Doctrine

  ¶ III
  Marx’s Economic Doctrine

  ¶ IV
  Socialism

  ¶ V
  Tactics of the Class Struggle of the
    Proletariat

¶ Bibliography

161k

A German Voice on the War7k

Dead Chauvinism and Living Socialism

How the International Can Be Restored
27k
On the National Pride of the Great Russians

16k

1915

What Next?

On the Tasks Confronting the Workers’ Parties with Regard
to Opportunism and Social-Chauvinism
30k
The Kind of “Unity” Larin Proclaimed at the Swedish Congress
12k
The Russian Brand of Südekum
21k
To the Editors of Nashe Slovo
13k
How the Police and the Reactionaries Protect the Unity of German Social-Democracy
10k
The London Conference
8k
Under a False Flag
59k
The Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. Groups Abroad
20k
Letter from the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. to the Editors of Nashe Slovo
11k
What Has Been Revealed By the Trial of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Duma Group
20k
On the London Conference
9k
The Slogan of Civil War Illustrated
6k
The Social-Chauvinists’ Sophisms
14k
The Question of the Unity of Internationalists
13k
Bourgeois Philanthropists and Revolutionary Social-Democracy
7k
The Collapse of Platonic Internationalism
17k
On the Struggle Against Social-Chauvinism
14k
The Collapse of the Second International
6k
British Pacifism and the British Dislike of Theory
17k
How Servility to Reaction is Blended with Playing at Democracy
10k
The Main German Opportunist Work on the War
14k
The Defeat of One's Own Government in the Imperialist War
35k
The State of Affair’s in Russian Social-Democracy
17k
The “Peace” Slogan Appraised
8k
The Question of Peace
15k
Socialism and War

   

  ¶ Preface to the
  First (Foreign) Edition

  ¶ Preface to the
    Second Edition

  ¶ 1 The
  Principles of Socialism and the War of 1914-1915

  ¶ 2 Classes
  and Parties in Russia

  ¶ 3 The
  Restoration of the International

  ¶ 4 The
  History of the Split and  the Present State of
  Social-Democracy in Russia

145k
On the Slogan for a United States of Europe 
12k
On the Slogan for a United States of Europe (Editorial Comment)
    
Editorial
  Comment By Sotsial-Demokrat On The Manifesto On War
  Issued By The Central Committee Of The R.S.D.L.P.
4k
The Draft Resolution of the Left Wing at Zimmerwald
9k
The Voice of an Honest French Socialist
25k
Imperialism and Socialism in Italy
27k
Appeal on the War
9k
We Are Thankful For Such Frankness
5k
To the International Socialist Committee (I.S.C.)
18k
The Defeat of Russia and the Revolutionary Crisis
14k
The First Step
17k
Revolutionary Marxists at the International Socialist Conference, September 5-8, 1915
12k
Kautsky, Axelrod and Martov—True Internationalists
18k
Several Theses
    
Proposed by the Editors
13k
The Revolutionary Proletariat and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination 
22k
On the Two Lines in the Revolution
17k
At the Uttermost Limit 
6k
Letter to the Secretary of the Socialist Propaganda League
15k
Social-Chauvinist Policy Behind a Cover of Internationalist Phrases
26k
Opportunism, and the Collapse of the Second International
49k

 


Volume 21 Transcription/Mark-up:

    R. Cymbala, Brian Baggins, Charles Farrel, David Walters, and Zodiac,
    1997,1999, 2000, 2003

        •
    Converted to "tx2html", Mar. 2005.

  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## The Tasks of Revolutionary Social-Democracy in the European War









Lenin: The Tasks of Revolutionary Social-Democracy in the European War







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Tasks of Revolutionary Social-Democracy in the European War[1]




Written: Written not later than August 24 (September 6), 1914 

Published:

      The introduction The Russian Social-Democrats on the European War is published for the first time. The theses (resolution) were first published in full in 1929 in the second and third editions of the works of V. I. Lenin, Volume 18.

      The introduction is published according to the manuscript; the theses (resolution) according to a copy made by N. K. Krupskaya.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 15-19.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



 

Reports have reached us from most reliable sources, regarding
    a conference recently held by leaders of the Russian Social-Democratic
    Labour Party, on the question of the European war. The conference was not of
    a wholly official nature, since the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. has
    as yet been unable to gather, as a result of the numerous arrests and
    unprecedented persecution by the tsarist government. We do, however, have
    precise information that the conference gave expression to views held by the
    most influential circles of the R.S.D.L.P. 
The conference adopted the following resolution, whose full text we are
    quoting below as a document:
    

      Resolution Of A Group Of Social-Democrats

1.The European and world war has the clearly defined character of a
    bourgeois, imperialist and dynastic war. A struggle for markets and for
    freedom to loot foreign countries, a striving to suppress the revolutionary
    movement of the proletariat and democracy in the individual countries, a
    desire to deceive, disunite, and slaughter the proletarians of all countries
    by setting the wage slaves of one nation

    

against those of another so as to
    benefit the bourgeoisie—these are the only real content and
    significance of the war. 
2.The conduct of the leaders of the German Social-Democratic Party, the
    strongest and the most influential in the Second International (1889-1914),
    a party which has voted for war credits and repeated the
    bourgeois-chauvinist phrases of the Prussian Junkers and the bourgeoisie, is
    sheer betrayal of socialism. Under no circumstances can the conduct of the
    leaders of the German Social-Democratic Party be condoned, even if we assume
    that the party was absolutely weak and had temporarily to bow to the will of
    the bourgeois majority of the nation. This party has in fact adopted a
    national-liberal policy.
3.The conduct of the Belgian and French Social-Democratic party leaders,
    who have betrayed socialism by entering bourgeois
governments,[2] is just as
    reprehensible. 
4.The betrayal of socialism by most leaders of the Second International
    (1889-1914) signifies the ideological and political bankruptcy of the
    International. This collapse has been mainly caused by the actual prevalence
    in it of petty-bourgeois opportunism, the bourgeois nature and the danger of
    which have long been indicated by the finest representatives of the
    revolutionary proletariat of all countries. The opportunists had long been
    preparing to wreck the Second International by denying the socialist
    revolution and substituting bourgeois reformism in its stead, by rejecting
    the class struggle with its inevitable conversion at certain moments into
    civil war, and by preaching class collaboration; by preaching bourgeois
    chauvinism under the guise of patriotism and the defence of the fatherland,
    and ignoring or rejecting the fundamental truth of socialism, long ago set
    forth in the 
    Communist Manifesto, that the workingmen have no country; by
    confining themselves, in the struggle against militarism, to a sentimental
    philistine point of view, instead of recognising the need for a
    revolutionary war by the proletarians of all countries, against the
    bourgeoisie of all countries; by making a fetish of the necessary
    utilisation of bourgeois parliamentarianism and bourgeois legality, and
    forgetting that illegal forms

    

of organisation and agitation are imperative
    at times of crises. One of the organs of international opportunism,
    Sozialistische
Monatshefte,[3] which has long taken a national
    liberal stand, is very properly celebrating its victory over European
    socialism. The so-called Centre of the German and other Social-Democratic
    parties has in actual fact faint heartedly capitulated to the
    opportunists. It must be the task of the future International resolutely and
    irrevocably to rid itself of this bourgeois trend in socialism. 
5.With reference to the bourgeois and chauvinist sophisms being used by
    the bourgeois parties and the governments of the two chief rival nations of
    the Continent—the German and the French—to fool the masses most
    effectively, and being copied by both the overt and covert socialist
    opportunists, who are slavishly following in the wake of the bourgeoisie,
    one must particularly note and brand the following: 
When the German bourgeois refer to the defence of the fatherland and to
    the struggle against tsarism, and insist on the freedom of cultural and
    national development, they are lying, because it has always been the policy
    of Prussian Junkerdom, headed by Wilhelm II, and the big bourgeoisie of
    Germany, to defend the tsarist monarchy; whatever the outcome of the war,
    they are sure to try to bolster it. They are lying because, in actual fact,
    the Austrian bourgeoisie have launched a robber campaign against Serbia, and
    the German bourgeoisie are oppressing Danes, Poles, and Frenchmen (in
    Alsace-Lorraine); they are waging a war of aggression against Belgium and
    France so as to loot the richer and freer countries; they have organised an
    offensive at a moment which seemed best for the use of the latest
    improvements in military matériel, and on the eve of the introduction
    of the so-called big military programme in Russia. 
Similarly, when the French bourgeois refer to the defence of the
    fatherland, etc., they are lying, because in actual fact they are defending
    countries that are backward in capitalist technology and are developing more
    slowly, and because they spend thousands of millions to hire Russian
    tsarism’s
Black-Hundred[4] gangs for a war of aggression, i.e., the looting
    of Austrian and German lands.
 

Neither of the two belligerent groups of nations is second to the other
    in cruelty and atrocities in warfare. 
6.It is the first and foremost task of Russian Social-Democrats to wage a
    ruthless and all-out struggle against Great-Russian and tsarist-monarchist
    chauvinism, and against the sophisms used by the Russian liberals,
Cadets,[5] a
    section of the Narodniks, and
    other bourgeois parties, in defence of that chauvinism. From the viewpoint
    of the working class and the toiling masses of all the peoples of Russia,
    the defeat of the tsarist monarchy and its army, which oppress Poland, the
    Ukraine, and many other peoples of Russia, and foment hatred among the
    peoples so as to increase Great-Russian oppression of the other
    nationalities, and consolidate the reactionary and barbarous government of
    the tsar’s monarchy, would be the lesser evil by far. 
7.The following must now be the slogans of Social-Democracy: 
First, all-embracing propaganda, involving the army and the theatre of
    hostilities as well, for the socialist revolution and the need to use
    weapons, not against their brothers, the wage slaves in other countries, but
    against the reactionary and bourgeois governments and parties of all
    countries; the urgent necessity of organising illegal nuclei and groups in
    the armies of all nations, to conduct such propaganda. in all languages; a
    merciless struggle against the chauvinism and “patriotism” of
    the philistines and bourgeoisie of all countries without exception. In the
    struggle against the leaders of the present International, who have betrayed
    socialism, it is imperative to appeal to the revolutionary consciousness of
    the working masses, who bear the entire burden of the war and are in most
    cases hostile to opportunism and chauvinism. 
Secondly, as an immediate slogan, propaganda for republics in (Germany,
    Poland, Russia, and other countries, and for the transforming of all the
    separate states of Europe into a republican United States of
Europe.[6] 
Thirdly and particularly, a struggle against the tsarist monarchy and
    Great-Russian, Pan-Slavist chauvinism, and advocacy of a revolution in
    Russia, as well as of the liberation of and self-determination for
    nationalities oppressed by Russia, coupled with the immediate slogans of a
    democratic

    

republic, the confiscation of the landed estates, and an
    eight-hour working day.
    
A group of Social-Democrats, members of the Russian
    Social-Democratic Labour Party

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
These
    theses on the war were drawn up by Lenin not later than August 24 (September
    6), 1914 after he had come to Berne from Poronin (Galicia). They were
    discussed at a meeting of the Bolshevik group in Berne on August 24-26
    (September 6-8). Approved by the group, the theses were circulated among
    Bolshevik groups abroad. To throw the police off the scent, the copy of the
    theses made out by N. K. Krupskaya, carried the inscription: “Copy of
    the manifesto issued in Denmark. ”
The theses were smuggled into Russia for discussion by
    the Russian section of the Central Committee, Party organisations and the
    Bolshevik Duma group. 
Through Swiss Social-Democrats the theses were submitted
    to the conference of the Swiss and Italian Socialists held in Lugano on
    September 27, 1914. Many of the ideas contained in the theses were
    incorporated in the conference’s resolution.
On learning of the approval of the theses in Russia,
    Lenin used them as a basis for writing the manifesto of the
    R.S.D.L.P. Central Committee “The War and Russian Social-Democracy
    ”(see this volume, pp. 25-34).
    
The introduction to the theses (“The Russian
    Social-Democrats on the European War”, which was written on a separate
    sheet) was discovered only later, and was first published in the 4th Russian
    edition of Lenin’s Collected Works. 



[2]
Among
    those who joined the bourgeois government of Belgium was Vandervelde, and in
    France Jules Guesde, Marcel Sembat and Albert Thomas. 



[3]
Sozialistische Monatshefte (Socialist Monthly )—the
    principal organ of the German opportunists, and one of the organs of
    international opportunism. It was published in Berlin from 1897 to
    1933. During the First World War it took a social-chauvinist stand.



[4]
The
    Black Hundreds—monarchist gangs formed by the tsarist police to
    fight the revolutionary movement. They murdered revolutionaries, assaulted
    progressive intellectuals and organised pogroms. 



[5]
Cadets—members of the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the
    leading party of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie in Russia. Founded in
    1905, the party represented the bourgeoisie, Zemstvo

   

landowner leaders and
    bourgeois intellectuals. Prominent among its members were Milyukov,
    Muromtsev, Maklakov, Shingaryov, Struve, and Rodichev. 
The Cadets were active in Russia’s war
    preparations. They stood solidly behind the tsarist government’s
    predatory designs, hoping to batten on war contracts, strengthen the
    bourgeoisie’s positions, and suppress the revolutionary movement in
    the country.
 With the outbreak of the war the Cadets advanced the
    slogan of “War to the victorious end! ”When, in 1915, the
    tsarist forces suffered a defeat at the front, which led to the aggravation
    of the revolutionary crisis, the Cadet members of the State Duma, headed by
    Milyukov, and the other representatives of the bourgeoisie and the
    landowners formed a “Progressist ”bloc aimed at checking the
    revolution, preserving the monarchy and bringing the war to a
    “victorious end”. The Cadets actively helped to set up
    war-industries committees.



[6]
See
    Lenin’s articles “On the Slogan for a United States of
    Europe” and “On the Slogan for a United States of
    Europe. Editorial Comment by Sotsial-Demokrat on the Manifesto on
    War Issued by the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.” (see this
    volume, pp. 339-43, 344). 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The European War and International Socialism









Lenin: The European War and International Socialism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The European War and International Socialism




Written: Written in late August–September 1914 

Published:

      First published on August 1, 1929, in Pravda No. 174.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 20-24.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



 

To the socialist it is not the horrors of war that are the
    hardest to endure—we are always for “santa guerra di tutti
    gli oppressi per la conquista delle loro
patrie!”[1]

—but

the horrors of the treachery shown by the leaders of present day
    socialism, the horrors of the collapse of the present-day
    International. 
Is it not treachery to Social-Democracy when we see the German
    socialists’ amazing change of front (after Germany’s declaration
    of war); the false phrases about a war of liberation against tsarism;
    forgetfulness of German imperialism, forgetfulness of the rape of Serbia;
    the bourgeois interests involved in the war against Britain, etc., etc.?
    Chauvinist patriots vote for the Budget! 
Have the socialists of France and Belgium not shown the same kind of
    treachery? They are excellent at exposing German imperialism, but,
    unfortunately they are amazingly purblind with regard to British, French,
    and particularly the barbarous Russian imperialism. They fail to see the
    disgraceful fact that, for decades on end, the French bourgeoisie have been
    paying out thousands of millions for the hire of the Black-Hundred gangs of
    Russian tsarism, and that the latter has been crushing the non-Russian
    majority in our country, robbing Po]and, oppressing the Great Russian
    workers and peasants, and so on.
    
At such a time, the socialist feels refreshed when he reads of the bitter
    truth so courageously and straightforwardly told by
Avanti![11] to
    Südekum,[12] the truth that paper

    

told the German socialists,
    namely, that they are imperialists, i.e., chauvinists. One feels
    even more refreshed on reading the article by Zibordi (Avanti!,
    Sept. 2) exposing not only the German and the Austrian brands of chauvinism
    (which is to the advantage of the Italian bourgeoisie), but also
    the French, an article which shows that this war is a war of the
    bourgeoisie of all lands! 
Avanti!’s stand and the Zibordi article—[as well as
    the resolution of the group of revolutionary Social-Democrats (at a recent
    conference in a Scandinavian
country)[2]

]—shows

us what is right
    and what is wrong in the usual phrase about the collapse of the
    International. This phrase is reiterated with malicious relish by the
    bourgeois and the opportunists (riformisti di
destra[3]

),

and with
    bitterness by socialists
(Volksrecht[13] in Zurich, and Bremer
    Bürger-Zeitung[14]). There is a great deal of truth in the phrase!
    The downfall of the leaders and of most of the parties in the present-day
    International is a fact. (Compare
Vorwärts,[15] Wiener
    Arbeiter-Zeitung[16] and Hamburger
Echo[17] versus
    l’Humanité,[18] and the appeals of the Belgian
    and the French
    socialists versus the “reply ”of the German
Vorstand.[19]) The
    masses have not yet spoken out! 
However, Zibordi is a thousand times right in saying that it is not a
    matter of “dottrina è sbagliata”, or of the
    “rimedio ”of socialism being
    “errato”, but “semplicemente non erano in
    dose bastante”, “gli altri socialisti non sono
    ‘abbastanza
socialisti’”.[4]

It is not socialism that has collapsed, in the shape of the
    present-day European International, but an insufficient socialism,
    i.e., opportunism and reformism. It is this
    “tendency"—which exists everywhere, in all countries,
    and has found such vivid expression in Bissolati and Co. in Italy—that
    has collapsed, for it has for years been teaching forgetfulness of
    the class struggle, etc., etc.—from the
resolution.[20] 
 

Zibordi is right when he sees the European socialists’ main guilt in
      “cercano nobilitare con postumi motivi la loro incapacità
      a prevenire, la loro necessità di partecipare al
      macello”, in the fact that they “preferisce fingere
      di fare per amore ciò ch’è [European
socialism][5]
costretto a fare per forza”, that the socialists
      “solidarizzarono ciascuno con la propria nazione, col
      Governo borghese della propria rulzione . . . in una misura da
      formare una delusione per noi [also in all socialists who are not
      opportunists] e un compiacimento per tutti i non socialisti
      d’Italia”[6]

(and not of Italy alone, but of all
      countries; cf., for instance, with Russian liberalism). 
Even given the total incapacità and impotence of the
    European socialists, the behaviour of their leaders reveals treachery and
    baseness: the workers have been driven into the slaughter, while their
    leaders vote in favour and join governments! Even with
    their total impotence, they should have voted against, should
    not have joined their governments and uttered chauvinistic
    infamies; should not have shown solidarity with their
    “nation”, and should not have defended their “own
    ”bourgeoisie, they should have unmasked its vileness. 
Everywhere there is the bourgeoisie and the imperialists,
    everywhere the ignoble preparations for carnage; if Russian tsarism is
    particularly infamous and barbarous (and more reactionary than all the
    rest), then German imperialism too is monarchist: its aims are feudal and
    dynastic, and its gross bourgeoisie are less free than the French. The
    Russian Social-Democrats were right in saying that to them the
    defeat of tsarism was the lesser evil, for their immediate enemy
    was, first and foremost, Great-Russian
    

chauvinism, but that in each
    country the socialists (who are not opportunists) ought to see their main
    enemy in their “own ”(“home-made”) chauvinism. 
Is it true, however, that the “incapacità ”is
    so very absolute? Is that so?
Fucilare?[7]
Heldentod[8]

and a miserable
    death? All this in vantagglo di un altra
patria?[9]

Not always!! The
    initiative was possible and even obligatory. Illegal propaganda and
    civil war would be more honest, and obligatory for socialists
    (this  is what the Russian socialists are calling for). 
For Instance, they take comfort in the illusion that the war will end and
    things will settle down. .. But no! For the collapse of the present-day
    (1889-1914) International not to turn into the collapse of socialism, for
    the masses not to turn away, and to prevent the domination of
    anarchism and syndicalism (just as shamefully [as] in France), the truth
    must be looked in the face. Whoever wins, Europe is threatened by the
    growth of chauvinism, by
    “revenge-seeking”. etc. Militarism, whether German or
    Great Russian, fosters counter-chauvinism and the like.
    
It is our duty to draw the conclusion of the complete collapse of the
    opportunism, the reformism, so impressively proclaimed in Italy (and so
    decisively rejected by the Italian
comrades[21]
and[10]

N. B. insert: the
    contemptuous and scornful attitude of Die Neue
Zeit[22] towards the
    Italian socialists and Avanti!: petty concessions to opportunism!
    “The golden mean.”


[[BOX-ENDS:


The so-called “Centre ”= lackeys of the opportunists.

]]



 
Notes
 

[1]

“a
    holy war of all the oppressed, for the conquest of their own
    fatherland!”—Ed.


[2]
See
    pp. 15-19 of this volume:
The Tasks of Revolutionary
    Social-Democracy in the European War—Editor
    —Lenin

[3]
the reformists of the Right.—Ed.
    

[4]

… it
    is not a matter of “theory being wrong”, or of the “remedy
    ”of socialism being “wrong ”but “simply of its not
    being available in sufficient doses ”and of “certain socialists
    not being ’sufficiently
    socialist’”.—Ed.


[5]
Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin) have
    been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise
    indicated.—Ed.


[6]

…
    their attempts to backdate their justification, with plausible excuses, both
    of their inability to prevent the carnage and their need to take part in the
    latter”, . . . they “prefer to create the semblance of doing
    voluntarily [European socialism] what they are forced to do of
    necessity”, that the socialists have “lined up with
    their own particular nation, with the latter’s bourgeois
    government . . . in a measure capable of engendering disappointment in us
    [also in all socialists who are not opportunists] and delight all
    non-socialists in Italy”. —Ed.


[7]
Shoot down?—Ed.


[8]
A hero’s death.—Ed.


[9]
For the
    sake of another country?—Ed.


[10]
The
    manuscript breaks off here. The next two sentences are marginal
    notes.—Ed.

 



[11]
Avanti!—a daily and central organ of the Italian Socialist
    Party, was founded in December 1896. During the First World War its policy
    was not consistently internationalist, and it failed to break with the
    reformists. At present  Avanti! is the central organ of the Italian
    Democratic Left Party.



[12]
Südekum, Albert—a German Social-Democrat, who was an
    extreme social-chauvinist during the First World War. His name has come to
    denote social-chauvinism.



[13]
Volksrecht (The People’s Right)—a Swiss
    Social-Democratic daily, published in Zurich since 1898. During the First
    World War it published articles by Left Zimmerwaldists, including
    Lenin’s articles “Twelve Brief Theses on H. Greulich’s
    Defence of Fatherland Defence”, “The Tasks of the Russian
    Social-Democratic Labour Party in the Russian Revolution ”and
    “Tricks of the Republican Chauvinists”. 



[14]
Bremer
    Bürger-Zeitung—a daily published by the Bremen
    Social-Democrats from 1890 to 1919. In 1914-15 it was actually the organ of
    the Left Social-Democrats, and in 1916 it was taken over by the
    social-chauvinists.



[15]
Vorwärts—a daily, central organ of the German
    Social-Democrats,  published in Berlin from 1876 by Wilhelm Liebknecht and
    other editors. Through this newspaper Engels fought against all
    manifestations of opportunism. In the latter half of the 1890s, following
    Engels’s death, the newspaper systematically published articles

   

by
    opportunists, who had become dominant among German Social-Democrats and in
    the Second International. During the First World War (1914-18) the paper
    pursued a social-chauvinist policy, and after the October Socialist
    Revolution it became a mouthpiece of anti-Soviet propaganda. It ceased
    publication in 1933. 



[16]
Wiener Arbeiter-Zeitung—a daily newspaper, central organ of
      the Austrian Social-Democratic Party, published in Vienna from
      1889. During the First World War it took a social-chauvinist stand, Lenin
      describing it as the newspaper of “Vienna betrayers of
      socialism”. Suppressed in 1934, it resumed publication in 1945 as
      the central organ of the Austrian Socialist Party.



[17]
Hamburger Echo—German Social-Democratic daily newspaper
    published from 1887; took a social-chauvinist stand during the First World
    War. 



[18]
l’Humanité—a daily founded by Jean
    Jaurès in 1904 as the organ of the French Socialist Party. During
    the First World War the news paper became a mouthpiece of the extreme Right
    wing of the French Socialist Party, and pursued a social-chauvinist
    policy. Shortly after the split in the Socialist Party at the Tours Congress
    in December 1920, and the formation of the Communist Party, it became the
    organ of the Communist Party. 



[19]
The
    reference is to the appeal addressed to the German people by the French and
    Belgian delegations to the International Socialist Bureau, and published in
    l’Humanité on September 6, 1914. It accused the German
    Government of pursuing predatory designs and the German troops of
    perpetrating atrocities in the occupied areas. Vorwärts of
    September 10, 1914  carried a protest by the German Social-Democratic
    Party’s Executive against this appeal. This started off a press
    polemic between French and German social-chauvinists, each side seeking to
    justify its own government’s participation in the war and put the
    blame on the other side. 



[20]
Lenin is
    referring to the resolution adopted by the Bolshevik group at its meeting in
    Berne, August 24-26 (September 6-8) 1914 (see this volume, pp. 15-19).



[21]
Ever since
    its foundation in 1892, a sharp ideological struggle was conducted in the
    Italian Socialist Party between the opportunist and revolutionary wings,
    which differed on the question of the Party’s policy and
    tactics. Under pressure from the Lefts, the most outspoken reformists
    (Bonomi, Bissolati), who supported the war and advocated collaboration with
    the government and the bourgeoisie, were expelled from the Party at its
    congress in Reggio Emilia in 1912. After the outbreak of the war, and before
    Italy’s entry into it, the Party took an anti-war stand under the
    slogan: “Against the war, for neutrality! ”In December 1914, the
    Party expelled a group of renegades (Mussolini and others) who defended the
    imperialist

   

policy of the bourgeoisie and favoured Italy’s
    participation in the war. The Italian Socialists met in a joint conference
    with the Swiss Socialists at Lugano (1914) and took an active part in the
    international socialist conferences in Zimmerwald (1915) and Kienthal
    (1916). On the whole however, the Italian Socialist Party followed a
    Centrist policy. With Italy’s entry into the war in May 1915, the
    Party renounced its anti-war stand and issued a slogan “neither
    participate in the war, nor sabotage it”, which in practice meant
    support for the war. 



[22]
Die
    Neue Zeit (New Times)—theoretical journal of the German
    Social-Democratic Party published in Stuttgart from 1883 to 1923. Until
    October 1917 it was edited by Karl Kautsky and afterwards by Heinrich
    Cunow. Several works by Marx and Engels were first published in it. Engels
    helped the journal with advice, frequently criticising it for its deviations
    from Marxism. In the latter half of the nineties, following Engels’s
    death, it systematically published articles by revisionists, including a
    series of Bernstein’s articles called “Problems of
    Socialism”, which launched a revisionist crusade against
    Marxism. During the First World War Die Neue Zeit held a Centrist
    position, which in practice supported social-chauvinists.

[See also Glossary
    entry which also contains related links]









<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The War and Russian Social-Democracy









Lenin: The War and Russian Social-Democracy







V. I.  

      Lenin
The War and Russian Social-Democracy




Written: Written prior to September 28 (October 11), 1914 

Published:

      Published on November 1, 1914 in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 33.

      Published according to the newspaper text, checked against the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 25-34.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

 

The European war, which the governments and the bourgeois
    parties of all countries have been preparing for decades, has broken
    out. The growth of armaments, the extreme intensification of the struggle
    for markets in the latest—the imperialist—stage of capitalist
    development in the advanced countries, and the dynastic interests of the
    more backward East-European monarchies were inevitably bound to bring about
    this war, and have done so. Seizure of territory and subjugation of other
    nations, the ruining of competing nations and the plunder of their wealth,
    distracting the attention of the working masses from the internal political
    crises in Russia, Germany, Britain and other countries, disuniting and
    nationalist stultification of the workers, and the extermination of their
    vanguard so as to weaken the revolutionary movement of the
    proletariat—these comprise the sole actual content, importance and
    significance of the present war.


It is primarily on Social-Democracy that the duty rests of revealing the
    true meaning of the war, and of ruthlessly exposing the falsehood, sophistry
    and “patriotic” phrasemongering spread by the ruling classes, the
    landowners and the bourgeoisie, in defence of the war.


One group of belligerent nations is headed by the German bourgeoisie. It
    is hoodwinking the working class and the toiling masses by asserting that
    this is a war in defence of the fatherland, freedom and civilisation, for
    the liberation of the peoples oppressed by tsarism, and for the destruction
    of reactionary tsarism. In actual fact, however, this bourgeoisie, which
    servilely grovels to the Prussian Junkers, headed by Wilhelm II, has always
    been a most faithful ally of tsarism, and an enemy of the revolutionary
    movement of Russia’s workers and peasants. In fact, whatever the
    outcome of the war, this bourgeoisie will together with the

    

      Junkers, exert every effort to support the tsarist monarchy against a
      revolution in Russia.


In fact, the German bourgeoisie has launched a robber campaign against
    Serbia, with the object of subjugating her and throttling the national
    revolution of the Southern Slavs, at the same time sending the bulk of its
    military forces against the freer countries, Belgium and France, so as to
    plunder richer competitors. In fact, the German bourgeoisie, which has been
    spreading the fable that it is waging a war of defence, chose the moment it
    thought most favourable for war, making use of its latest improvements in
    military matériel and forestalling the rearmament already planned and
    decided upon by Russia and France.


The other group of belligerent nations is headed by the British and the
    French bourgeoisie, who are hoodwinking the working class and the toiling
    masses by asserting that they are waging a war for the defence of their
    countries, for freedom and civilisation and against German militarism and
    despotism. In actual fact, this bourgeoisie has long been spending thousands
    of millions to hire the troops of Russian tsarism, the most reactionary and
    barbarous monarchy in Europe, and prepare them for an attack on
    Germany.


In fact, the struggle of the British and the French bourgeoisie is aimed
    at the seizure of the German colonies, and the ruining of a rival nation,
    whose economic development has been more rapid. In pursuit of this noble
    aim, the “advanced” “democratic” nations are helping
    the savage tsarist regime to still more throttle Poland, the Ukraine, etc.,
    and more thoroughly crush the revolution in Russia.


Neither group of belligerents is inferior to the other in spoiliation,
    atrocities and the boundless brutality of war; however, to hoodwink the
    proletariat and distract its attention from the only genuine war of
    liberation, namely, a civil war against the bourgeoisie both of its
    “own” and of “foreign” countries—to achieve so
    lofty an aim—the bourgeoisie of each country is trying, with the help
    of false phrases about patriotism, to extol the significance of its
    “own” national war, asserting that it is out to defeat the enemy,
    not for plunder and the seizure of territory, but for the
    “liberation” of all other peoples except its own.

 

But the harder the governments and the bourgeoisie of all countries try
    to disunite the workers and pit them against one another, and the more
    savagely they enforce, for this lofty aim, martial law and the military
    censorship (measures which even now, in wartime, are applied against the
    “internal” foe more harshly than against the external), the more
    pressingly is it the duty of the class-conscious proletariat to defend its
    class solidarity, its internationalism, and its socialist convictions
    against the unbridled chauvinism of the “patriotic” bourgeois
    cliques in all countries. If class-conscious workers were to give up this
    aim, this would mean renunciation of their aspirations for freedom and
    democracy, to say nothing of their socialist aspirations.


It is with a feeling of the most bitter disappointment that we have to
    record that the socialist parties of the leading European countries have
    failed to discharge this duty, the behaviour of these parties’
    leaders, particularly in Germany, bordering on downright betrayal of the
    cause of socialism. At this time of supreme and historic importance, most of
    the leaders of the present Socialist International, the Second (1889-1914),
    are trying to substitute nationalism for socialism. As a result of their
    behaviour, the workers’ parties of these countries did not oppose the
    governments’ criminal conduct, but called upon the working class to
    identify its position with that of the imperialist governments. The leaders
    of the International committed an act of treachery against socialism by
    voting for war credits, by reiterating the chauvinist
    (“patriotic”) slogans of the bourgeoisie of their
    “own” countries, by justifying and defending the war, by joining
    the bourgeois governments of the belligerent countries, and so on and so
    forth. The most influential socialist leaders and the most influential
    organs of the socialist press of present-day Europe hold views that are
    chauvinist, bourgeois and liberal, and in no way socialist. The
    responsibility for thus disgracing socialism falls primarily on the German
    Social-Democrats, who were the strongest and most influential party in the
    Second International. But neither can one justify the French socialists, who
    have accepted ministerial posts in the government of that very bourgeoisie
    which betrayed its country and allied itself with Bismarck so as to crush
    the Commune.

 

The German and the Austrian Social-Democrats are attempting to justify
      their support for the war by arguing that they are thereby fighting
      against Russian tsarism. We Russian Social-Democrats declare that we
      consider such justification sheer sophistry. In our country the
      revolutionary movement against tsarism has again assumed tremendous
      proportions during the past few years. This movement has always been
      headed by the working class of Russia. The political strikes of the last
      few years, which have involved millions of workers, have had as their
      slogan the overthrow of tsarism and the establishment of a democratic
      republic. During his visit to Nicholas II on the very eve of the war,
      Poincaré, President of the French Republic, could see for himself, in
      the streets of St. Petersburg, barricades put up by Russian workers. The
      Russian proletariat has not flinched from any sacrifice to rid humanity of
      the disgrace of the tsarist monarchy. We must, however, say that if there
      is anything that, under certain conditions, can delay the downfall of
      tsarism, anything that can help tsarism in its struggle against the whole
      of Russia’s democracy, then that is the present war, which has
      placed the purses of the British, the French and the Russian bourgeois at
      the disposal of tsarism, to further the latter’s reactionary
      aims. If there is anything that can hinder the revolutionary struggle of
      the Russia’s working class against tsarism, then that is the
      behaviour of the German and the Austrian Social-Democratic leaders, which
      the chauvinist press of Russia is continually holding up to us as an
      example.


Even assuming that German Social-Democracy was so weak that it was
    compelled to refrain from all revolutionary action, it should not have
    joined the chauvinist camp, or taken steps which gave the Italian socialists
    reason to say that the German Social-Democratic leaders were dishonouring
    the banner of the proletarian International.


Our Party, the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, has made, and will
    continue to make great sacrifices in connection with the war. The whole of
    our working-class legal press has been suppressed. Most working-class
    associations have been disbanded, and a large number of our comrades have
    been arrested and exiled. Yet our parliamentary representatives—the
    Russian Social-Democratic Labour

    

group in the Duma—considered it their
    imperative socialist duty not to vote for the war credits, and even to walk
    out of the Duma, so as to express their protest the more energetically; they
    considered it their duty to brand the European governments’ policy as
    imperialist. Though the tsar’s government has increased its tyranny
    tenfold, the Social-Democratic workers of Russia are already publishing
    their first illegal manifestos against the war, thus doing their duty to
    democracy and to the International.


While the collapse of the Second International has given rise to a sense
    of burning shame in revolutionary Social-Democrats—as represented by
    the minority of German Social-Democrats and the finest Social-Democrats in
    the neutral countries; while socialists in both Britain and France have been
    speaking up against the chauvinism of most Social-Democratic parties; while
    the opportunists, as represented, for instance, by the German
    Sozialistische Monatshefte, which have long held a national-liberal
    stand, are with good reason celebrating their victory over European
    socialism—the worst possible service is being rendered to the
    proletariat by those who vacillate between opportunism and revolutionary
    Social-Democracy (like the “Centre” in the German
    Social-Democratic Party), by those who are trying to hush up the collapse of
    the Second International or to disguise it with diplomatic phrases.


On the contrary, this collapse must be frankly recognised and its causes
    understood, so as to make it possible to build up a new and more lasting
    socialist unity of the workers of all countries.


The opportunists have wrecked the decisions of the Stuttgart, Copenhagen
    and Basle
congresses,[1] which made it binding on socialists of all
    countries to combat chauvinism in all and any conditions, made it binding on
    socialists to reply to any war begun by the bourgeoisie and governments,
    with intensified propaganda of civil war and social revolution. The collapse
    of the Second International is the collapse of opportunism, which developed
    from the features of a now bygone (and so-called “peaceful”)
    period of history, and in recent years has come practically to dominate the
    International. The opportunist have long been preparing the ground for this
    collapse by denying the socialist

    

revolution and substituting bourgeois
    reformism in its stead; by rejecting the class struggle with its inevitable
    conversion at certain moments into civil war, and by preaching class
    collaboration; by preaching bourgeois chauvinism under the guise of
    patriotism and the defence of the fatherland, and ignoring or rejecting the
    fundamental truth of socialism, long ago set forth in the 
    Communist Manifesto, that the workingmen have no country; by
    confining themselves, in the struggle against militarism, to a sentimental,
    philistine point of view, instead of recognising the need for a
    revolutionary war by the proletarians of all countries, against the
    bourgeoisie of all countries; by making a fetish of the necessary
    utilisation of bourgeois parliamentarianism and bourgeois legality, and
    forgetting that illegal forms of organisation and propaganda are imperative
    at times of crises. The natural “appendage” to
    opportunism—one that is just as bourgeois and hostile to the
    proletarian, i.e., the Marxist, point of view—namely, the
    anarcho-syndicalist trend, has been marked by a no less shamefully smug
    reiteration of the slogans of chauvinism, during the present crisis.


The aims of socialism at the present time cannot be fulfilled, and real
    international unity of the workers cannot be achieved, without a decisive
    break with opportunism, and without explaining its inevitable fiasco to the
    masses.


It must be the primary task of Social-Democrats in every country to
    combat that country’s chauvinism. In Russia this chauvinism has
    overcome the bourgeois liberals (the
    “Constitutional-Democrats”), and part of the
    Narodniks—down to the
Socialist-Revolutionaries[2] and the
    “Right” Social-Democrats. (In particular, the chauvinist
    utterances of E. Smirnov, P. Maslov and G. Plekhanov, for example, should be
    branded; they have been taken up and widely used by the bourgeois
    “patriotic” press.)


In the present situation, it is impossible to determine, from the
    standpoint of the international proletariat, the defeat of which of the two
    groups of belligerent nations would be the lesser evil for socialism. But to
    us Russian Social-Democrats there cannot be the slightest doubt that, from
    the standpoint of the working class and of the toiling masses of all the
    nations of Russia, the defeat of the tsarist

    

monarchy, the most reactionary
    and barbarous of governments, which is oppressing the largest number of
    nations and the greatest mass of the population of Europe and Asia, would be
    the lesser evil.


The formation of a republican United States of Europe should be the
    immediate political slogan of Europe’s Social-Democrats. In contrast
    with the bourgeoisie, which is ready to “promise” anything in
    order to draw the proletariat into the mainstream of chauvinism, the
    Social-Democrats will explain that this slogan is absolutely false and
    meaningless without the revolutionary overthrow of the German, the Austrian
    and the Russian monarchies. 

Since Russia is most backward and has not yet completed its bourgeois
    revolution, it still remains the task of Social-Democrats in that country to
    achieve the three fundamental conditions for consistent democratic reform,
    viz., a democratic republic (with complete equality and self-determination
    for all nations), confiscation of the landed estates, and an eight-hour
    working day. But in all the advanced countries the war has placed on the
    order of the day the slogan of socialist revolution, a slogan that is the
    more urgent, the more heavily the burden of war presses upon the shoulders
    of the proletariat, and the more active its future role must become in the
    re-creation of Europe, after the horrors of the present
    “patriotic” barbarism in conditions of the tremendous
    technological progress of large-scale capitalism. The bourgeoisie’s
    use of wartime laws to gag the proletariat makes it imperative for the
    latter to create illegal forms of agitation and organisation. Let the
    opportunists “preserve” the legal organisations at the price of
    treachery to their convictions—revolutionary Social-Democrats will
    utilise the organisational experience and links of the working class so as
    to create illegal forms of struggle for socialism, forms appropriate to a
    period of crisis, and to unite the workers, not with the chauvinist
    bourgeoisie of their respective countries, but with the workers of all
    countries. The proletarian International has not gone under and will not go
    under. Notwithstanding all obstacles, the masses of the workers will create
    a new International. Opportunism’s present triumph will be
    short-lived. The greater the sacrifices imposed by the war the clearer will
    it become to the mass of the workers

    

that the opportunists have betrayed the
    workers’ cause and that the weapons must be turned against the
    government and the bourgeoisie of each country. 

The conversion of the present imperialist war into a civil war is the
    only correct proletarian slogan, one that follows from the experience of the
    Commune, and outlined in the Basle resolution (1912); it bas been dictated
    by all the conditions of an imperialist war between highly developed
    bourgeois countries. However difficult that transformation may seem at any
    given moment, socialists will never relinquish systematic, persistent and
    undeviating preparatory work in this direction now that war has become a
    fact. 

It is only along this path that the proletariat will be able to shake off
    its dependence on the chauvinist bourgeoisie, and, in one form or another
    and more or less rapidly, take decisivo steps towards genuine freedom for
    the nations and towards socialism. 

Long live the international fraternity of the workers against the
    chauvinism and patriotism of the bourgeoisie of all countries! 

Long live a proletarian International, freed from
    opportunism!

      Central Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The
    Stuttgart Congress of the Second Internationalwas held on August 18–24,
    1907. The R.S.D.L.P. delegation consisted of 37 members, the Bolshevik
    delegates including Lenin, Lunacharsky and Litvinov. 
The Congress conducted its main work in committees set up
    to draft resolutions for the plenary meetings. Lenin worked on the committee
    which drafted a resolution on “Militarism and International
    Conflicts”. Lenin and Rosa Luxemburg introduced into Bebel’s
    draft the historic amendment on the duty of the socialists to use the
    war-created crisis to arouse the masses for the overthrow of capitalism. The
    amendment was adopted by the Congress (concerning the Congress, see
    Lenin’s articles “The International Socialist Congress in
    Stuttgart” in Volume 13 of the present edition, pp. 75-81 and 82-93).
    
The Copenhagen Congress of the Second
    International was held between August 28 and September 3, 1910, the
    R.S.D.L.P: being represented by Lenin, Plekhanov, Lunacharsky, Kollontai,
    Pokrovsky and others. The Congress appointed, several committees for
    preliminary discussion and drafting of resolutions on the agenda
    items. Lenin worked on the co-operative committee. 
The Congress’s resolution “The Struggle
    Against Militarism and War” confirmed the Stuttgart Congress’s
    resolution on “Militarism and International Conflicts” and listed
    the demands to be advanced by the socialist parliamentary deputies: (a) all
    conflicts between states to be unfailingly submitted for settlement by
    international courts of arbitration, (b) general disarmament; (c) abolition
    of secret diplomacy; (d) autonomy for all nations and their protection
    against military attacks and oppression. 

The Basle Congress of the Second
    International was held on November 24–25, 1912. It was the extraordinary
    congress called in connection with the Balkan War and the imminent European
    war. The Congress adopted a manifesto emphasising the imperialist nature of
    the approaching world war, and called on the socialists of all countries to
    wage a vigorous struggle against war. (The Basle Manifesto is discussed on
    pp. 208-17, 307-08
    in this volume.) 



[2]
Socialist-Revolutionaries—a peasant-based party in Russia,
    founded at the end of 1901 and the beginning of 1902 as a result of the
    union of various Narodnik groups and circles (Union of Socialist
    Revolutionaries, the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, etc.). The newspaper
    Revolutsionnaya Rossiya (Revolutionary Russia ) (1900-05)
    and the journal Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii (Herald of the
    Russian Revolution ) (1901-05) became its official organs. The
    Socialist-Revolutionaries did not recognise the class differences between
    the proletariat and the petty proprietors, glossed over the class
    contradictions within the peasantry, and rejected the proletariat’s
    leading role in the revolution. The Socialist-Revolutionaries’ views
    were an eclectic mixture of the ideas of Narodism and revisionism; they
    tried, as Lenin put it, to patch up “the rents in the Narodnik ideas
    with bits of fashionable opportunist “criticism” of
    Marxism” (see present edition, Vol. 9, p. 310). 
The Bolshevik Party exposed the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries’ attempts to masquerade as socialists,
    conducted a determined struggle against the Socialist-Revolutionaries for
    influence over the peasantry, and showed how dangerous their tactic of
    individual terrorism was to the working-class movement. At the same time the
    Bolsheviks were prepared, on definite conditions, to enter into temporary
    agreements with the Socialist-Revolutionaries in the struggle against
    tsarism. As early as the first Russian revolution (1905-07), the Right wing
    of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party broke away and formed the legal
    Popular-Socialist Party, whose outlook was close to that of the Cadets, the
    Left wing forming the semi-anarchist league of Maximalists. In the period of
    reaction between 1907 and 1910, the Socialist-Revolutionary Party suffered a
    complete ideological and organisational breakdown. During the First World
    War most of its members took a social-chauvinist position.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Position and Tasks of the Socialist International









Lenin: The Position and Tasks of the Socialist International







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Position and Tasks of the Socialist International




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 33 November 1, 1914.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat, checked against the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 35-41.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



 

The gravest feature of the present crisis is that the
    majority of official representatives of European socialism have succumbed to
    bourgeois nationalism, to chauvinism. It is with good reason that the
    bourgeois press of all countries writes of them now with derision, now with
    condescending praise. To anyone who wants to remain a socialist there can be
    no more important duty than to reveal the causes of this crisis in socialism
    and analyse the tasks of the International. 

There are such that are afraid to admit that the crisis or, to put it
    more accurately, the collapse of the Second International is the collapse of
    opportunism. 

Reference is made to the unanimity, for instance, among French
    socialists, and to the fact that the old groups in socialism have supposedly
    changed their stands in the question of the war. Such references, however,
    are groundless. 

Advocacy of class collaboration; abandonment of the idea of socialist
    revolution and revolutionary methods of struggle; adaptation to bourgeois
    nationalism; losing sight of the fact that the borderlines of nationality
    and country are historically transient; making a fetish of bourgeois
    legality; renunciation of the class viewpoint and the class struggle, for
    fear of repelling the “broad masses of the population”(meaning
    the petty bourgeoisie)—such, doubtlessly, are the ideological
    foundations of opportunism. And it is from such soil that the present
    chauvinist and patriotic

    

frame of mind of most Second International leaders
    has developed. Observers representing the most various points of view have
    long noted that the opportunists are in fact prevalent in the Second
    International’s leadership. The war has merely brought out, rapidly
    and saliently, the true measure of this prevalence. There is nothing
    surprising in the extraordinary acuteness of the crisis having led to a
    series of reshufflings within the old groups. On the whole, however, such
    changes have affected only individuals. The trends within socialism have
    remained the same. 

Complete unanimity does not exist among French socialists. Even Vaillant,
    who, with Guesde, Plekhanov, Hervé and others, is following a
    chauvinist line, has had to admit that he has received a number of letters
    of protest from French socialists, who say that the war is imperialist in
    character and that the French bourgeoisie is to blame for its outbreak no
    less than the bourgeoisie of any other country. Nor should it be overlooked
    that these voices of protest are being smothered, not only by triumphant
    opportunism, but also by the military censorship. With the British, the
    Hyndman group (the British Social-Democrats—the British Socialist
    Party [2])
    has completely sunk into chauvinism, as have also most of the semi-liberal
    leaders of the trade unions. Resistance to chauvinism has come from
    MacDonald and Keir Hardie of the opportunist Independent Labour
Party.[3] This, of
    course, is an exception to the rule. However, certain revolutionary
    Social-Democrats who have long been in opposition to Hyndman have now left
    the British Socialist Party. With the Germans the situation is clear: the
    opportunists have won; they are jubilant, and feel quite in their
    element. Headed by Kautsky, the “Centre” has succumbed to
    opportunism and is defending it with the most hypocritical, vulgar and smug
    sophistry. Protests have come from the revolutionary
    Social-Democrats—Mehring, Pannekoek, Karl Liebknecht, and a number of
    unidentified voices in Germany and German-speaking Switzerland. In Italy,
    the line-up is clear too: the extreme opportunists, Bissolati and Co. stand
    for “fatherland”, for Guesde-Vaillant-Plekhanov-Hervé. The
    revolutionary Social-Democrats (the Socialist Party), with Avanti!
    at their head, are combating chauvinism and are exposing the bourgeois and
    selfish nature of the calls for

    

war. They have the support of the vast
    majority of progressive
workers.[4] In Russia, the extreme opportunists of the
    liquidators’
camp[5] have already raised their voices, in public
    lectures and the press, in defence of chauvinism. P. Maslov and Y. Smirnov
    are defending tsarism on the pretext that the fatherland must be
    defended. (Germany, you see, is threatening to impose trade agreements on
    “us” at swordpoint, whereas tsarism, we are expected to believe,
    has not been using the sword, the knout and the gallows to stifle the
    economic, political and national life of nine-tenths of Russia’s
    population!) They justify socialists participating in reactionary bourgeois
    governments, and their approval of war credits today and more armaments
    tomorrow! Plekhanov has slid into nationalism, and is endeavouring to mask
    his Russian chauvinism with a Francophile attitude, and so has Alexinsky. To
    judge from the Paris
Golos,[6] Martov is behaving with more
    decency than the rest of this crowd, and has come out in opposition to both
    German and French chauvinism, to Vorwärts, Mr. Hyndman and
    Maslov, but is afraid to come out resolutely against international
    opportunism as a whole, and against the German Social-Democratic Centrist
    group, its most “influential” champion. The attempts to present
    volunteer service in the army as performance of a socialist duty (see the
    Paris declaration of a group of Russian volunteers consisting of
    Social-Democrats and Socialist-Revolutionaries, and also a declaration by
    Polish Social-Democrats,  Leder, and others) have had the backing of
    Plekhanov alone. These attempts have been condemned by the majority of our
    Paris Party
group.[7] The leading article in
    this
issue[1]

will inform readers of our Party Central Committee’s
    stand. To preclude any misunderstanding, the following facts relating to the
    history of our Party’s views and their formulation must be stated
    here. After overcoming tremendous difficulties in re-establishing
    organisational contacts broken by the war, a group of Party members first
    drew up “theses” and on September 6-8 (New Style) had them
    circulated among the comrades. Then they were sent to two delegates to the
    Italo-Swiss Conference in Lugano (September 27), through Swiss
    Social-Democrats. It was only in

    

mid-October that it became possible to
      re-establish contacts and formulate the viewpoint of the Party’s
      Central Committee. The leading article in this issue represents the final
      wording of the “theses”.

Such, briefly, is the present state of affairs in the European and the
    Russian Social-Democratic movement. The collapse of the International is a
    fact. It has been proved conclusively by the polemic, in the press, between
    the French and German socialists, and acknowledged, not only by the Left
    Social-Democrats (Mehring and
    Bremer Bürger Zeitung ), but by moderate Swiss papers
    (Volksrecht ). Kautsky’s attempts to cover up this collapse
    are a cowardly subterfuge. The collapse of the International is clearly the
    collapse of opportunism, which is now captive to the bourgeoisie. 

The bourgeoisie’s stand is clear. It is no less clear that the
    opportunists are simply echoing bourgeois arguments. In addition to what has
    been said in the leading article, we need only mention the insulting
    statements in Die Neue Zeit, suggesting that internationalism
    consists in the workers of one country shooting down the workers of another
    country, allegedly in defence of the fatherland! 

The question of the fatherland—we shall reply to the
    opportunists—cannot be posed without due consideration of the concrete
    historical nature of the present war. This is an imperialist war, i.e., it
    is being waged at a time of the highest development of capitalism, a time of
    its approaching end. The working class must first “constitute itself
    within the nation”, the 
    Communist Manifesto declares, emphasising the limits and conditions
    of our recognition of nationality and fatherland as essential forms of the
    bourgeois system, and, consequently, of the bourgeois fatherland. The
    opportunists distort that truth by extending to the period of the end of
    capitalism that which was true of the period of its rise. With reference to
    the former period and to the tasks of the proletariat in its struggle to
    destroy, not feudalism but capitalism, the 
    Communist Manifesto gives a clear and precise formula: “The
    workingmen have no country.” One can well understand why the
    opportunists are so afraid to accept this socialist proposition, afraid
    even, in most cases, openly to reckon with it. The socialist movement cannot
    triumph within the old framework of the fatherland. It creates new

    

and
    superior forms of human society, in which the legitimate needs and
    progressive aspirations of the working masses of each nationality
    will, for the first time, be met through international unity, provided
    existing national partitions are removed. To the present-day
    bourgeoisie’s attempts to divide and disunite them by means of
    hypocritical appeals for the “defence of the fatherland” the
    class-conscious workers will reply with ever new and persevering efforts to
    unite the workers of various nations in the struggle to overthrow the rule
    of the bourgeoisie of all nations. 

The bourgeoisie is duping the masses by disguising imperialist rapine
    with the old ideology of a “national war”. This deceit is being
    shown up by the proletariat, which has brought forward its slogan of turning
    the imperialist war into a civil war. This was the slogan of the Stuttgart
    and Basle resolutions, which had in mind, not war in general, but precisely
    the present war and spoke, not of “defence of the fatherland”,
    but of “hastening the downfall of capitalism”, of utilising the
    war-created crisis for this purpose, and of the example provided by the
    Paris Commune. The latter was an instance of a war of nations being turned
    into a civil war. 

Of course, such a conversion is no easy matter and cannot be accomplished
    at the whim of one party or another. That conversion, however, is inherent
    in the objective conditions of capitalism in general, and of the period of
    the end of capitalism in particular. It is in that direction, and that
    direction alone, that socialists must conduct their activities. It is not
    their business to vote for war credits or to encourage chauvinism in their
    “own” country (and allied countries), but primarily to strive
    against the chauvinism of their “own” bourgeoisie, without
    confining themselves to legal forms of struggle when the crisis has matured
    and the bourgeoisie has itself taken away the legality it has created. Such
    is the line of action that leads to civil war, and will bring about
    civil war at one moment or another of the European conflagration. 

War is no chance happening, no “sin” as is thought by
    Christian priests (who are no whit behind the opportunists in preaching
    patriotism, humanity and peace), but an inevitable stage of capitalism, just
    as legitimate a form of the

    

capitalist way of life as peace
    is. Present-day war is a people’s war. What follows from this truth is
    not that we must swim with the “popular” current of chauvinism,
    but that the class contradictions dividing the nations continue to exist in
    wartime and manifest themselves in conditions of war. Refusal to serve with
    the forces, anti-war strikes, etc., are sheer nonsense, the miserable and
    cowardly dream of an unarmed struggle against the armed bourgeoisie, vain
    yearning for the destruction of capitalism without a desperate civil war or
    a series of wars. It is the duty of every socialist to conduct propaganda of
    the class struggle, in the army as well; work directed towards turning a war
    of the nations into civil war is the only socialist activity in the era of
    an imperialist armed conflict of the bourgeoisie of all nations. Down with
    mawkishly sanctimonious and fatuous appeals for “peace at any price"!
    Let us raise high the banner of civil war! Imperialism sets at hazard the
    fate of European culture: this war will soon be followed by others, unless
    there are a series of successful revolutions. The story about this being the
    “last war” is a hollow and dangerous fabrication, a piece of
    philistine “mythology”(as Golos aptly puts it). The
    proletarian banner of civil war will rally together, not only hundreds of
    thousands of class-conscious workers but millions of semi-proletarians and
    petty bourgeois, now deceived by chauvinism, but whom the horrors of war
    will not only intimidate and depress, but also enlighten, teach, arouse,
    organise, steel and prepare for the war against the bourgeoisie of their
    “own” country and “foreign” countries. And this will
    take place, if not today, then tomorrow, if not during the war, then after
    it, if not in this war then in the next one. 

The Second International is dead, overcome by opportunism. Down with
    opportunism, and long live the Third International, purged not only of
    “turncoats”(as Golos wishes), but of opportunism as
    well. 

The Second International did its share of useful preparatory work in
    preliminarily organising the proletarian masses during the long,
    “peaceful” period of the most brutal capitalist slavery and most
    rapid capitalist progress in the last third of the nineteenth and the
    beginning of the twentieth centuries. To the Third International falls the
    task

    

of organising the proletarian forces for a revolutionary onslaught
    against the capitalist governments, for civil war against the bourgeoisie of
    all countries for the capture of political power, for the triumph of
    socialism!


 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 25–34 of this volume.—Ed.

 



[2]
The British
    Socialist Party was founded in 1911, in Manchester, as a result of the
    Social-Democratic Federation merging with other socialist groups. The
    B.S.P. carried on its propaganda in the Marxist spirit, was “not
    opportunist, and . . . was really independent of the
    Liberals” (see present edition, Vol. 19, p. 273  Its small membership,
    however, and its isolation from the masses gave it a somewhat sectarian
    character.
During the First World War, a sharp struggle flared up in
    the party between the internationalist trend (William Gallacher, Albert
    Inkpin, John Maclean, Thomas Rothstein and others) and the social-chauvinist
    trend led by Hyndman. On a number of

   

questions a section of the
    internationalists held Centrist views. In February 1916 a group of party
    members founded the newspaper The Call, which was instrumental in
    uniting the internationalist elements. When, at its Salford conference in
    April 1916, the Party denounced the social-chauvinist stand held by Hyndman
    and his followers, the latter broke away from the Party.
The British Socialist Party acclaimed the October
    Socialist Revolution in Russia, its members playing a prominent role in the
    British working people’s movement in support of Soviet Russia, and
    against the foreign intervention. In 1919 the majority of the local Party
    branches (98 against 4) declared for affiliation to the Communist
    International. 
The British Socialist Party and the Communist unity group
    played the leading part in founding the Communist Party of Great Britain. At
    the first Unity Congress of 1920 the overwhelming majority of the
    B.S.P. branches merged in the newly founded Communist Party.



[3]
The
    Independent Labour Partya reformist party founded by the leaders of
    “new trade unions” in 1893, when the strike struggle revived and
    there was a mounting drive for a labour movement independent of the
    bourgeois parties. The Party included members of the “new trade
    unions” and a number of the old trade unions, representatives of the
    professions and the petty bourgeoisie, who were under Fabian influence. The
    Party’s leader was James Keir Hardie. 
From its early days the Independent Labour Party held a
    bourgeois-reformist stand, concentrating on the parliamentary forms of
    struggle and parliamentary deals with the Liberals. Characterising this
    party, Lenin wrote that it was “actually an opportunist party that has
    always been dependent on the bourgeoisie” (V. I. Lenin, On
    Britain, Moscow, p. 401).
 When the First World War broke out, the Party issued an
    anti-war manifesto, but shortly afterwards took a social-chauvinist
    stand.



[4]

See Note 20 in Position and Tasks of
      the Socialist International.




[5]
For
    liquidators see pp. 333-34 of this
    volume.



[6]
Golos (The Voice )—a daily Menshevik paper, published
    in Paris from September 1914 to January 1915, which followed a Centrist
    line. 
 In the early days of the war of 1914-18 Golos
    published several of Martov’s articles directed against
    social-chauvinists. After Martov’s swing to the Right, the newspaper
    came out in defence of the social-chauvinists, preferring “unity with
    the social-chauvinists to drawing closer to those who are irreconcilably
    hostile to social chauvinism” (p. 113 in this volume) 
 In January 1915 Golos ceased publication and
    was replaced by Nashe Slovo (Our Word ). 



[7]
The
    Paris group or group for aid the R.S.D.L.P. was formed on November 5
    (18), 1908. It separated from the common Menshevik and Bolshevik Paris
    group, to unite Bolsheviks alone. It was later joined by pro-Party
    Mensheviks and Vperyod supporters. 
 During the war the group consisted of N. A. Semashko,
    M. F. Vladimirsky, I. F. Armand, S. I. Gopner, L. N. Stal, V. K. Taratula,
    A. S. Shapovalov and others. Led by Lenin, the group took an
    internationalist stand and waged a vigorous struggle against the imperialist
    war and the opportunists. 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Letter to Vorwärts and Wiener Arbeiter-Zeitung









Lenin: Letter to Vorwärts and Wiener Arbeiter-Zeitung







V. I.  

      Lenin
Letter to Vorwärts and Wiener Arbeiter-Zeitung




Published:

      First published in 1930, in Lenin Miscellany XIV.

      Translated from the German.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      page 42.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Dear Comrades:


Some days ago, Vorwärts published a brief item regarding the
    paper I read in Zurich, on the subject of war and social-ism, and conveying
    an entirely false impression of that paper. The impression is created that I
    limited myself to a polemic against tsarism. In actual fact, however, as one
    who is convinced that it is the duty of the socialists of every country to
    wage an unrelenting struggle against the chauvinism and patriotism of their
    own country (and not only of the enemy), I vehemently attacked tsarism, and,
    in that connection, I spoke of freedom for the Ukraine. However, the sense
    of my argument may be utterly distorted if no mention is made of what I said
    of opportunism and the collapse of the Second International, and against the
    stand taken by the Social-Democrats of Germany and Austria. Nine-tenths of
    my paper, whose reading lasted two hours, dealt with that criticism.

I would be grateful for publication, in Vorwärts, of the
    omissions I have named
(or...).[1]

With Social-Democratic greetings

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The notes
    on Lenin’s report referred to in the article were published in
    Vorwärts No. 308 of November 10 and in Wienner
    Arbeiter-Zeitung No. 309 of November 7, 1914. On November 22, 1914, the
    Vorwärts editorial board published a brief note replying to
    Lenin’s letter, claiming that the report had criticised the stand
    taken by the German and Austrian Social-Democrats and gave an appraisal of
    the Second International’s collapse.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## KARL 











Index to Lenin's 'Karl Marx'




Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Karl Marx
A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism


Written: 1914
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Moscow, 1974,
  Volume 21, pp. 43-91.
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: 1915 in the Granat Encyclopaedia, 
  Seventh Edition, Vol. 28, over the signature of V. Ilyin.
      Published according to the manuscript, checked against the text of the pamphlet of 1918.
Translated: Clemence Dutt
Edited: Stewart Smith
Original Transcription:
Zodiac
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters, 
  B. Baggins, 
  R. Cymbala, and
  Kevin Goins
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008).You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

Lenin wrote this article for the Encyclopaedia
    Dictionary published by the Granat Brothers, which was then the most popular
    in Russia. In the preface for the pamphlet edition in 1918 Lenin gave the
    date of writing as 1913, from memory. Actually, he began it in the spring of
    1914 in Poronin, but had to interrupt it, being too busy with his work
    guiding the Party and the newspaper Pravda. Lenin resumed his work
    on the aritcle only in September that year, after he had moved to Berne, and
    finished it in the first half of November.
The aritcle was published in 1915 in Volume 28 of the
    Dictionary with Bibliography of Marxism appended to it; it
    was signed V. Ilyin. For censorship reasons, the editors omitted
    two chapters: Socialism and Tactics of the Class Struggle of
    the Proletariat and made a number of changes in the text.
In 1918, the Priboi Publishers put out the article in
    pamphlet form exactly as published in the Dictionary but without
    the “Bibliography.”
The full text of the article according to the manuscript was
    first published by the Lenin Institute of the C.P.S.U. Central Committee in
    the collection of Lenin’s articles Marx, Engels, Marxism,
    which appeared in 1925.

Note that this document has undergone special formating to ensure that 
Lenin’s sidenotes fit on the page, marking as best as possible 
where they were located in the original manuscript.

 

Contents




Preface




Marx, Karl, was born...




The Marxist Doctrine




Marx’s Economic Doctrine




Socialism




Tactics of the Class Struggle 
  of the Proletariat




Bibliography




 
 







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 



==========

## Preface




Lenin's Karl Marx: Preface








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Karl Marx
A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism





Preface

      This article on Karl Marx, which now appears in a separate printing, was
      written in 1913 (as far as I can remember) for the Granat
  Encyclopaedia. A fairly detailed bibliography of literature on Marx,
      mostly foreign, was appended to the article. This has been omitted in the
      present edition. The editor of the Encyclopaedia, for their part, have, for
      censorship reasons, deleted the end of the article on Marx, namely, the
      section dealing with his revolutionary tactics. Unfortunately, I am unable
      to reproduce that end, because the draft has remained among my papers
      somewhere in Krakow or in Switzerland. I only remember that in the
      concluding part of the article I quoted, among other things, the passage
      from Marx’s letter to Engels of April 16, 1856, in which he
      wrote: “The whole thing in Germany will depend on the possibility 
  of backing the proletarian revolution by some second edition of the Peasant 
  War. Then the affair will be splendid.”
      That is what our Mensheviks, who have now sunk to utter betrayal of socialism 
  and to desertion to the bourgeoisie, have failed to understand since 1905.
    
N. Lenin 
Moscow, May 14, 1918
 


Published in 1918 in the pamphlet: N. Lenin,
Karl Marx, Priobi Publishers, Moscow
  Published according to the manuscript



 


 
 
 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## I




Lenin's Karl Marx: I: Marx, Karl, was born...








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Karl Marx
A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism



Marx, Karl, was born...




      Marx, Karl, was born on May 5, 1818 (New Style), in the city of Trier
      (Rhenish Prussia). His father was a lawyer, a Jew, who in 1824 adopted
      Protestantism. The family was well-to-do, cultured, but not
      revolutionary. After graduating from a Gymnasium in Trier, Marx
      entered the university, first at Bonn and later in Berlin, where he read
      law, majoring in history and philosophy. He concluded his university
      course in 1841, submitting a doctoral thesis on the philosophy of
      Epicurus. At the time Marx was a Hegelian idealist in his views. In
      Berlin, he belonged to the circle of “Left Hegelians”
    (Bruno Bauer and others) who sought to draw atheistic and revolutionary 
    conclusion from Hegel’s philosophy.

    After graduating, Marx moved to Bonn, hoping to become a
      professor. However, the reactionary policy of the government, which deprived
      Ludwig Feuerbach of his chair in 1832, refused to allow him to return to the
      university in 1836, and in 1841 forbade young Professor Bruno Bauer to
      lecture at Bonn, made Marx abandon the idea of an academic career. Left
      Hegelian views were making rapid headway in Germany at the time. Feuerbach
      began to criticize theology, particularly after 1836, and turn to
      materialism, which in 1841 gained ascendancy in his philosophy (The
      Essence of Christianity). The year 1843 saw the appearance of his 
    Principles of the Philosophy of the Future. “One must oneself 
    have experienced the
      liberating effect” of these books, Engels subsequently wrote of
      these works of Feuerbach. “We [i.e., the Left Hegelians, including
      Marx] all became at once Feuerbachians.” At that time, some radical
      bourgeois in the Rhineland, who were in touch with the Left Hegelians,
      founded, in Cologne, an opposition paper called Rheinische
      Zeitung (The first issue appeared on January 1, 1842). Marx

 

  and Bruno Bauer were invited to be the chief contributors, and
      in October 1842 Marx became editor-in-chief and moved from Bonn to
      Cologne. The newspaper’s revolutionary-democratic trend became more and more
      pronounced under Marx’s editorship, and the government first imposed
      double and triple censorship on the paper, and then on January 1 1843
      decided to suppress it. Marx had to resign the editorship before that
      date, but his resignation did not save the paper, which suspended
      publication in March 1843. Of the major articles Marx contributed to
      Rheinische Zeitung, Engels notes, in addition to those indicated
      below (see Bibliography),[1]
  an article on the condition of peasant winegrowers in the Moselle
  Valley.[2] Marx’s 
  journalistic activities convinced him that he was insufficiently acquainted 
  with political economy, and he zealously set out to study it.

  In 1843, Marx married, at Kreuznach, a childhood friend he had become
      engaged to while still a student. His wife came of a reactionary family of
      the Prussian nobility, her elder brother being Prussia’s Minister of
      the Interior during a most reactionary period—1850-58. In the autumn
      of 1843, Marx went to Paris in order to publish a radical journal abroad,
      together with Arnold Ruge (1802-1880); Left Hegelian; in prison in
      1825-30; a political exile following 1848, and a Bismarckian after
      1866-70). Only one issue of this journal, Deutsch-Französische
      Jahrbücher, appeared;[3] publication was discontinued owing to 
  the difficulty of secretly distributing it in Germany, and to disagreement
  with Ruge. Marx’s articles in this journal showed that he was
      already a revolutionary who advocated “merciless criticism of
      everything existing”, and in particular the “criticism by
  weapon”,[13] and appealed to the 
  masses and to the proletariat.




      In September 1844, Frederick Engels came to Paris for a few days, and from
      that time on became Marx’s closest friend. They both took a most
      active part in the then seething life of the revolutionary groups in Paris
      (of particular importance at the time was Proudhon’s[4] doctrine), which Marx pulled to pieces 
  in his Poverty
      of Philosophy, 1847); waging a vigorous struggle against the
      various doctrines of petty-bourgeois socialism, they worked out the theory
      and tactics of revolutionary proletarian socialism, or communism

 

  Marxism). See Marx’s works of this period, 1844-48 in the
      Bibliography. At the insistent request of the Prussian
      government, Marx was banished from Paris in 1845, as a dangerous
      revolutionary. He went to Brussels. In the spring of 1847 Marx and Engels
      joined a secret propaganda society called the Communist League;[5] they took a
      prominent part in the League’s Second Congress (London, November
      1847), at whose request they drew up the celebrated Communist
      Manifesto, which appeared in February 1848. With the clarity and
      brilliance of genius, this work outlines a new world-conception,
      consistent with materialism, which also embrace the realm of social life;
      dialectics, as the most comprehensive and profound doctrine of
      development; the theory of the class struggle and of the world-historic
      revolutionary role of the proletariat—the creator of a new,
      communist society.
On the outbreak of the Revolution of February 1848,[6] Marx was banished from Belgium. 
  He returned to Paris, whence, after the March Revolution,[7] he went to Cologne, Germany, where 
  Neue Rheinische Zeitung[8] was published
      from June 1, 1848, to May 19, 1849, with Marx as editor-in-chief. The new
      theory was splendidly confirmed by the course of the revolutionary events of
      1848-49, just as it has been subsequently confirmed by all proletarian and
      democratic movements in all countries of the world. The victorious
      counter-revolution first instigated court proceedings against Marx (he was
      acquitted on February 9, 1849), and then banished him from Germany (May 16,
      1849). First Marx went to Paris, was again banished after the demonstration
      of June 13, 1849,[9] and then went to London, 
    where he lived until his death.

    His life as a political exile was a very hard one, as the correspondence
      between Marx and Engels (published in 1913) clearly reveals. Poverty weighed
      heavily on Marx and his family; had it not been for Engels’ constant
      and selfless financial aid, Marx would not only have been unable to complete
      Capital
      but would have inevitably have been crushed by want. Moreover, the
      prevailing doctrines and trends of petty-bourgeois socialism, and of
      non-proletarian socialism in general, forced Marx to wage a continuous and
      merciless struggle and sometime to repel the most savage and monstrous

 

  personal attacks (Herr Vogt).[10] Marx, who stood aloof from circles
      of political exiles, developed his materialist theory in a number of
      historical works (see Bibliography), 
  devoting himself mainly to a study of political economy. Marx revolutionized 
  science (see “The Marxist Doctrine”, below) in his Contribution
      to the Critique of Political Economy (1859) and Capital
      (Vol. I, 1867).

      The revival of the democratic movements in the late fifties and in the
      sixties recalled Marx to practical activity. In 1864 (September 28) the
      International Working Men’s Association—the celebrated First
      International—was founded in London. Marx was the heart and soul of
      this organization, and author of its first Address[11] and of a host of resolutions,
      declaration and manifestoes. In uniting the labor movement of various forms
      of non-proletarian, pre-Marxist socialism (Mazzini, Proudhon, Bakunin,
      liberal trade-unionism in Britain, Lassallean vacillations to the right in
      Germany, etc.), and in combating the theories of all these sects and
      schools, Marx hammered out a uniform tactic for the proletarian struggle of
      the working in the various countries. Following the downfall of the Paris
      Commune (1871)—of which gave such a profound, clear-cut, brilliant
      effective and revolutionary analysis (The
      Civil War In France, 1871)—and the Bakunin-caused[12] cleavage in
      the International, the latter organization could no longer exist in
      Europe. After the Hague Congress of the International (1872), Marx had the
      General Council of the International had played its historical part, and now
      made way for a period of a far greater development of the labor movement in
      all countries in the world, a period in which the movement grew in
      scope, and mass socialist working-class parties in
      individual national states were formed.

    Marx’s health was undermined by his strenuous work in the
      International and his still more strenuous theoretical occupations. He
      continued work on the refashioning of political economy and on the
      completion of Capital, for which he collected a mass of new
      material and studied a number of languages (Russian, for instance). However,
      ill-health prevented him from completing Capital.


      His wife died on December 2, 1881, and on March 14, 1883, Marx passed away
      peacefully in his armchair. He lies buried next to his wife at Highgate
      Cemetery in London. Of Marx’s children some died in childhood in
      London, when the family were living in destitute circumstances. Three
      daughters married English and French socialists; Eleanor Aveling, Laura
      Lafargue and Jenny Longuet. The latters’ son is a member of the
      French Socialist Party.
      
 
 

Notes
 

[1] This “Bibliography” 
written by Lenin for the article is not included. —Ed.

[2] The reference 
is to the article “Justification of the Correspondent from the Mosel” 
by Karl Marx.—Ed.

[3] The reference 
is to the Deutsch-Franzosische
    Jahrbucher (German-French Annals), a magazine edited by Karl Marx and
    Arnold Ruge and published in German in Paris. Only the first issue, a double
    one, appeared, in February 1844. It included works by Karl Marx and
    Frederick Engels which marked the final transition of Marx and Engels to
    materialism and communism. Publication of the magazine was discontinued
    mainly as a result of basic differences of opinion between Marx and the
    bourgeois radical Ruge.—Ed.

[4] Proudhonism—An 
unscientific trend in petty-bourgeois
    socialism, hostile to Marxism, so called after its ideologist, the French
    anarchist Pierre Joseph Proudhon. Proudhon criticized big capitalist
    property from the petty-bourgeois position and dreamed of perpetuating small
    private ownership. He proposed the foundation of
    “people’s” and “exchange” banks, with the aid
    of which the workers would be able to acquire the means of production,
    become handicraftsmen and ensure the just marketing of their
    produce. Proudhon did not understand the historic role of the proletariat
    and displayed a negative attitude to the class struggle, the proletarian
    revolution, and the dictatorship of the proletariat; as an anarchist, he
    denied the need for the state. Marx subjected Proudhonism to ruthless
    criticism in his work The
    Poverty of Philosophy.—Ed.

[5] The Communist
    League—The first international communist organization of the
    proletariat founded under the guidance of Marx and Engels in London early in
    June 1847.
 Marx and Engels helped to work out the programmatic and
    organizational principles of the League; they wrote its programme—the
    Manifesto
    of the Communist Party, published in February 1848.
 The Communist League was the predecessor of the International
    Working Men’s Association (The First International). It existed until
    November 1852, its prominent members later playing a leading role in the
    First International.—Ed.

[6] The reference is to 
the bourgeois revolutions in Germany and Austria which began in March 
1848.—Ed.

[7] The reference is to 
the bourgeois revolution in France in February 1848.—Ed.

[8] Die Neue Rheinische
    Zeitung (New Rhenish Gazette)—Published in Cologne from June
    1, 1848, to May 19, 1849. Marx and Engels directed the newspaper, Marx being
    its editor-in-chief. Lenin characterized Die Neue Rheinische
    Zeitung as “the finest and unsurpassed organ of the revolutionary
    proletariat”. Despite persecution and the obstacles placed in its way by the
    police, the newspaper staunchly defended the interests of revolutionary
    democracy, the interests of the proletariat. Because of Marx’s
    banishment from Prussia in May 1849 and the persecution of the other
    editors. Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung had to cease 
publication.—Ed.

[9] The reference is 
to the mass demonstration in Paris organized by the Montagne, the party of 
the petty bourgeoisie, in protest against the infringement by the President 
and the majority in the Legislative Assembly of the constitutional orders
    established in the revolution of 1848. The demonstration was dispersed by
    the government.—Ed.

[10] The reference 
is to Marx’s pamphlet Herr Vogt, which was written in reply 
to the slanderous pamphlet by Vogt, a Bonapartist agent provocateur, My 
Process Against “Allgemeine Zeitung”.—Ed.

[11] The First International 
Workingmen’s Association was the first international tendency that grouped 
together all the worlds’ workers parties in one unified international 
party.—Ed.

[12] Bakuninism—A
    trend called after its leader Mikhail Bakunin, an ideologist of anarchism
    and enemy of Marxism and scientific socialism.—Ed.



[13] These
words are from Marx’s “Critique of
the Hegelian Philosophy of Right: Introduction.” The relevant 
passage reads: “The weapon of criticism cannot, of course, replace 
criticism by weapon, material force must be overthrown by a material force; 
but theory, too, becomes a material force, as soon as it grips the 
masses.”—Lenin

 



 

Works Index | 
  Volume 21 | Collected Works | L.I.A. Index

  < backward

  forward >
 



==========

## II






Lenin's Karl Marx: II: The Marxist Doctrine






Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Karl Marx
A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism



The Marxist Doctrine

     Marxism is the system of Marx’s views and teachings. Marx was the
      genius who continued and consummated the three main ideological currents of
      the 19th century, as represented by the three most advanced countries of
      mankind: classical German philosophy, classical English political economy,
      and French socialism combined with French revolutionary doctrines in
      general. Acknowledged even by his opponents, the remarkable consistency and
      integrity of Marx’s views, whose totality constitutes modern
      materialism and modern scientific socialism, as the theory and programme of
      the working-class movement in all the civilized countries of the world, make
      it incumbent on us to present a brief outline of his world-conception in
      general, prior to giving an exposition of the principal content of Marxism,
      namely, Marx’s economic doctrine.
    
Philosophical Materialism


  
      Beginning with the years 1844–45, when his views took shape, Marx was a
      materialist and especially a follower of Ludwig Feuerbach, whose weak point
      he subsequently saw only in his materialism being insufficiently consistent
      and comprehensive. To Marx, Feuerbach’s historic and
      “epoch-making” significance lay in his having resolutely broken
      with Hegel’s idealism and in his proclamation of materialism, which
      already “in the 18th century, particularly French materialism, was not
      only a struggle against the existing political institutions and
      against... religion and
  
   
  
    theology, but also... against all metaphysics”
      (in the sense of “drunken speculation” as distinct from
      “sober philosophy”). (The Holy
      Family, in Literarischer Nachlass[1])
      “To Hegel... ,” wrote Marx, “the process of thinking,
      which, under the name of ‘the Idea’, he even transforms into
      an independent subject, is the demiurgos (the creator, the maker) of the
      real world.... With me, on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than
      the material world reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms
      of thought.” (Capital,
      Vol. I, Afterward to
      the Second Edition.) In full conformity with this materialist
      philosophy of Marx’s, and expounding it, Frederick Engels wrote in
      Anti-Duhring
      (read by Marx in the manuscript):

      “The real unity of the world consists in its materiality, and this
      is proved... by a long and wearisome development of philosophy and natural
      science....”

      “Motion is the mode of existence of matter. Never anywhere has there
      been matter without motion, or motion without matter, nor can there
      be.... Bit if the... question is raised: what thought and consciousness
      really are, and where they come from; it becomes apparent that they are
      products of the human brain and that man himself is a product of Nature,
      which has developed in and along with its environment; hence it is
      self-evident that the products of the human brain, being in the last
      analysis also products of Nature, do not contradict the rest of
      Nature’s interconnections but are in correspondence with
      them....

  “Hegel was an idealist, that is to say, the thoughts within his
      mind were to him not the more or less abstract images [Abbilder,
      reflections; Engels sometimes speaks of “imprints”] of real things and
      processes, but on the contrary, things and their development were to him
      only the images, made real, of the “Idea” existing somewhere or
      other before the world existed.”

      In his Ludwig Feuerbach—which expounded his own and
      Marx’s views on Feuerbach’s philosophy, and was sent to the
      printers after he had re-read an old manuscript Marx and himself had
      written in 1844-45 on Hegel, Feuerbach and the materialist conception of
      history—Engels wrote:

      “The great basic question of all philosophy, especially of more
      recent philosophy, is the relation of thinking and being... spirit to
      Nature... which

 

  is primary, spirit or Nature.... The answers which the
      philosophers gave to this question split them into two great camps. Those
      who asserted the primary of spirit to Nature and, therefore, in the last
      instance, assumed world creation in some form or other... comprised the
      camp of idealism. The others, who regarded Nature as primary, belonged to
      the various schools of materialism.”

  Any other use of the concepts of (philosophical) idealism and materialism
      leads only to confusion. Marx decidedly rejected, not only idealism, which
      is always linked in one way or another with religion, but also the
      views—especially widespread in our day—of Hume and Kant,
      agnosticism, criticism, and positivism[2] in their various 
  forms; he considered that philosophy a “reactionary” concession 
  to idealism, and at best a “shame-faced way of surreptitiously accepting 
  materialism, while denying it before the world.”[3]

  On this question, see, besides the
      works by Engels and Marx mentioned above, a letter Marx wrote to Engels on
      December 12, 1868, in which, referring to an utterance by the naturalist
      Thomas Huxley, which was “more materialistic” than usual, and
      to his recognition that “as long as we actually observe and think,
      we cannot possibly get away from materialism”, Marx reproached Huxley for
      leaving a “loop hole” for agnosticism, for Humism.

      It is particularly important to note Marx’s view on the relation
      between freedom and necessity: “Freedom is the appreciation of
      necessity. ‘Necessity is blind only insofar as it is not
      understood.’” (Engels in Anti-Duhring)
      This means recognition of the rule of objective laws in Nature and of the 
  dialectical transformation of necessity into freedom (in the same manner 
  as the transformation of the uncognized but cognizable
      “thing-in-itself” into the “thing-for-us”, of the
      “essence of things” into “phenomena”). Marx and Engels
      considered that the “old” materialism, including that of
      Feuerbach (and still more the “vulgar” materialism of Buchner,
      Vogt and Moleschott), contained the following major shortcomings:



  (1)
    
   
  (2)
    
   
  (3)


  this materialism was “predominantly mechanical,” failing
      to take account of the latest developments in chemistry and biology
      (today it would be necessary to add: and in the electrical theory of
      matter);

  the old materialism was non-historical and non-dialectical
      (metaphysical, in the meaning

 

  of anti-dialectical), and did not adhere
      consistently and comprehensively to the standpoint of
      development;
  
  it regarded the “human essence” in the abstract, not as
      the “complex of all” (concretely and historically
      determined) “social relations”, and therefore merely
      “interpreted” the world, whereas it was a question of
      “changing” it, i.e., it did not understand the importance
      of “revolutionary practical activity”.
  


Dialectics

 
As the most comprehensive and profound doctrine of development, and the
    richest in content, Hegelian dialectics was considered by Marx and Engels
    the greatest achievement of classical German philosophy. They thought that
    any other formulation of the principle of development, of evolution, was
    one-sided and poor in content, and could only distort and mutilate the
    actual course of development (which often proceeds by leaps, and via
    catastrophes and revolutions) in Nature and in society.

    “Marx and I were pretty well the only people to rescue conscious
    dialectics [from the destruction of idealism, including Hegelianism] and
    apply it in the materialist conception of Nature.... Nature is the proof of
    dialectics, and it must be said for modern natural science that it has
    furnished extremely rich [this was written before the discovery of radium,
    electrons, the transmutation of elements, etc.!] and daily increasing
    materials for this test, and has thus proved that in the last analysis
    Nature’s process is dialectical and not metaphysical.

“ The great basic thought,” Engels writes, “that the
world is not to be comprehended as a complex of ready-made things, but as a
    complex of processes, in which the things apparently stable no less than
    their mind images in our heads, the concepts, go through an uninterrupted
    change of coming into being and passing away... this great fundamental
    thought has, especially since the time of Hegel, so thoroughly permeated
    ordinary consciousness that in this generality it is now scarcely ever
    contradicted. But to acknowledge this fundamental thought in words and to
    apply it in reality in detail to each domain of investigation are two
    different things.... For dialectical philosophy nothing is final, absolute,

 

    sacred. It reveals the transitory character of everything and in everything;
    nothing can endure before it except the uninterrupted process of becoming
    and of passing away, of endless ascendancy from the lower to the higher. And
    dialectical philosophy itself is nothing more than the mere reflection of
    this process in the thinking brain.” Thus, according to Marx,
    dialectics is “the science of the general laws of motion, both of the
    external world and of human thought.”[4]

This revolutionary aspect of Hegel’s philosophy was adopted and
    developed by Marx. Dialectical materialism “does not need any
    philosophy standing above the other sciences.” From previous
    philosophy there remains “the science of thought and its laws—formal
    logic and dialectics.” Dialectics, as understood by Marx, and also in
    conformity with Hegel, includes what is now called the theory of knowledge,
    or epistemology, studying and generalizing the original and development of
    knowledge, the transition from non-knowledge to knowledge.

In our times, the idea of development, of evolution, has almost
    completely penetrated social consciousness, only in other ways, and not
    through Hegelian philosophy. Still, this idea, as formulated by Marx and
    Engels on the basis of Hegels’ philosophy, is far more comprehensive
    and far richer in content than the current idea of evolution is. A
    development that repeats, as it were, stages that have already been passed,
    but repeats them in a different way, on a higher basis (“the negation of the
    negation”), a development, so to speak, that proceeds in spirals, not in a
    straight line; a development by leaps, catastrophes, and revolutions;
    “breaks in continuity”; the transformation of quantity into quality;
    inner impulses towards development, imparted by the contradiction and
    conflict of the various forces and tendencies acting on a given body, or
    within a given phenomenon, or within a given society; the interdependence
    and the closest and indissoluble connection between all aspects of
    any phenomenon (history constantly revealing ever new aspects), a connection
    that provides a uniform, and universal process of motion, one that follows
    definite laws—these are some of the features of dialectics as a
    doctrine of development that is richer than the conventional

 

    one. (Cf. Marx’s letter to Engels of January 8, 1868, in which he
    ridicules Stein’s “wooden trichotomies,” which it would be
    absurd to confuse with materialist dialectics.)
The Materialist Conception of History


A realization of the inconsistency, incompleteness, and onesidedness of
    the old materialism convinced Marx of the necessity of “bringing the
    science of society... into harmony with the materialist foundation, and of
    reconstructing it thereupon.”[5] Since materialism in general explains consciousness
    as the outcome of being, and not conversely, then materialism as applied to
    the social life of mankind has to explain social consciousness as
    the outcome of social being. “Technology,” Marx writes
    (Capital, Vol. I), “discloses man’s mode of dealing
    with Nature, the immediate process of production by which he sustains his
    life, and thereby also lays bare the mode of formation of his social
    relations, and of the mental conceptions that flow from them.”[6] In the preface
    to his Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Marx
    gives an integral formulation of the fundamental principles of materialism
    as applied to human society and its history, in the following words:

“In the social production of their life, men enter
    into definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their
    will, relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of
    development of their material productive forces.

“The sum total of these relations of production
    constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which
    rises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite
    forms of social consciousness. The mode of production of material life
    conditions the social, political and intellectual life process in
    general. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being,
    but, on the contrary, their social being that determines their
    consciousness. At a certain stage of their development, the material
    productive forces of society come in conflict with the existing relations of
    production, or—what is but a legal expression for the same
    thing—with the property relations within which they have been at work

 

    hitherto. From forms of development of the productive forces these relations
    turn into their fetters. Then begins an epoch of social revolution. With the
    change of the economic foundation the entire immense superstructure is more
    or less rapidly transformed. In considering such transformations a
    distinction should always be made between the material transformation of the
    economic conditions of production, which can be determined with the
    precision of natural science, and the legal, political, religious, aesthetic
    or philosophic—in short, ideological forms in which men become
    conscious of this conflict and fight it out.

“Just as our opinion of an individual is not based on
    what he thinks of himself, so we cannot judge of such a period of
    transformation by its own consciousness; on the contrary, this consciousness
    must be explained rather from the contradictions of material life, from the
    existing conflict between the social productive forces and the relations of
    production.... In broad outlines, Asiatic, ancient, feudal, and modern
    bourgeois modes of production can be designated as progressive epochs in the
    economic formation of society.”[7] [Cf. Marx’s
    brief formulation in a letter to Engels dated July 7, 1866: “Our
    theory that the organization of labor is determined by the means of
    production.”]

The discovery of the materialist conception of history, or more
    correctly, the consistent continuation and extension of materialism into the
    domain of social phenomena, removed the two chief shortcomings in earlier
    historical theories. In the first place, the latter at best examined only
    the ideological motives in the historical activities of human beings,
    without investigating the origins of those motives, or ascertaining the
    objective laws governing the development of the system of social relations,
    or seeing the roots of these relations in the degree of development reached
    by material production; in the second place, the earlier theories did not
    embrace the activities of the masses of the population, whereas
    historical materialism made it possible for the first time to study with
    scientific accuracy the social conditions of the life of the masses, and the
    changes in those conditions. At best, pre-Marxist
    “sociology” and historiography brought forth an accumulation of
    raw facts, collected at random, and a description of individual aspects of

 

    the historical process. By examining the totality of opposing
    tendencies, by reducing them to precisely definable conditions of life and
    production of the various classes of individual aspects of the
    historical process. By examining the choice of a particular
    “dominant” idea or in its interpretation, and by revealing that,
    without exception, all ideas and all the various tendencies stem
    from the condition of the material forces of production, Marxism indicated
    the way to an all-embracing and comprehensive study of the process of the
    rise, development, and decline of socio-economic systems. People make their
    own history but what determines the motives of people, of the mass of
    people—i.e., what is the sum total of all these clashes in the mass of
    human societies? What are the objective conditions of production of material
    life that form the basis of all man’s historical activity? What is the
    law of development of these conditions? To all these Marx drew attention and
    indicated the way to a scientific study of history as a single process
    which, with all its immense variety and contradictoriness, is governed by
    definite laws.
The Class Struggle


 It is common knowledge that, in any given society, the striving of some
    of its members conflict with the strivings of others, that social life is
    full of contradictions, and that history reveals a struggle between nations
    and societies, as well as within nations and societies, and, besides, an
    alternation of periods of revolution and reaction, peace and war, stagnation
    and rapid progress or decline. Marxism has provided the guidance
    —i.e., the theory of the class struggle—for the discovery of the
    laws governing this seeming maze and chaos. It is only a study of the sum of
    the strivings of all the members of a given society or group of societies
    that can lead to a scientific definition of the result of those
    strivings. Now the conflicting strivings stem from the difference in the
    position and mode of life of the classes into which each society is
    divided.

    “The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of
    class struggles,” Marx wrote in the Communist Manifesto
    (with the exception of the history of the primitive community, Engels

 

    added subsequently). “Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian,
    lord and serf, guild-master and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and
    oppressed, stood in constant opposition to one another, carried on an
    uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time ended,
    either in a revolutionary reconstruction of society at large, or in the
    common ruin of the contending classes.... The modern bourgeois society
    that has sprouted from the ruins of feudal society has not done away with
    class antagonisms. It has but established new classes, new conditions of
    oppression, new forms of struggle in place of the old ones. Our epoch, the
    epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this distinctive feature: it
    has simplified class antagonisms. Society as a whole is more and more
    splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two great classes directly
    facing each other: Bourgeoisie and Proletariat.”

    Ever since the Great French Revolution, European history has, in a number
    of countries, tellingly revealed what actually lies at the bottom of
    events—the struggle of classes. The Restoration period in
France[8] already 
produced a number of historians (Thierry, Guizot, Mignet, and
Thiers) who, in summing up what was taking place, were obliged to admit
    that the class struggle was taking place, were obliged to admit that the
    class struggle was the key to all French history. The modern period—that
of complete victory of the bourgeoisie, representative institutions,
    extensive (if not universal) suffrage, a cheap daily press that is widely
    circulated among the masses, etc., a period of powerful and
    ever-expanding unions of workers and unions of employers, etc.—has
    shown even more strikingly (though sometimes in a very one-sided,
    “peaceful”, and “constitutional” form) the class
    struggle as the mainspring of events. The following passage from
    Marx’s Communist Manifesto will show us what Marx demanded
    of social science as regards an objective analysis of the position of each
    class in modern society, with reference to an analysis of each
    class’s conditions of development:

    “Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie
    today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other
    classes decay and finally disappear in the face of Modern Industry; the
    proletariat is its special and essential product. The lower middle class,
    the small manufacturer, the shopkeeper, the artisan, the peasant, all
    these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their

 

    existence as fractions of the middle class. They are therefore not
    revolutionary, but conservative. Nay more, they are reactionary, for they
    try to roll back the wheel of history. If by chance they are
    revolutionary, they are so only in view of their impending transfer into
    the proletariat; they thus defend not their present, but their future
    interests; they desert their own standpoint to place themselves at that of
    the proletariat.”

In a number of historical works (see Bibliography),
Marx gave brilliant and profound examples of materialist historiography, of 
an analysis of the position of each individual class, and sometimes
    of various groups or strata within a class, showing plainly why and how
    “every class struggle is a political struggle.”[9] The above-quoted passage is an 
illustration of what a complex network of social relations and transitional 
stages from one class to another, from the past to the future, was analyzed 
by Marx so as to determine the resultant of historical development.

Marx’s economic doctrine is the most profound, comprehensive and
    detailed confirmation and application of his theory.
 
 

Notes
 

[1]
    See Marx and Engels, The Holy
    Family (Chapter Eight)—Lenin

[2]
Agnoticism—An idealist philosophical theory asserting that 
the world in  unknowable, that the human mind is limited and cannot know 
anything beyond the realms of sensations. Agnosticism has various forms: 
some agnostics recognize the objective existence of the material world but 
deny the possibility of knowing it, others deny the existence of the material 
world on the plea that man cannot know whether anything exists beyond his 
sensations.

Criticism—Kant gave this name to his
    idealist philosophy, considering the criticism of man’s cognitive
    ability to be the purpose of that philosophy. Kant’s criticism led him
    to the conviction that human reason cannot know the nature of things.

Positivism—A widespread trend in
    bourgeois philosophy and sociology, founded by Comte (1798-1857), a French
    philosopher and sociologist. The positivists deny the possibility of knowing
    inner regularities and relations and deny the significance of philosophy as
    a method of knowing and changing the objective world. They reduce philosophy
    to a summary of the data provided by the various branches of science and to
    a superficial description of the results of direct observation—i.e.,
    to “positive” facts. Positivism considers itself to be
    “above” both materialism and idealism but it is actually nothing
    more than a variety of subjective idealism.—Ed.

[3] Frederick 
Engels: Ludwig
    Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy—Lenin

[4] Frederick Engels: Ludwig
    Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy—Lenin

[5] Frederick Engels: Ludwig
    Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy—Lenin

[6] See Karl Marx, Capital.
    Volume I.—Lenin

[7] Karl Marx, Contribution
    to the Critique of Political Economy (1859)—Lenin

[8] The
Restoration—The period in France between 1814 and 1830 when power 
was in the hands of the Bourbons, restored to the throne after their overthrow 
by the French bourgeois revolution in 1792.—Ed.

[9] See Marx and Engels, 
Selected Works Vol. 1, Moscow, 1973, pp. 108-09, 117-18, 
116.—Ed.
 


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## III






Lenin's Karl Marx: III: Marx's Economic Doctrine






Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Karl Marx
A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism



Marx’s Economic Doctrine

    “It is the ultimate aim of this work to lay bare the
      economic law of motion of modern society, i.e., capitalist, bourgeois
      society,”

  says Marx in the preface to Capital. An
      investigation into the relations of production in a given, historically
      defined society, in their inception, development, and decline—such
      is the content of Marx’s economic doctrine. In capitalist society,
      the production of commodities is predominant, and Marx’s
      analysis therefore begins with an analysis of commodity.
Value


  A commodity is, in the first place, a thing that satisfies a human want;
      in the second place, it is a thing that can be exchanged for another
      thing. The utility of a thing makes is use-value. Exchange-value
      (or, simply, value), is first of all the ratio, the proportion, in which a
      certain number of use-values of one kind can be exchanged for a certain
      number of

 

      use-values of another kind. Daily experience shows us that million upon
      millions of such exchanges are constantly equating with one another every
      kind of use-value, even the most diverse and incomparable. Now, what is
      there in common between these various things, things constantly equated
      with one another in a definite system of social relations? Their common
      feature is that they are products of labor. In exchanging
      products, people equate the most diverse kinds of labor. The production of
      commodities is a system of social relations in which individual producers
      create diverse products (the social division of labor), and in which all
      these products are equated with one another in the process of
      exchange. Consequently, what is common to all commodities is not the
      concrete labor of a definite branch of production, not labor of one
      particular kind, but abstract human labor—human labor in
      general. All the labor power of a given society, as represented in the sum
      total of the values of all commodities, is one and the same human labor
      power. Thousands upon thousands of millions of acts of exchange prove
      this. Consequently, each particular commodity represents only a certain
      share of the socially necessary labor time. The magnitude of
      value is determined by the amount of socially necessary labor, or by the
      labor time that is socially necessary for the production of a given
      commodity, of a given use-value.

      “Whenever, by an exchange, we equate as values our different
      products, by that very act, we also equate, as human labor, the different
      kind of labor expended upon them. We are not aware of this, nevertheless
      we do it.” [Capital]. As
      one of the earlier economists said, value is a relation between two
      persons; only he should have added: a relation concealed beneath a
      material wrapping. We can understand what value is only when we consider
      it from the standpoint of the system of social relations of production in
      a particular historical type of society, moreover, or relations that
      manifest themselves in the mass phenomenon of exchange, a phenomenon which
      repeats itself thousands upon thousands of time. “As values, all
      commodities are only definite masses of congealed labor time.”
      [A
      Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy].

  After making a detailed analysis of the twofold character of the labor
      incorporated in commodities, Marx goes on to analyze the form of

 

  value and money. Here, Marx’s main task is to study the
      origin of the money form of value, to study the historical
  process of the development of exchange, beginning with individual and
      incidental acts of exchange (the “elementary or accidental form of
      value”, in which a given quantity of one commmodity is exchanged for a given
      quantity of another), passing on to the universal form of value, in which a
      number of different commodities are exchanged for one and the same
      particular commodity, and ending with the money form of value, when gold
      becomes that particular commodity, the universal equivalent. As the highest
      product of the development of exchange and commodity production, money
      masks, conceals, the social character of all individual labor, the social
      link between individual producers united by the market. Marx analyzes the
      various functions of money in very great detail; it is important to note
      here in particular (as in the opening chapters of Capital in
      general) that what seems to be an abstract and at times purely deductive
      mode of exposition deals in reality with a gigantic collection of factual
      material on the history of the development of exchange and commodity
      production.

      “If we consider money, its existence implies a definite stage in the
      exchange of commodities. The particular functions of money, which it
      performs either as the mere equivalent of commodities or as means of
      circulation, or means of payment, as hoard or as universal money, point,
      according to the extent and relative preponderance of the one function or
      the other, to very different stages in the process of social
      production.” [Capital].
Surplus Value


    At a certain stage in the development of commodity production money
      becomes transformed into capital. The formula of commodity circulation was
      C-M-C (commodity—money—commodity)—i.e., the sale of one
      commodity for the purpose of buying another.

      The general formula of capital, on the contrary, is M-C-M—i.e., the
      purchase for the purpose of selling (at a profit).

      The increase over the original value of the money that is put into
      circulation is called by Marx surplus value. The fact of this

 

      “growth” of money in capitalist circulation is common
      knowledge. Indeed, it is this “growth” which transforms money
      into capital, as a special and historically determined social
      relation of production. Surplus value cannot arise out of commodity
      circulation, for the latter knows only the exchange of equivalents;
      neither can it arise out of price increases, for the mutual losses and
      gains of buyers and sellers would equalize one another, whereas what we
      have here in not an individual phenomenon but a mass, average and social
      phenomenon. To obtain surplus value, the owner of money “must
      ... find... in the market a commodity, whose use-value possesses the
      peculiar property of being a source of value” [Capital]—a
      commodity whose process of consumption is at the same time a process of
      the creation of value. Such a commodity exists—human labor
      power. Its consumption is labor, and labor creates value. The owner of
      money buys labor power at its value, which, like the value of every other
      commodity, is determined by the socially necessary labor time requisite
      for its production (i.e., the cost of maintaining the worker and his
      family). Having bought enough labor power, the owner of money is entitled
      to use it, that is, to set it to work for a whole day—12 hours, let
      us say. Yet, in the course of six hours (“necessary” labor
      time) the worker creates product sufficient to cover the cost of his own
      maintenance; in the course of the next six hours (“surplus”
      labor time), he creates “surplus” product, or surplus value,
      for which the capitalist does not pay. Therefore, from the standpoint of
      the process of production, two parts must be distinguished in capital:
      constant capital, which is expended on means of production (machinery,
      tools, raw materials, etc.), whose value, without any change, is
      transferred (immediately or part by part) to the finished product;
      secondly, variable capital, which is expended on labor power. The value of
      this latter capital is not invariable, but grows in the labor process,
      creating surplus value. Therefore, to express the degree of
      capital’s exploitation of labor power, surplus must be compared not
      with the entire capital but only with variable capital. Thus, in the
      example just given, the rate of surplus value, as Marx calls this ratio,
      will be 6:6, i.e., 100 per cent.


      There were two historical prerequisites for capital to arise: first, the
      accumulation of certain sums of money in the hands of individuals under
      conditions of a relatively high level of development of commodity
      production in general; secondly, the existence of a worker who is
      “free” in a double sense: free of all constraint or
      restriction on the scale of his labor power, and free from the land and
      all means of production in general, a free and unattached laborer, a
      “proletarian”, who cannot subsist except by selling his labor
      power.

      There are two main ways of increasing surplus value: lengthening the
      working day (“absolute surplus value”), and reducing the
      necessary working day (“relative surplus value”). In analyzing
      the former, Marx gives a most impressive picture of the struggle of the
      working class for a shorter working day and of interference by the state
      authority to lengthen the working day (from the 14th century to the 17th)
      and to reduce it (factory legislation in the 19th century). Since the
      appearance of Capital, the history of the working class movement in
      all civilized countries of the world has provided a wealth of new facts
      amplifying this picture.

  Analyzing the production of relative surplus value, Marx investigates the
      three fundamental historical stages in capitalism’s increase of the
      productivity of labor: (1) simple co-operation; (2) the division of labor,
      and manufacture; (3) machinery and large-scale industry. How profoundly Marx
      has here revealed the basic and typical features of capitalist development
      is shown incidentally by the fact that investigations into the handicraft
      industries in Russia furnish abundant material illustrating the first two of
      the mentioned stages. The revolutionizing effect of large-scale machine
      industry, as described by Marx in 1867, has revealed itself in a number of
      “new” countries (Russia, Japan, etc.), in the course of the
      half-century that has since elapsed.

   To continue. New and important in the highest degree is Marx’s
      analysis of the accumulation of capital—i.e., the
      transformation of a part of surplus value into capital, and its use, not for
      satisfying the personal needs of whims of the capitalist, but for new
      production. Marx revealed the error made by all earlier classical political
      economists (beginning with Adam Smith), who assumed that the entire surplus

 

      value which is transformed into capital goes to form variable capital. In
      actual fact, it is divided into means of production and variable
      capital. Of tremendous importance to the process of development of
      capitalism and its transformation into socialism is the more rapid growth of
      the constant capital share (of the total capital) as compared with the
      variable capital share.

   By speeding up the supplanting of workers by machinery and by creating
      wealth at one extreme and poverty at the other, the accumulation of capital
      also gives rise to what is called the “reserve army of labor”,
      to the “relative surplus” of workers, or “capitalist
      overpopulation”, which assumes the most diverse forms and enables
      capital to expand production extremely rapidly. In conjunction with credit
      facilities and the accumulation of capital in the form of means of
      production, this incidentally is the key to an understanding of the
      crises of overproduction which occur periodically in capitalist
      countries—at first at an average of every 10 years, and later at more
      lengthy and less definite intervals. From the accumulation of capital under
      capitalism we should distinguish what is known as primitive accumulation:
      the forcible divorcement of the worker from the means of production, the
      driving of the peasant off the land, the stealing of communal lands, the
      system of colonies and national debts, protective tariffs, and the
      like. “Primitive accumulation” creates the “free”
      proletarian at one extreme, and the owner of money, the capitalist, at the
      other.

  The “historical tendency of capitalist accumulation”
  is described by Marx in the following celebrated words:

  “The expropriation of the immediate producers is accomplished with
      merciless vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most infamous,
      the most sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly odious. Self-earned private
      property [of the peasant and handicraftsman], that is based, so to say, on
      the fusing together of the isolated, independent laboring-individual with
      the conditions of his labor, is supplanted by capitalistic private
      property, which rests on exploitation of the nominally free labor of
      others.... That which is now to be expropriated is no longer the laborer
      working for himself,

 

  but the capitalist exploiting many laborers. This
      expropriation is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of
      capitalistic production itself, by the centralization of capital. One
      capitalist always kills many. Hand in hand with this centralization, or
      this expropriation of many capitalists by few, develop, on an ever
      extending scale, the co-operative form of the labor process, the conscious
      technical application of science, the methodical cultivation of the soil,
      the transformation of the instruments of labor into instruments of labor
      only usable in common, the economizing of all means of production by their
      use as the means of production of combined, socialized labor, the
      entanglement of all people in the net of the world market, and with this
      the international character of the capitalistic regime. Along with the
      constantly diminishing number of the magnates of capital, who usurp and
      monopolize all advantages of this process of transformation, grows the
      mass of misery, oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation; but with
      this too grows the revolt of the working class, a class always increasing
      in numbers, and disciplined, united, organized by the very mechanism of
      the process of capitalist production itself. The monopoly of capital
      becomes a fetter upon the mode of production, which has sprung up and
      flourished along with, and under, it. Centralization of the means of
      production and socialization of labor at last reach a point where they
      become incompatible with their capitalist integument. The integument is
      burst asunder. The knell of capitalist private property sound. The
      expropriators are expropriated.” (Capital, Volume I)

  Also new and important in the highest degree is the analysis Marx gives,
      in Volume Two of Capital of the reproduction of aggregate social
      capital. Here, too, Marx deals, not with an individual phenomenon but with a
      mass phenomenon; not with a fractional part of the economy of society, but
      with that economy as a whole. Correcting the aforementioned error of the
      classical economists, Marx divides the whole of social production into two
      big sections: (I) production of the means of production, and (II) production
      of articles of consumption, and examines in detail, with numerical examples,
      the circulation of the aggregate social capital—both when reproduced
      in its former dimension and in the case of accumulation. Volume Three of


Capital solves the problem of how the average rate of
      profit is formed on the basis of the law of value. This immense stride
      forward made by economic science in the person of Marx consists in his
      having conducted an analysis, from the standpoint of mass economic
      phenomena, of the social economy as a whole, not from the standpoint of
      individual cases or of the external and superficial aspects of competition,
      to which vulgar political economy and the modern “theory of marginal
      utility”[1] frequently restrict
      themselves. Marx first analyzes the origin of surplus value, and then goes
      on to consider its division into profit, interest, and ground rent. Profit
      is the ratio between surplus value and the total capital invested in an
      undertaking. Capital with a “high organic composition” (i.e.,
      with a preponderance of constant capital over variable capital in excess of
      the social average) yields a rate of profit below the average; capital with
      a “low organic composition” yields a rate of profit above the
      average. Competition among capitalists, and their freedom to transfer their
      capital from one branch to another, will in both cases reduce the rate of
      profit to the average. The sum total of the values of all the commodities in
      a given society coincides with the sum total of the prices of the
      commodities, but, in individual undertakings and branches of production, as
      a result of competition, commodities are sold not at their values at the
      prices of production (or production prices), which are equal to the
      capital expended plus the average profit.

  In this way, the well-known and indisputable fact of the divergence
      between prices and values and of the equalization of profits is fully
      explained by Marx on the basis of law of value, since the sum total of
      values of all commodities coincides with the sum total of prices. However,
      the equating of (social) value to (individual) prices does not take place
      simply and directly, but in a very complex way. It is quite natural that in
      a society of separate producers of commodities, who are united only by the
      market, a conformity to law can be only an average, social, mass
      manifestation, with individual deviations in either direction mutually
      compensating one another.

  A rise in the productivity of labor implies a more rapid growth of
  constant capital as compared with variable capital. Inasmuch as surplus

 

      value is a function of variable capital alone, it is obvious that the rate
      of profit (the ratio of surplus value to the whole capital, not to its
      variable part alone) tends to fall. Marx makes a detailed analysis of this
      tendency and of a number of circumstances that conceal or counteract
      it. Without pausing to deal with the extremely interesting sections of
      Volume Three of Capital, Vol. I devoted to usurer’s capital,
      commercial capital and money capital, we must pass on to the most important
      section—the theory of ground rent. Since the area of land is
      limited and, in capitalist countries, the land is all held by individual
      private owners, the price of production of agricultural products is
      determined by the cost of production, not on soil of average quality but on
      the worst soil; not under average conditions but under the worst conditions
      of delivery of produce to the market. The difference between this price and
      the price of production on better soil (or in better conditions) constitutes
      differential rent. Analyzing this in detail, and showing how it
      arises out of the difference in fertility of different plots of land, and
      out of the difference in the amount of capital invested in land, Marx fully
      reveals (see also Theories of Surplus Value, in which the criticism
      of Rodbertus is most noteworthy) the error of Ricardo, who considered that
      differential rent is derived only when there is a successive transition from
      better land to worse. On the contrary, there may be inverse transitions,
      land may pass from one category into others (owing to advances in
      agricultural techniques, the growth of towns, and so on), and the notorious
      “law of diminishing returns”, which charges Nature with the
      defects, limitations and contradictions of capitalism, is profoundly
      erroneous. Further, the equalisation of profit in all branches of industry
      and the national economy in general presupposes complete freedom of
      competition and the free flow of capital from one branch to
      another. However, the private ownership of land creates monopoly, which
      hinders that free flow. Because of that monopoly, the products of
      agriculture, where a lower organic composition of capital obtains, and
      consequently an individually higher rate of profit, do not enter into the
      quite free process of the equalisation of the rate of profit. As a
      monopolist, the landowner can keep the price above the average, and this

 

  monopoly price gives rise to absolute rent. Differential rent cannot be done
      away with under capitalism, but absolute rent can—for instance, by
      the nationalisation of the land, by making it state property. That would
      undermine the monopoly of private landowners, and would mean the sole
      consistent and full operation of freedom of competition in agriculture. That
      is why, as Marx points out, bourgeois radicals have again and again in the
      course of history advanced this progressive bourgeois demand for
      nationalisation of the land, a demand which, however, frightens most
      of the bourgeoisie, because it would too closely affect another monopoly,
      one that is particularly important and “sensitive”
      today—the monopoly of the means of production in general. (A
      remarkably popular, concise, and clear exposition of his theory of the
      average rate of profit on capital and of absolute ground rent is given by
      Marx himself in a letter 
  to Engels, dated August 2, 1862. See Briefwechsel,
      Volume 3, pp. 77-81; also the letter of August 9, 1862, ibid.,
      pp. 86-87.)

     With reference to the history of ground rent it is also important to note
      Marx’s analysis showing how labor rent (the peasant creates surplus
      product by working on the lord’s land) is transformed into rent paid
      in produce or in kind (the peasant creates surplus product by working on the
      lord’s land) is transformed into rent paid in produce or in kind (the
      peasant creates surplus product on his own land and hands it over to the
      landlord because of “non-economic constraint”), then into
      money-rent (rent in kind, which is converted into money—the
      obrok[2] of old Russia—as
  a result of the development of commodity production), and finally into 
  capitalist rent, when
      the peasant is replaced by the agricultural entrepreneur, who
      cultivates the soil with the help of hired labor. In connection with this
      analysis of the “genesis of capitalistic ground rent”, note
      should be taken of a number of profound ideas (of particular importance to
      backward countries like Russia) expressed by Marx regarding the
      evolution of capitalism in agriculture:

  “The transformation of rent in kind into money-rent is furthermore
      not only inevitably accompanied, but even anticipated, by the formation of
      a class of propertyless day-laborers, who hire themselves out for
      money. During their genesis, when this new class appears but sporadically,
     
 

  the custom necessarily develops among the more prosperous peasants,
      subject to rent payments, of exploiting agricultural wage-laborers for
      their own account, much as in feudal times, when the more well-to-do
      peasant serfs themselves also held serfs. In this way, they gradually
      acquire the possibility of accumulating a certain amount of wealth and
      themselves becoming transformed into future capitalists. The old
      self-employed possessors of land themselves just give rise to a nursery
      school for capitalist tenants, whose development is conditioned by the
      general development of capitalist production beyond the bounds of the
      countryside.” [Capital,
      Vol. III]

      “The expropriation and eviction of a part of the agricultural
      population not only set free for industrial capital the laborers, their
      means of subsistence, and material for labor; it also created the home
      market.” (Capital, Vol. I) In their turn, the impoverishment
      and ruin of the rural population play a part in the creation, for capital,
      or a reserve army of labor. In every capitalist country
      “part of the agricultural population is therefore constantly on the
      point of passing over into an urban or manufacturing [i.e.,
      non-agricultural] proletariat.... This source of relative surplus
      population is thus constantly flowing.... The agricultural laborer is
      therefore reduced to the minimum of wages, and always stands with one foot
      already in the swamp of pauperism.” (Capital, Vol. I) The
      peasant’s private ownership of the land he tills is the foundation
      of small-scale production and the condition for its prospering and
      achieving the classical form. But such small-scale production is
      compatible only with a narrow and primitive framework of production and
      society. Under capitalism, the

      “exploitation of the peasant differs only in form from the
      exploitation of the industrial proletariat. The exploiter is the same:
      capital. The individual capitalists exploit the individual peasant through
      mortgages and usury; the capitalist class exploits the peasant class
      through the state taxes.” [The
      Class Struggles in France]

  “The small holding of the peasant is now only the pretext that
      allows the capitalist to draw profits, interest and rent from the soil,
      while leaving it to the tiller of the soil himself to see how he can
      extract his wages.” (The Eighteenth Brumaire) As a rule,
      the peasant cedes to capitalist society—i.e., to the

 

  capitalist class—even a part of the wages, sinking “to the
      level of the Irish tenant farmer—all under the pretense of being a
      private proprietor.” (The Class Struggles In France)

      What is “one of the reasons why grain prices are lower in countries
      with predominant small-peasant land proprietorship than in countries with
      a capitalist mode of production?” [Capital,
      Vol. III] It is that the peasant hands over gratis to society (i.e., the
      capitalist class) a part of his surplus product. “This lower price
      [of grain and other agricultural produce] is consequently a result of the
      producers’ poverty and by no means of their labor
      productivity.” [Capital,
      Vol. III] Under capitalism, the small-holding system, which is the normal
      form of small-scale production, degenerates, collapses, and perishes.

  “Proprietorship of land parcels, by its very nature, excludes the
      development of social productive forces of labor, social forms of labor,
      social concentration of capital, large-scale cattle raising, and the
      progressive application of science. Usury and a taxation system must
      impoverish it everywhere. The expenditure of capital in the price of the
      land withdraws this capital from cultivation. An infinite fragmentation of
      means of production and isolation of the producers themselves.”

      (Co-operative societies, i.e., associations of small peasants, while
      playing an extremely progressive bourgeois role, only weakens this
      tendency, without eliminating it; nor must it be forgotten that these
      co-operative societies do much for the well-to-do peasants, and very
      little—next to nothing—for the mass of poor peasants; then the
      associations themselves become exploiters of hired labor.)

  “Monstrous waste of human energy. Progressive deterioration of
      conditions of production and increased prices of means of
      production—an inevitable law of proprietorship of parcels.”
      [Capital, Volume 
  III] In agriculture, as in industry, capitalism
      transforms the process of production only at the price of the
      “martyrdom of the producer.”

      “The dispersion of the rural laborers over larger areas breaks their
      power of resistance, while concentration increases that of the town
      operatives. In modern agriculture, as in the urban industries, the
      increased productiveness and quantity of the labor set in motion are
      bought at the cost of laying waste and consuming by disease labor power
      itself. Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture is a progress

 

      in the art, not only of robbing the laborer, but of robbing the
      soil.... Capitalist production, therefore, develops technology, and the
      combining together of various processes into a social whole, only by
      sapping the original sources of all wealth—the soil and the
      laborer.” [Capital, Volume III]
 
 

Notes
 

[1] The
    Theory of Marginal Utility—An economic theory that originated
    in the 1870s to counteract Marx’s theory of value. According to this
    theory, the value of commodities are estimated by their usefulness and not
    the amount of social labor expended on their production.—Ed.

[2] 
 Quit-rent.—Ed.
 


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## IV






Lenin's Karl Marx: IV: Socialism






Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Karl Marx
A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism



Socialism

  From the foregoing, it is evident that Marx deduces the inevitability of
      the transformation of capitalist society into socialist society and wholly
      and exclusively from the economic law of the development of contemporary
      society. The socialization of labor, which is advancing ever more rapidly
      in thousands of forms and has manifested itself very strikingly, during
      the half-century since the death of Marx, in the growth of large-scale
      production, capitalist cartels, syndicates and trusts, as well as in the
      gigantic increase in the dimensions and power of finance capital, provides
      the principal material foundation for the inevitable advent of
      socialism. The intellectual and moral motive force and the physical
      executor of this transformation is the proletariat, which has been trained
      by capitalism itself. The proletariat’s struggle against the
      bourgeoisie, which finds expression in a variety of forms ever richer in
      content, inevitably becomes a political struggle directed towards the
      conquest of political power by the proletariat (“the dictatorship of the
      proletariat”). The socialization of production cannot but lead to the
      means of production becoming the property of society, to the
      “expropriation of the expropriators.” A tremendous rise in labor
      productivity, a shorter working day, and the replacement of the remnants,
      the ruins, of small-scale, primitive and disunited production by
      collective and improved labor—such are the direct consequences of
      this transformation. Capitalism breaks for all time the ties between
      agriculture and industry, but at the same time, through its highest
      development, it prepares new elements of those ties, a union between
      industry and agriculture based on the conscious application of science and
      the concentration of collective labor, and on a redistribution of the
      human population (thus putting an end both to rural backwardness, isolation and

 

  barbarism, and to the unnatural concentration of vast masses of people in
      big cities). A new form of family, new conditions in the status of women and
      in the upbringing of the younger generation are prepared by the highest
      forms of present-day capitalism: the labor of women and children and the
      break-up of the patriarchal family by capitalism inevitably assume the most
      terrible, disastrous, and repulsive forms in modern society. Nevertheless,
“modern industry, by assigning as it does, an important part in the
      socially organized process of production, outside the domestic sphere, to
      women, to young persons, and to children of both sexes, creates a new
      economic foundation for a higher form of the family and of the relations
      between the sexes. It is, of course, just as absurd to hold the
      Teutonic-Christian form of the family to be absolute and final as it would
      be to apply that character to the ancient Roman, the ancient Greek, or the
      Eastern forms which, moreover, taken together form a series in historic
      development. Moreover, it is obvious that the fact of the collective
      working group being composed of individuals of both sexes and all ages,
      must necessarily, under suitable conditions, become a source of human
      development; although in its spontaneously developed, brutal, capitalistic
      form, where the laborer exists for the process of production, and not the
      process of production for the laborer, that fact is a pestiferous source
      of corruption and slavery.” (Capital,
      Vol. I, end of Chapter 13)

  The factory system contains
“the germ of the education of the future, an education that will, 
  in the ease of every child over a given age, combine productive labor with
      instruction and gymnastics, not only as one of the methods of adding to the
      efficiency of social production, but as the only method of producing fully
      developed human beings.” [ibid.]

  Marx’s socialism places the problems of nationality and of the state
      on the same historical footing, not only in the sense of explaining the
      past but also in the sense of a bold forecast of the future and of bold
      practical action for its achievement. Nations are an inevitable product,
      an inevitable form, in the bourgeois epoch of social development. The
      working class could not grow strong, become mature and take shape without
      “constituting itself within the nation,” without being “national”

 

  (“though
      not in the bourgeois sense of the word”). The development of capitalism,
      however, breaks down national barriers more and more, does away with
      national seclusion, and substitutes class antagonisms for national
      antagonism. It is, therefore, perfectly true of the developed capitalist
      countries that “the workingmen have no country” and that “united action”
      by the workers, of the civilized countries at least, “is one of the first
      conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat” [Communist
      Manifesto]. That state, which is organized coercion, inevitably
      came into being at a definite stage in the development of society, when
      the latter had split into irreconcilable classes, and could not exist
      without an “authority” ostensibly standing above society, and to a certain
      degree separate from society. Arising out of class contradictions, the
      state becomes “...the state of the most powerful, economically dominant
      class, which, through the medium of the state, becomes also the
      politically dominant class, and thus acquires new means of holding down
      and exploiting the oppressed class. Thus, the state of antiquity was above
      all the state of the slave-owners for the purpose of holding down the
      slaves, as the feudal state was the organ of the nobility for holding down
      the peasant serfs and bondsmen, and the modern representative state is an
      instrument of exploitation of wage labor by capital.” (Engels, The
      Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State, a work in
      which the writer expounds his own views and Marx’s.) Even the
      democratic republic, the freest and most progressive form of the bourgeois
      state, does not eliminate this fact in any way, but merely modifies its
      form (the links between government and the stock exchange, the
      corruption—direct and indirect—of officialdom and the press,
      etc.). By leading to the abolition of classes, socialism will thereby lead
      to the abolition of the state as well. “The first act,” Engels writes in
      Anti-Dühring
      “by virtue of which the state really constitutes itself the representative
      of society as a whole—the taking possession of the means of
      production in the name of society—is, at the same time, its last
      independent act as a state. The state interference in social relations
      becomes superfluous in one sphere after another, and then ceases of
      itself. The government of persons is replaced by the administration of
      things and by the direction of the processes

 

  of production. The state is not ‘abolished,’ it withers away”
      [Anti-Dühring].
“The society that will organize production on the basis 
  of a free and equal
      association of the producers will put the whole machinery of state where
      it will then belong: into the Museum of Antiquities, by the side of the
      spinning wheel and the bronze axe.” [Engels, The Origin of the Family,
  Private Property and the State].

      Finally, as regards the attitude of Marx’s socialism towards the
      small peasantry, which will continue to exist in the period of the
      expropriation of the expropriators, we must refer to a declaration made by
      Engels, which expresses Marx’s views:
“...when we are in possession of state power we shall 
  not even think of
      forcibly expropriating the small peasants (regardless of whether with or
      without compensation), as we shall have to do in the case of the big
      landowners. Our task relative to the small peasant consists, in the first
      place, in effecting a transition of his private enterprise and private
      possession to co-operative ones, not forcibly but by dint of example and the
      proffer of social assistance for this purpose. And then of course we shall
      have ample means of showing to the small peasant prospective advantages that
      must be obvious to him even today.” [Engels, The
  Peasant Question in France and Germany, [1] published by Alexeyeva;
      there are errors in the Russian translation. Original in Die Neue
  Zeit].
 
 

Notes
 

[1]
 See Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Moscow, 1958, Vol. II, p. 433.
 —Ed.
 


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## V






Lenin's Karl Marx: V: Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat






Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Karl Marx
A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism



Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat

    After examining, as early as 1844-45, one of the main shortcomings in
      the earlier materialism—namely, its inability to understand the
      conditions or appreciate the importance of practical revolutionary
      activity—Marx, along with his theoretical work, devoted unremitting
      attention, throughout his lifetime, to the tactical problems of the
      proletariat’s class struggle. An immense amount of material bearing
      on this is contained in all the works of Marx, particularly in the
      four volumes of his correspondence with Engels, published in 1913. This
  
   
  
      material is still far from having been brought together, collected,
      examined and studied. We shall therefore have to confine ourselves here to
      the most general and brief remarks, emphasizing that Marx justly considered
      that, without this aspect, materialism is incomplete, onesided,
      and lifeless. The fundamental task of proletarian tactics was defined by
      Marx in strict conformity with all the postulates of his
      materialist-dialectical Weltanschauung [“world-view”]. 
  Only an objective consideration of the sum total of the relations between 
  absolutely all the classes in a given society, and consequently a consideration of the
      objective stage of development reached by that society and of the relations
      between it and other societies, can serve as a basis for the correct
      tactics of an advanced class. At the same time, all classes and all
      countries are regarded, not statically, but dynamically —i.e., not
      in a state of immobility—but in motion (whose laws are determined by
      the economic conditions of existence of each class). Motion, in its turn,
      is regarded from the standpoint, not only of the past, but also of the
      future, and that not in the vulgar sense it is understood in by the
      “evolutionists”, who see only slow changes, but dialectically: “...in
      developments of such magnitude 20 years are no more than a day,“ Marx wrote
      to Engels, “thought later on there may come days in which 20 years are
      embodied” (Briefwechsel, Vol. 3,
    p. 127).[2]

    At each stage of development, at each moment, proletarian tactics
      must take account of this objectively inevitable dialectics of human
      history, on the one hand, utilizing the periods of political stagnation or
      of sluggish, so-called “peaceful” development in order to develop the
      class-consciousness, strength and militancy of the advanced class, and, on
      the other hand, directing all the work of this utilization towards the
      “ultimate aim” of that class’s advance, towards creating in it the
      ability to find practical solutions for great tasks in the great days, in
      which “20 years are embodied”. Two of Marx’s arguments are of special
      importance in this connection: one of these is contained in The
      Poverty of Philosophy, and concerns the economic struggle and
      economic organizations of the proletariat; the other is contained in the
      Communist
      Manifesto and concerns the asks of the proletariat. The former
      runs as follows:

  “Large-scale industry concentrates in one place

 

  a crowd of people unknown
      to one another. Competition divides their interests. But the maintenance
      of wages, this common interest which they have against their boss, unites
      them in a common thought of resistance—combination....
      Combinations, at first isolated, constitute themselves into groups ... and
      in face of always united capital, the maintenance of the association
      becomes more necessary to them [i.e., the workers] than that of wages....
      In this struggle—a veritable civil war—all the elements
      necessary for coming battle unite and develop. Once it has reached this
      point, association takes on a political character. (Marx, The
      Poverty of Philosopy, 1847)

  Here we have the programme and
      tactics of the economic struggle and of the trade union movement for
      several decades to come, for all the lengthy period in which the
      proletariat will prepare its forces for the “coming battle.” All this
      should be compared with numerous references by Marx and Engels to the
      example of the British labor movement, showing how industrial “property”
      leads to attempts “to buy the proletariat” (Briefwechsel, Vol. 1,
  p. 136).[3] to divert them from the
      struggle; how this prosperity in general “demoralizes the workers” (Vol. 2, p. 218);
  how the British proletariat becomes “bourgeoisified”—“this most bourgeois of all
      nations is apparently aiming ultimately at the possession of a bourgeois
      aristocracy and a bourgeois proletariat alongside the bourgeoisie” Chartists (1866; Vol. 3, p. 305)[4]; how the British workers’ leaders
      are becoming a type midway between “a radical bourgeois and a worker” (in
      reference to Holyoak, Vol. 4, p. 209); how, owning to Britain’s
      monopoly, and as long as that monopoly lasts, “the British workingman will
      not budge” (Vol. 4, p. 433).[5] The tactics 
  of the economic struggle, in connection with the
      general course (and outcome) of the working-class movement, are
      considered here from a remarkably broad, comprehensive, dialectical, and
      genuinely revolutionary standpoint.

  The Communist Manifesto advanced a fundamental Marxist
      principle on the tactics of the political struggle:

  “The

 

  Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the
      enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; but in the
      movement of the present, they also represent and take care of the future
      of that movement.” That was why, in 1848, Marx supported the party of the
      “agrarian revolution” in Poland, “that party which brought about the
      Krakow insurrection in 1846.”[1]

  In Germany, Marx, in 1848 and 1849, supported the
      extreme revolutionary democrats, and subsequently never retracted what he
      had then said about tactics. He regarded the German bourgeoisie as an
      element which was “inclined from the very beginning to betray the people”
      (only an alliance with the peasantry could have enabled the bourgeoisie to
      completely achieve its aims) “and compromise with the crowned
      representatives of the old society.” Here is Marx’s summing-up of
      the German bourgeois-democratic revolution—an analysis which,
      incidentally, is a sample of a materialism that examines society in
      motion, and, moreover, not only from the aspect of a motion that is
      backward:

  “Without faith in itself, without faith in the people, grumbling at
      those above, trembling before those below ... intimidated by the world
      storm ... no energy in any respect, plagiarism in every respect ... without
      initiative ... an execrable old man who saw himself doomed to guide and
      deflect the first youthful impulses of a robust people in his own senile
      interests....” (Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 1848; see
      Literarischer Nachlass, Vol. 3, p. 212.)[6]

  About 20 years later, Marx declared, in a letter to Engels
      (Briefwechsel, Vol. 3, p.224), that the Revolution of 1848 had
      failed because the bourgeoisie had preferred peace with slavery to the mere
      prospect of a fight for freedom. When the revolutionary period of 1848-49
      ended, Marx opposed any attempt to play at revolution (his struggle against
      Schapper and Willich), and insisted on the ability to work in a new phase,
      which in a quasi-“peaceful” way was preparing new revolutions. The spirit
      in which Marx wanted this work to be conducted is to be seen in his
      appraisal of the situation in Germany in 1856, the darkest period of
      reaction: “The whole thing in Germany will depend on the possibility of
      backing the proletarian revolution by some second edition of the Peasant
      War” (Briefwechsel, Vol. 2,

 

  p. 108).[7] While the democratic
      (bourgeois) revolution in Germany was uncompleted, Marx focused every
      attention, in the tactics of the socialist proletariat, on developing the
      democratic energy of the peasantry. He held that Lassalle’s attitude
      was “objectively... a betrayal of the whole workers’ movement to
      Prussia” (Vol. 3, p.210), incidentally because Lassalle was tolerant of the
      Junkers and Prussian nationalism.

  “In a predominantly agricultural country,” Engels wrote in 1865, in
      exchanging views with Marx on their forthcoming joint declaration in the
      press, “...it is dastardly to make an exclusive attack on the bourgeoisie
      in the name of the industrial proletariat but never to devote a word to the
      patriarchal exploitation of the rural proletariat under the lash of the
      great feudal aristocracy” (Vol. 3, p. 217).[8]

  From 1864 to 1870, when the period of the consummation of the
      bourgeois-democratic revolution in Germany was coming to an end, a period
      in which the Prussian and Austrian exploiting classes were struggling to
      complete that revolution in one way or another from above, Marx
      not only rebuked Lassalle, who was coquetting with Bismarck, but also
      corrected Liebknecht, who had “lapsed into Austrophilism” and a defense of
      particularism; Marx demanded revolutionary tactics which would combat with
      equal ruthlessness both Bismarck and the Austrophiles, tactics which would
      not be adapted to the “victor”—the Prussian Junkers—but would
      immediately renew the revolutionary struggle against him despite the
  conditions created by the Prussian military victories
      (Briefwechsel, Vol. 3, pp. 134, 136, 147, 179, 204, 210, 215, 418,
      437, 440-41).

  In the celebrated Address of the International of September 9
      1870, Marx warned the French proletariat against an untimely uprising, but
      when an uprising nevertheless took place (1871), Marx enthusiastically
      hailed the revolutionary initiative of the masses, who were “storming
      heaven” (Marx’s letter to Kugelmann).

  From the standpoint of Marx’s dialectical materialism, the defeat of
      revolutionary action in that situation, as in many other, was a lesser
      evil, in the general course and outcome of the proletarian
      struggle, than the abandonment of a position already occupied, than
      surrender without battle. Such a surrender would have demoralised the
      proletariat and weakened its militancy. While fully appreciating the use

 

      of legal means of struggle during periods of political stagnation and the
      domination of bourgeois legality, Marx, in 1877 and 1878, following the
      passage of the Anti-Socialist Law,[9]
      sharply condemned Most’s “revolutionary phrases”; no less sharply, if not
      more so, did he attack the opportunism that had for a time come over the
      official Social-Democratic Party, which did not at once display
      resoluteness, firmness, revolutionary spirit and the readiness to resort
      to an illegal struggle in response to the Anti-Socialist Law
      (Briefwechsel, Vol. 4, pp. 397, 404, 418, 422, 424; cf. also
      letters to Sorge).
 


 
 
Notes
 

[1] The 
 reference is to the democratic uprising for
     national liberation in the Krakow Republic which in 1815 was placed under
     the joint control of Austria, Prussia and Russia. The rebels set up a
     National Government which issued a manifesto proclaiming abolition of
     feudal services and promising to give the peasants lands without
     redemption. In its other proclamations it announced the establishment of
     national workshops with higher wages and the introduction of equal rights
     for all citizens. Soon, however, the uprising was suppressed.—Ed.
 


[2] [PLACEHOLDER.]


[3] [PLACEHOLDER.]


[4] [PLACEHOLDER.]


[5] [PLACEHOLDER.]


[6] [PLACEHOLDER.]


[7] [PLACEHOLDER.]


[8] [PLACEHOLDER.]


[9] [PLACEHOLDER.]


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## Bibliography






Lenin's Karl Marx: VI: Bibliography






Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Karl Marx
A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism



Bibliography

  No complete collection of Marx’s works and letters has
    yet been published. More works by Marx have been translated into
    Russian than into any other language. The following list of
    Marx’s writings is arranged in chronological order. In 1841 Marx wrote
    his thesis on Epicurus’s philosophy. (It was included in
    Literarischer Nachiass, of which more will be said later.) In this
    thesis, Marx still fully adhered to the Hegelian idealist point of view. In
    1842 Marx wrote articles for Rheinische Zeitung (Cologne), among
    them a criticism of the free-press debate in the Sixth Rhenish Diet, an
    article on the laws concerning the stealing of timber, another in defence of
    divorcing politics from theology, etc. (partly included in Literarischer
    Nachiass). Here we see signs of Marx’s transition from idealism
    to materialism and from revolutionary democracy to communism. In 1844, under
    the editorship of Marx and Arnold Ruge, there appeared in Paris
    Deutsche-Franzosische Jahrbücher, in which this transition
    was finally made. Among Marx’s articles published in that magazine,
    the most noteworthy are A Criticism of the Hegelian Philosophy of
    Right (besides Literarischer Nachiass, also published as a
    separate pamphlet) and On the Jewish Question (likewise in
    Literarischer Nachiass; issued as a pamphlet brought out by the
    Znaniye Publishers in their Cheap Library, No. 210). In 1845, Marx
    and Engels jointly published, in Frankfort on Main, a pamphlet entitled
    The Holy Family. Against Bruno Bauer and Co. (besides
    Literarischer Nachiass, there are two Russian editions as
    pamphlets: one published by Novy Gobs in St. Petersburg, 1906, the
    other by Vesinik Znaniya, St. Petersburg, 1907). In the spring of
    1845, Marx wrote his theses on Feuerbach (published as an appendix to

 

    Frederick Engels’s pamphlet entitled Ludwig Feuerbach (there
    is a Russian translation). In 1845-47 Marx wrote a number of articles (most
    of which have not been collected, republished, or translated into Russian)
    in the papers Vorwärts, Deutsche Brässeler-Zeitung
    (1847); Westphalisches Dampboot (Bide. fold, 1845-48); Der
    Gesellschatsspiegel (Elberfeld, 1846). In 1847 Marx wrote his
    fundamental work against Proudhon, The Poverty of Philosophy, a
    reply to Proudhon’s work The Philosophy of Poverty. The book
    was published in Brussels and Paris (there have been three publications in
    Russian by Novy Mir, one by G. Lvovich, one by Alexeyeva, and one
    by Prosveshcheniye, all in 1905-06). In 1848 the Speech on Free
    Trade was published in Brussels (Russian translation available),
    followed by the publication in London, in collaboration with Frederick
    Engels, of the celebrated Manifesto of the Communist Party, which has been
    translated into probably all the languages of Europe and into a number of
    other languages (there are about eight Russian publications referring to
    1905 and 1906; by Molot, Kolokol, Alexeyeva, etc., most of which were
    confiscated. These appeared under various titles: The Communist
    Manifesto, On Communism, Social Classes and Communism, Capitalism and
    Communism, The Philosophy of History. A complete and most accurate
    translation of this, as well as of other works by Marx, will be found in the
    editions of the Emancipation of Labour group, issued
abroad[31]). From
    June 1, 1848, to May 19, 1849, Neue Rheinische Zeitung was
    published in Cologne with Marx as the actual editor-in-chief. His numerous
    articles for that paper, which to this very day remains the finest and
    unsurpassed organ of the revolutionary proletariat, have not been collected
    and republished in full. The most important of them were included in
    Literarischer Nachiass. Wage-Labour and Capital, published in that
    paper, has been repeatedly issued as a pamphlet (four Russian editions, by
    Kozman, Mobot, Myagkov, and Lvovich, 1905 and 1906); also from the
    same paper The Liberals at the Helm (published by Znaniye
    Publishers in their Cheap Library, No. 272, St. Petersburg, 1901). In 1849
    Marx published, in Cologne, Two Political Trials (two speeches in
    his own defence by Marx, who was acquitted by a jury when facing trial on

 

    the charge of having violated the press law and called for armed resistance
    to the government. Russian translations are available in five publications
    brought out in 1905 and 1906 by Alexayeva, Molot, Myagkov, Znaniye,
    and Novy Mir). In 1850 Marx published, in Hamburg, six issues of
    the magazine Neue Rheinische Zeitung. The most important articles published
    therein were later included in Literarischer Nachiass. Especially
    noteworthy are Marx’s articles, republished by Engels in 1895 in a
    pamphlet entitled Class Struggles in France, 1848-1850 (Russian
    translation, published by M. Malykh, Library, No. 59-60; also in the
    Collection of Historical Works, translated by Bazarov and
    Stepanov and published by Skirmunt, St. Petersburg, 1906; also Thoughts
    and Views of the 20th Century, St. Petersburg, 1912). In 1852 a
    pamphlet by Marx was published in New York under the title of The
    Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (Russian translation in
    publications just mentioned). In the same year a pamphlet was published in
    London under the title of Enthüllungen fiber den Communistenprozess in
    Köln (Russian translation entitled The Cologne Trial of the
    Communards, Popular Science Library, No. 43, St. Petersburg, 1906,
    Oct. 28).

From August 1851 until 1862,[1]
Marx was a regular contributor
    to the New York Tribune, where many of his articles appeared
    unsigned, as editorials. Most outstanding among these is a series of
    articles, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany, which were
    republished after the death of Marx and Engels in a German translation (a
    Russian translation is available in collections translated by Bazarov and
    Stepanov, and then, in pamphlet form, in five editions brought out in
    1905-06 by Alexeyeva, Obshchestvennaya Poiza, Novy Mir, Vseobshchaya
    Biblioteka and Molot). Some of Marx’s articles in the
    Tribune were later published in London as separate pamphlets, as,
    for instance, the one on Palmerston, published in 1856; Revelations of
    the Diplomatic History of the 18th Century (regarding the constant
    venal dependence on Russia of the British Liberal Ministers), and

 

    others. After Marx’s death, his daughter, Eleanor Aveling, published a
    number of his Tribune articles on the Oriental question, under the
    title of The Eastern Question, London, 1897. Part has been
    translated into Russian: War and Revolution, Issue I, Marx and
    Engels: Unpublished Articles (1852, 1853, 1854), Kharkov, 1919
    (Our Thought Library). From the end of 1854, and during 1855, Marx
    contributed to the Neue Oder-Zeitung and in 1861-62 to the Viennese
    paper Presse. These articles have not been collected, and only a few of
    them were reprinted in Die Neue Zeit, as were also Marx’s
    numerous letters. The same is true about Marx’s articles from Das
    Volk (London, 1859) on the diplomatic history of the Italian War of
    1859. In 1859 Marx’s Contribution to the Critique of Political
    Economy appeared in Berlin (Russian translations: Moscow, 1896, edited
    by Manuilov; St. Petersburg, 1907, translated by Rumyantsev), In 1860 a
    pamphlet by Marx, entitled Herr Vogt, appeared in London.

In 1864 the Address of the International Workingmen’s
    Association, which was written by Marx, came out in London (Russian
    translation available). Marx was the author of numerous manifestos, appeals
    and resolutions of the International’s General Council. This material
    is far from having been analysed or even collected. The first approach to
    this work is Gustav Jaeckh’s book, Die Internationale (in the
    Russian translation: St. Petersburg, 1906, Znaniye Publishers), which
    includes several of Marx’s letters and draft resolutions. Among the
    documents of the International that Marx wrote was the Address of the
    General Council on the Paris Commune. The document appeared in 1871
    in London, as a pamphlet entitled The Civil War in France
    (Russian translations: one edited by Lenin, Molot Publishers, and
    others). Between 1862 and 1874 Marx corresponded with Kugelniann, a member
    of the International (two Russian translations: one by A. Goikhbarg, the
    other edited by Lenin). In 1867 Marx’s main work, Capital: A
    Critique of Political Economy, Vol. 1, appeared in Hamburg. Volumes 2
    and 3 were published by Engels in 1885 and 1894, after the death of
    Marx. The Russian translations: Vol. 1, in five editions (two in a
    translation by Danielson, 1872 and 1898; two in a translation by
    E. A. Gurvich and L. M. Zak, edited

 

by Struve; 1st ed.—1899, 2nd ed.—1905; another edited by Bazarov and
    Stepauov). Volumes 2 and 3 appeared in a translation by Danielson (less
    satisfactory) and in another under the editorship of Bazarov and Stepanov
    (the better). In 1876 Marx took part in the writing of Engels’s
    Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft
    (Anti-Dühring); he went over the manuscript of the whole work
    and wrote an entire chapter dealing with the history of political economy.

    The following works by Marx were published posthumously: Critique of
    the Gotha Programme (St. Petersburg, 1906, and in German in Die
    Neue Zeit, 1890-91, No, 18); Value, Price and Profit (a
    lecture delivered on June 26, 1865; Die Neue Zeit, XVI, 1897-98; Russian
    translations, brought out by Molot, 1906, and Lvovich, 1905); Aus
dem literarischen Nachiass von Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels und
    Ferdinand Lassalle, three volumes, Stuttgart, 1902 (Russian
    translation, edited by Axelrod and others, 2 vols., St. Petersburg, 1908:
    Vol. 1 also edited by E. Gurvich, Moscow, 1907. Lassalle’s letters
    to Marx, published separately, are included in Literarischer
    Nachiass); Letters from K. Marx and F. Engels and Others to F. A. Sorge
    and Others (two editions in Russian; one edited by Axeirod, another
    published by Dauge, with a preface by Lenin); Theorien fiber den
    Mehrwert, three volumes in four parts, Stuttgart, 1905-10, which is
    the manuscript of the fourth volume of Capital and published by
    Kautsky (only the first volume translated into Russian; in three editions;
    St. Petersburg, 1906, edited by Plekhanov; Kiev, 1906, edited by
    Zheleznov, and Kiev, 1907, edited by Tuchapsky). In 1913 four big volumes
    of Marx-Engels Correspondence came out in Stuttgart, with 1,386
    letters written between September 1844 and January 10, 1883, and providing
    a mass of highly valuable material for a study of Marx’s biography
    and views. In 1917, two volumes of Marx’s and Engels’s works
    appeared, containing their articles for 1852-62 (in German). This list of
    Marx’s works must conclude with a note that many of Marx’s
    shorter articles and letters, published, for the most part, in Die
    Neue Zeit, Vorwürts, and other German-language Social-Democratic
    periodicals, have not been enumerated. The list of Russian translations of
    Marx is no doubt incomplete especially with reference to pamphlets that
    appeared in 1905-06.


 The literature on Marx and Marxism is very extensive. We shall mention
    only what is most outstanding, and divide the authors into three main groups:
    Marxists who, in important matters, adhere to Marx’s point of view;
    bourgeois writers, in essence hostile to Marxism; and revisionists, who,
    while claiming to accept certain fundamentals of Marxism, in fact replace it
    with bourgeois conceptions. The Narodnik attitude towards Marx should be
    considered a peculiarly Russian variety of revisionism. In his Em
    Beitrag zur Bibliographie des Marxismus (Archiv für
    Soztalwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, XX, 2. Heft,[2]
1905, pp. 413-30), Werner
    Sombart gives some three hundred titles in a list that is far from
    complete. More can be found in the indexes to Die Neue Zeit, 1883-1907,
    et seq., also in Josef Stammhammer’s Bibliographie des Sozialismus
    und Kommunismus, Bd. I—III,[3]
Jena (1893—1909). For a detailed bibliography on Marxism see 
also Bibliographic der Soztalwissenschaften, Berlin. Jahrgang 1, 1905,
u. ff.[4]

See also N. A. Rubakin, Among Books (Vol. 2, 2nd ed.). We mention 
here only the most important bibliographies. On the
    subject of Marx’s biography, attention must be called first of all to
    Frederick Engels’s articles in Volkskalender,[5] published by Bracke in Brunswick in 
1878 and in Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschatten, Bd. 6, S.
600—03[6];

W. Liebknecht, Karl Marx zum Gedächtniss,[7] Nuremberg, 1896; Lafargue, Karl
    Marx, Persönlichee Ermnnerungen;[8] W. Liebknecht, Karl
    Marx, 2nd ed., St. Petersburg, 1906; P. Lafargue, My Recollections of
    Karl Marx, Odessa, 1905 (see original in Die Neue Zeit, IX,
    1); Karl Marx: In Memoriam, St. Petersburg, 1908, 410 pages, a collection of
    articles by Y. Nevzoroy, N. Rozhkov, V. Bazarov, Y. Steklov,
    A. Finn-Yenotayevsky, P. Rumyantsev, K. Renner, H. Roland-Holst,

 

    V. Ilyin, R. Luxemburg, G. Zinoviev, Y. Kamenev, P. Orlovsky,
    M. Tagansky; Franz Mehring, Karl Marx. The extensive biography of
    Marx written in English by the Amencan socialist, Spargo (John Spargo,
    Karl Marx, His Life and Work, London, 1911), is unsatisfactory. For
    a general review of Marx’s activities, see Karl Kautsky, Die
    historische Leistung von Karl Marx. Zum 25. Todestag des
Meisters,[9] Berlin,
    1908. The Russian translation is entitled Karl Marx and His Historical
    Importance, St. Petersburg, 1908. See also a popular pamphlet by Clara
    Zetkin, Karl Marx und sein Lebenswerk[10] (1913). Reminiscences of
    Marx: those by Annenkov in Vestnik Yevropy, 1880, No. 4 (also in
    his Reminiscences, Vol. 3, A Remarkable Decade, St. Petersburg,
    1882); those by Karl Schurz in Russkoye Bogatstvo, 1906,
    No. 12; by M. Kovalevsky in Vestnik Yevropy, 1909, No. 6, et seq.

On the question of Marxist philosophy and historical materialism the best
    exposition is given by G. V. Plekhanov, For Twenty Years,
    St. Petersburg, 1909, 3rd ed.; From Defence to Attack,
    St. Petersburg, 1910; Fundamental Problems of Marxism,
    St. Petersburg, 1908; A Critique of Our Critics, St. Petersburg,
    1906; The Development of the Monist View of History,
    St. Petersburg, 1908, and other works. Antonio Labriola, On the
    Materialist View of History [in Russian], St. Petersburg, 1898; also
    his Historical Materialism and Philosophy, St. Petersburg, 1906;
    Franz Mehring, On Historical Materialism [in Russian] (two
    editions, by Prosveshcheniye and Molot), St. Petersburg,
    1906, and The Lessing Legend [in Russian], St. Petersburg, 1908
    (Znaniye); see also Charles Andler (non-Marxist), The Communist
    Manifesto. History, Introduction, Comments [in Russian],
    St. Petersburg, 1906. See also Historical Materialism,
    St. Petersburg, 1908, a collection of articles by Engels, Kautsky, Lafargue,
    and many others; L. Axelrod, Philosophical Sketches. A Reply to Philosophic
    Critics of Historical Materialism, St. Petersburg, 1906. A special
    defence of Dietzgen’s unsuccessful deviations from Marxism is
    contained in E. Untermann’s Die logischen Mängel des

 

engeren Marxismus,[11] Munich, 
1910 , 753 pages (an extensive but
    none too serious work). Hugo Riekes’s Die philosophische Tvurzel
    des Marxismus, in Zeitschrift für die gesamte
    Staatswissenschaft, 62. Jahrgang, 1906, 3. Heft, S. 407—32,[12] 
is an interesting
    piece of work by an opponent of the Marxist views, showing their
    philosophical integrity from the viewpoint of materialism. Benno
    Erdmann’s Die philosophisehen Voraussetzungen der materialist
    ischen Geschichtsaufiassung, in Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung
    und Volkswirtschaft (Schtnollers Jahrbuch), 1907, 3. Heft, S. 156,[13] is a
    very useful formulation of some of the basic principles of Marx’s
    philosophical materialism, and a summary of arguments against it from the
    current viewpoint of Kantianism, and agnosticism in general. Rudolph
    Stammier (a Kantian), Wirtschaft und Rechi nach der
    materialistischen Geschichtsauffassung,[14] 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1906;
    Woltmann (also a Kantian), Historical Materialism (in a Russian
    translation, 1901); Vorländer (also a Kantian), Kant and
    Marx, [in Russian], St. Petersburg, 1909. See also the polemic
    between A. Bogdanov, V. Bazarov and others, on the one hand, and
V. Ilyin,[15] on the
    other (the views of the former being contained in An Outline of the
    Philosophy of Marxism, St. Petersburg, 1908; A. Bogdanov, The Downfall
    of a Great Fetishism, Moscow, 1909, and elsewhere, and the views of the
    latter, in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, Moscow, 1909). On the
    question of historical materialism and ethics: Karl Kautsky, Ethics and the
    Materialist Conception of History, St. Petersburg, 1906, and numerous other
    works by Kautsky; Louis Boudin, The Theoretical System of Karl Marx in
    the Light of Recent Criticism, translated from the English under the
    editorship of V. Zasulich, St. Petersburg, 1908; Hermann Gorter, Der

 

    historische Materialismus,[16]
1909. Of works by opponents to Marxism, we would name Tugan-Baranovsky, 
The Theoretical Fundamentals of Marxism,
    St. Petersburg, 1907; S. Prokopovieb, A Critique of Marx,
    St. Petersburg, 1901; Hammacher, Dasphilosophisch-ökonomische
    System des Marxismus,[17]
Leipzig, 1910 (730 pages, collection of quotations); Werner Sombart, Socialism 
and the Social-Movement in the Nineteenth Century in Russian], St. Petersburg;
    Max Adler (a Kantian), Kausalitilt und Teleologie, Vienna, 1909, in 
Marx-Studien, also Marx als Denker[18] by the same author.

The book of an Hegelian idealist, Giovanni Gentile, La filosofia
    di Marx,[19] Pisa, 1899, 
is noteworthy. The author
    deals with some important aspects of Marx’s materialist dialectics
    which usually escape the attention of the Kantians, Positivists,
    etc.. Likewise: Levy, Feuerbach, a work about one of the main
    philosophical predecessors of Marx. A useful collection of quotations from a
    number of Marx’s works is contained in Chernyshev’s Notebook
    of a Marxist, St. Petersburg (Dyelo), 1908. On Marx’s economic
    doctrine, the following books are outstanding: Karl Kautsky, The
    Economic Doctrines of Karl Marx (numerous editions in Russian), The
    Agrarian Question, The Erfurt Programme, and numerous
    pamphlets. Cf. also: Eduard Bernstein, The Economic Doctrine of
    Marx. The Third Volume of Capital (Russian translation, 1905);
    Gabriel Deville, Capital (an exposition of the first volume of
    Capital, Russian translation, 1907). A representative of so-called
    revisionism among Marxists, as regards the agrarian question, is Eduard
    David, Socialism and Agriculture (Russian translation,
    St. Petersburg, 1902). For a critique of revisionism see V. Ilyin, The
    Agrarian Question, Part I, St. Petersburg, 1908. See also the following
    books by V. Ilyin: The Development of Capitalism in Russia, second
    edition, St. Petersburg, 1908; Economic Essays and Articles,
    St. Petersburg, 1899; New Data on the Laws of Development of Capitalism
    in Agriculture, Book 1, 1917. An application of Marx’s views,

 

    with some deviations, to the latest data concerning agrarian relations in
    France can be found in Cornpère-Morel, La question agraire et le
    socialisme en France,[20] Paris, 1912, 455 pages. For the further
    development of Marx’s economic views as applied to recent phenomena in
    economic life see Hilferding’s Finance Capital [in Russian],
    St. Petersburg, 1911 (outstanding inaccuracies in the author’s views
    on the theory of value have been corrected by Kautsky in “Gold, Papier
    und Ware”,—“Gold, Paper Money and Commodities”—in Die Neue
    Zeit, XXX, 1; 1912, pp. 837 and 886); and V. Ilyin’s Imperialism, the
    Highest Stage of Capitalism, 1917. Pyotr Maslov in his Agrarian
    Question (two volumes) and The Theory of Economic Development,
    St. Petersburg, 1910, deviates from Marxism on important points. A
    criticism of some of Maslov’s deviations may be found in
    Kautsky’s “Malthusianism and Socialism” in
    Die Neue Zeit, XXIX, 1, 1911.

    A criticism of the economic doctrine of Marx, from the point of view of
    the so-called marginal utility theory that is widespread among bourgeois
    professors, is contained in the following works: Böhm-Bawerk, Zum
    Abschluss des Marxschen Systems[21] (Berlin 1896, in Staatswiss. A
    ibeiten, Fesigabe für K. Knies), Russian translation,
    St. Petersburg, 1897, The Theory of Marx and Its Criticism, and
    also his Kapital und Kapitalzins, 2nd ed., two volumes, Innsbruck,
    1900-02 (Russian translation, Capital and Profits, St. Petersburg,
    1909). See also: Riekes, Wert und Tauschwert (1899)[22]; von Bortkiewicz,
    Wertrechnung und Preisrechnung im Marxschen System (Archiv für
    Sozialwissenschaft, 1906—07)[23]; Leo von Buch, Über die Elemente der
    politisczen Olconomie. I. Th. Die Intensität d. Arbeit,
    Tvert u. Preis[24] (published 
also in Russian). For an analysis of Böhm-Bawerk’s 
critique from a Marxist point of view

 

see Hilferding’s Böhm-Bawerks Marx-Kritik[25] (Marx-Sludien,
    I. Band, Vienna, 1904), and in shorter articles published in Die
    Neue Zeit.

On the question of the two main currents in the interpretation and
    development of Marxism—the “revisionist” and the radical
    (“orthodox”)—see Eduard Bernstein’s Voraussetzungen
    des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie (German
    original, Stuttgart, 1899; Russian translations: Historical Materialism,
    St. Petersburg, 1901, and Social Problems, Moscow, 1901); see
    also his From the History and Theory of Socialism, St. Petersburg,
    1902. A reply to Bernstein is contained in Karl Kautsky’s
    Bernstein und das sozialdemokratische Programm (German original,
    Stuttgart, 1899; Russian translation in four editions; 1905-06). For French
    Marxist literature see Jules Guesde’s Quatre ans de lutte des
    classes, En garde and Questions d’hier et d’aujourd’hui
(Paris, 1911)[26]; Paul Lafargue, Le
    déterminisme économique de K. Marx (Paris, 1909)[27]; Anton Pannokoek, Zwei Tendenzen in der
Arbeiterbewegung.[28]

On the question of the Marxist theory of the accumulation of capital
    there is a new work by Rosa Luxemburg, Die Accumulation des
    Kapitals (Berlin, 1913),[29]
and an analysis of her incorrect interpretation
    of Marx’s theory by Otto Bauer, Die Accumulation des Kapitals
    (Die Neue Zeit, XXXI, 1, 1913, §.831 und 862).[30] See also Eckstein in
    Vorwürtsand Pannekoek in Bremer Bürger-Zeitung for 1913.

Of the older Russian literature on Marxism the following should be noted:
    B. Chicherin, “The German Socialists,” in Bezobrazov’s
    Collection of Political Science, St. Petersburg, 1888, and
    The History of Political Doctrines, Part 5, Moscow, 1902, 156
    pages; a reply to the above by Zieber, “The German Economists Through
    Mr. Chicherin’s Glasses,” in his Collected Works,

 

    Vol. II, St. Petersburg, 1900; L. Slonimsky, The Economic
    Doctrine of Karl Marx, St. Petersburg, 1898; N. Zieber,
    David Ricardo and Karl Marx in Their Socioeconomic
    Investigations, St. Petersburg, 1885, and his Collected Works,
    in two volumes, St. Petersburg, 1900. Also J. Kaufmann’s (J. K-n)
    review of Capital in Vesinik Yevropy for 1872, No. 5—an
    article marked by the fact that, in his addendum to the second edition of
    Capital, Marx quoted J. K-n’s arguments, recognising them as
    a correct exposition of his dialectical-materialist method.

The Russian Narodniks on Marxism: N. K. Mikhailovskyin Russcoye
    Bogatstvo, 1894, No. 10, and 1895, Nos. 1 and 2; also reprinted in his
    Collected Works—remarks on P. Struve’s Critical
    Notes (St. Petersburg, 1894). Mikhailovsky’s views were analysed
    from a Marxist point of view by K. Tulin (V. Ilyin) in his Data
    Characterising Our Economic Development (St. Petersburg, 1895,
    destroyed by the censor), later reprinted in V. Ilyin’s For Twelve
    Years, St. Petersburg, 1908. Other Narodnik works: V. V., Our Lines
    of Policy, St. Petersburg, 1892, and From the Seventies to the
    Twentieth Century, St. Petersburg, 1907; Nikolai-on, Outline of Our
    Post-Reform Social Economy, St. Petersburg, 1893; V. Chernov,
    Marxism and the Agrarian Problem, St. Petersburg, 1906,
    and Philosophical and Sociological Sketches, St. Petersburg,
    1907.

Besides the Narodniks, the following may also be mentioned: N. Kareyev,
    Old and New Sketches on Historical Materialism, St.
    Petersburg, 1896, 2nd edition in 1913 under the title A
    Critique of Economic Materialism; Masaryk, Philosophical and
    Sociological Foundations of Marxism [in Russian], Moscow, 1900; Croce,
    Historical Materialism and Marxian Economy [in Russian],
    St. Petersburg, 1902.

For a correct appraisal of Marx’s views, an acquaintance is
    essential with the works of Frederick Engels, his closest fellow-thinker and
    collaborator. It is impossible to understand Marxism and to propound it
    fully without taking into account all the works of Engels.

For a critique of Marx from the point of view of anarchism, see
    V. Cherkezov, The Doctrines of Marxism, two parts, St. Petersburg,
    1905; V. Tucker, In Lieu of a Book [in Russian], Moscow,  1907;
    Sorel (a syndicalist), Social Studies of Modern Economy, Moscow,
1908.
    
 
 

Notes
 

[1] Engels, in
his article on Marx in the Handwörterbuch der
    Staatswissenschaften, Band VI, S. 603, and Bernstein, in his article on
    Marx in the Eleventh Edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica,
    1911, erroneously give the dates as 1853-60. See Briefwechsel
    of Marx and Engels, published in 1913.—Lenin

[2] “A
    Contribution to the Bibliography of Marxism” published in Archive
    for Social Science and Social Politics, Vol. 20,
    Book 2.—Ed.

[3] Bibliography
of Socialism and Communism, Vols. 1—3.—Ed.

[4] Bibliography
of the Social Sciences, Berlin, the first year of publication, 1905, 
and the following years.—Ed.

[5] People’s
Calendar.—Ed.

[6] Dictionary of 
the Political Sciences, Vol. 6, pp. 600—03.—Ed.

[7] W. Liebknecht, 
Karl Marx, Biographical Memoirs.—Ed.

[8] Paul
    Lafargue, Personal Recollections of Karl Marx.—Ed.

[9] Karl Kautsky, 
The Historical Contribution of Karl Marx. On the Twenty-Fifth 
Anniversary of the Master’s Death.—Ed.

[10] Clara
    Zetkin, Karl Marx and His Life Work.—Ed.

[11] E. Untermann, 
The Logical Defects of Narrow Marxism.—Ed.

[12] Hogo Riekes, 
“The Philosophical Roots of Marxism,” in the Journal
    of All Political Sciences, 62nd year of publication, 1906, Book 3,
    pp. 407—32.—Ed.

[13] Benno Erthnann, 
“The Philosophic Assumptions of the Materialist Conception
    of History” in the Yearbook for Legislation, Administration and
    National Economy (Schiller’s Yearbook), 1907, Book 3,
    pp. 1—56.—Ed.

[14] Rudolph
    Stammier, Economy and Law According to the Materialist Conception of
    History.—Ed.

[15] V. Ilyin—one 
of the literary pseudonyms of V. I. Lenin.—Ed.

[16] Hermann
    Gorter, Historical Materialism.—Ed.

[17] Flarnmacher, 
The Philosophic-Economic System of Marxism.—Ed.

[18] Max Adler,  
Causality and Teleology and Marx as a Thinker.—Ed.

[19] Giovanni Gentile, 
The Philosophy of Marx.—Ed.

[20] Compbre-Morel, 
Agrarian Question and Socialism in France.—Ed.

[21] Böhrn-Bawerk, 
Karl Marx and the Close of His System.—Ed.

[22] Riekes, Value 
and Exchange Value, (1899).—Ed.

[23] Von Bortkiewicz, 
Calculation of Value and Calculation of Price in the Marxian System
(Archive for Social Science, 1906—07).—Ed.

[24] Leo von Buch, 
On the Elements of Political Economy. Intensity of Labour, Value and 
Price.—Ed.

[25] Hulferding
    Bohm-Bawerk’s Criticism of Marx.—Ed.

[26] Jules Guesde, 
Four Years of Class Struggle, On-Guard! Questions of Today,
    Paris, 1911.—Ed.

[27] Paul Lafargue, 
Economic Determinism, The Historical Method of Karl Marx,
    Paris, 1909.—Ed.

[28] Anton Pannekoek, 
Two Tendencies in the Labour Movement.—Ed.

[29] Rosa Luxemhurg, 
The Accumulation of Capital, Berlin, 1913—Ed.

[30] Otto Bauer, 
The Accumulation of Capital (Die Neue Zeit, XXXI,
    1, 1913, pp. 831 and 862).—Ed.
 


[31] [PLACEHOLDER.]


 





Works Index
    |   
  Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works
    |   L.I.A. Index




  < backward




  forward >




 



==========

## A German Voice on the War









Lenin: A German Voice on the War







V. I.  

      Lenin
A German Voice on the War




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 34, December 5, 1914.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 92-93.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

      “In a single night the aspect of the world has changed...
      . Everyone puts the blame on his neighbour, everyone claims to be on the
      defensive, to act only in a state of urgent defence. Everyone, don’t
      you see, is defending only his most sacred values, the hearth, the
      fatherland... . National vainglory and national aggressiveness
      triumph... . Even the great international working class obeys national
      orders, workers are killing one another on the battlefields... . Our
      civilisation has proved bankrupt... . Writers of European fame are not
      ashamed to come forth as ragingly blind chauvinists... . We had too
      much faith in the possibility of imperialist madness being curbed by the
      fear of economic ruin... . We are going through an undisguised
      imperialist struggle for mastery of the world. There is no trace anywhere
      of a struggle for great ideas,  except perhaps the overthrow of the
      Russian Minotaur ... the tsar and his grand dukes who have delivered
      to the hangmen the noblest men of their country... . But do we not see
      how noble France, the bearer of ideals of liberty, has become the ally of
      the hangman tsar? How honest Germany ... is breaking its word and is
      strangling unhappy neutral Belgium? ... How will it all end? If
      poverty becomes too great, if despair gains the upper hand, if brother
      recognises his brother in the uniform of an enemy, then perhaps something
      very unexpected may still come, arms may perhaps be turned against those
      who are urging people into the war and nations that have been made to hate
      one another may perhaps forget that hatred, and suddenly unite. We do not
      want to be prophets, but should the European war bring us one step closer
      to a European social republic, then this war, after all, will not have
      been as senseless as it seems at present.”
    

Whose voice is this? Perhaps one coming from a German Social-Democrat?
    

Far from it! Headed by Kautsky, the German Social Democrats have become
    “wretched counter-revolutionary
windbags”,[2] as Marx called
    those Social-Democrats who, after the publication of the Anti-Socialist Law,
    behaved “in accord with the circumstances”, in the manner of
    Haase, Kautsky, Südekum and Co. today.
    
 

No, our quotation is from a magazine of petty-bourgeois Christian
      democrats published by a group of kind-hearted little churchmen in Zurich
      (Neue Wege, Blätter für religiöse
      Arbeit,[1]

September, 1914). That is the limit of
      humiliation we have come to: God-fearing philistines go as far as to say
      that it would not be bad to turn weapons against those who “are
      urging people into the war”, while
      “authoritative” Social-Democrats like Kautsky
      “scientifically” defend the most despicable chauvinism, or,
      like Plekhanov, declare the propaganda of civil war against the
      bourgeoisie a harmful “utopia”! 

Indeed, if such “Social-Democrats” wish to be in the majority
    and to form the official “International”(= an alliance for
    international justification of national chauvinism), then is it not better
    to give up the name of “Social-Democrats”, which has been
    besmirched and degraded by them, and return to the old Marxist name of
    Communists? Kautsky once threatened to do that when the opportunist
    Bernsteinians[3] seemed to be close to conquering the German
    party officially. What was an idle threat from his lips will perhaps become
    action to others.


 
Notes
 

[1]
New
    Ways, Pages for Religious Work.—Ed.

 



[2]
See
    Marx’s letter to F. A. Sorge of September 19, 1879.



[3]
This refers
    to the followers of the revisionist Bernstein, leader of the opportunist
    trend in German Social-Democracy, which arose at the end of the nineteenth
    century.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Dead Chauvinism and Living Socialism









Lenin: Dead Chauvinism and Living Socialism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Dead Chauvinism and Living Socialism
HOW THE INTERNATIONAL CAN BE RESTORED




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 35, December 12, 1914.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 94-101.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

For decades, German Social-Democracy was a model to the Social-Democrats
      of Russia, even somewhat more than to the Social-Democrats of the whole
      world. It is therefore clear that there can be no intelligent, i.e.,
      critical, attitude towards the now prevalent social-patriotism or
      “socialist” chauvinism, without a most precise definition of
      one’s attitude towards German Social-Democracy, What was it in the
      past? What is it today? What will it be in the future?

A reply to the first of these questions may be found in Der Weg zur
    Macht, a pamphlet written by K. Kautsky in 1909 and translated into
    many European languages. Containing a most complete exposition of the tasks
    of our times, it was most advantageous to the German Social-Democrats (in
    the sense of the promise they held out), and moreover came from the pen of
    the most eminent writer of the Second International. We shall recall the
    pamphlet in some detail; this will be the more useful now since those
    forgotten ideals are so often barefacedly cast aside.

Social-Democracy is a “revolutionary party” (as stated in the
    opening sentence of the pamphlet), not only in the sense that a steam engine
    is revolutionary, but “also in another sense”. It wants conquest
    of political power by the proletariat, the dictatorship of the
    proletariat. Heaping ridicule on “doubters of the revolution”,
    Kautsky writes: “In any important movement and uprising we must, of
    course, reckon with the possibility of defeat. Prior to the struggle, only a
    fool can consider himself quite certain of victory.” However, to
    refuse to consider the possibility of victory

    

would he “a direct betrayal of our cause”. A revolution in
      connection with a war, he says, is possible both during and after a
      war. It is impossible to determine at which particular moment the
      sharpening of class antagonisms will lead to revolution, but, the author
      continues, “I can quite definitely assert that a revolution that war
      brings in its wake, will break out either during or immediately after the
      war”; nothing is more vulgar, we read further, than the theory of
      “the peaceful growing into socialism”. “Nothing is more
      erroneous,” he continues, “than the opinion that a cognition
      of economic necessity means a weakening of the will ... . The will, as
      a desire for struggle,” he says, “is determined, first, by the
      price of the struggle, secondly, by a sense of power, and thirdly, by
      actual power.” When an attempt was made, incidentally by
      Vorwärts, to interpret Engels’s famous preface to The
      Class Struggles in France in the meaning of opportunism, Engels
      became indignant, and called shameful any assumption that he was a
      “peaceful worshipper of legality at any
price”.[1] “We have
      every reason to believe,” Kautsky goes on to say, “that we are
      entering upon a period of struggle for state power.” That struggle
      may last for decades; that is something we do not know, but “it will
      in all probability bring about, in the near future, a considerable
      strengthening of the proletariat, if not its dictatorship, in Western
      Europe”. The revolutionary elements are growing, Kautsky declares:
      out of ten million voters in Germany in 1895, there were six million
      proletarians and three and a half million people interested in private
      property; in 1907 the latter grew by 0.03 million, and the former by 1.6
      million! “The rate of the advance becomes very rapid as soon as a
      time of revolutionary ferment comes.” Class antagonisms are not
      blunted but, on the contrary, grow acute; prices rise, and imperialist
      rivalry and militarism are rampant. “A new era of revolution”
      is drawing near. The monstrous growth of taxes would “long ago have
      led to war as the only alternative to revolution ... had not that very
      alternative of revolution stood closer after a war than after a period of
      armed peace...”. “A world war Is ominously
      imminent,” Kautsky continues, “and war means also
      revolution.” In 1891 Engels had reason to fear a premature
      revolution in Germany; since then, however, “the

    

situation has greatly changed”. The proletariat “can no longer
      speak of a premature revolution” (Kautsky’s
      italics). The petty bourgeoisie is downright unreliable and is ever more
      hostile to the proletariat, but in a time of crisis it is “capable
      of coming over to our side in masses”. The main thing is that
      Social-Democracy “should remain unshakable, consistent, and
      irreconcilable”. We have undoubtedly entered a revolutionary
      period.

This is how Kautsky wrote in times long, long past, fully five years
      ago. This is what German Social-Democracy was, or, more correctly, what it
      promised to be. This was the kind of Social-Democracy that could and had to
      be respected.

See what the selfsame Kautsky writes today. Here are the most important
      statements in his article “Social-Democracy in Wartime”
      (Die Neue Zeit No. 1, October 2, 1914): “Our Party
      has far more rarely discussed the question of how to behave in wartime
      than how to prevent war .... Never is government so strong, never are
      parties so weak, as at the outbreak of war .... Wartime is least of
      all favourable to peaceful discussion .... Today the practical
      question is: victory or defeat for one’s own country.” Can
      there be an understanding among the parties of the belligerent countries
      regarding anti-war action? “That kind of thing has never been tested
      in practice. We have always disputed that possibility ....” The
      difference between the French and German socialists is “not one of
      principle” (as both defend their fatherlands)
      .... “Social-Democrats of all countries have an equal right or
      an equal obligation to take part in the defence of the fatherland: no
      nation should blame the other for doing so ....” “Has the
      International turned bankrupt?” “Has the Party rejected direct
      defence of its party principles in wartime?” (Mehring’s
      questions in the same issue.) “That is an erroneous conception
      .... There are no grounds at all for such pessimism .... The
      differences are not fundamental .... Unity of principles remains
      .... To disobey wartime laws would simply lead to suppression of our
      press.” Obedience to these laws “implies rejection of defence
      of party principles just as little as similar behaviour of our party press
      under that sword of Damocles—the Anti-Socialist Law.”
 

We have purposely quoted from the original because it is hard to believe
      that such things could have been written. It is hard to find in literature
      (except in that coming from downright renegades) such smug vulgarity, such
      shameful departure from the truth, such unsavoury subterfuge to cover up
      the most patent renunciation both of socialism in general and of precise
      international decisions unanimously adopted (as, for instance, in
      Stuttgart and particularly in Basic) precisely in view of the possibility
      of a European war just like the present! It would be disrespectful towards
      the reader were we to treat Kautsky’s arguments in earnest and try
      to analyse them: if the European war differs in many respects from a
      simple “little” anti-Jewish pogrom, the
      “socialist” arguments in favour of participation in such a war
      fully resimhle the “democratic” arguments in favour of
      participation in an anti-Jewish pogrom. One does not analyse arguments in
      favour of a pogrom; one only points them out so as to put their authors to
      shame in the sight of all class-conscious workers.

But how could it have come to pass, the reader will ask, that the leading
    authority in the Second International, a writer who once defended the views
    quoted at the beginning of this article, has sunk to something that is worse
    than being a renegade? That will not be understood, we answer, only by those
    who, perhaps unconsciously, consider that nothing out of the ordinary has
    happened, and that it is not difficult to “forgive and forget”,
    etc., i.e., by those who regard the matter from the renegade’s point
    of view. Those, however, who have earnestly and sincerely professed
    socialist convictions and have held the views set forth in the beginning of
    this article will not be surprised to learn that “Vorwdrts is
    dead” (Martov’s expression in the Paris Gobs) and that Kautsky
    is “dead”. The political bankruptcy of individuals is not a
    rarity at turning points in history. Despite the tremendous services he has
    rendered, Kautsky has never been among those who, at great crises,
    immediately take a militant Marxist stand (recall his vacillations on the
    issue of
Millerandism[2]).

It is such times that we are passing through. “You shoot  first,
    Messieurs the
Bourgeoisie!”[3] Engels wrote in 1891, advocating, most
    correctly, the use of bourgeois legality by

    

us, revolutionaries, in the period of so-called peaceful constitutional
      development. Engels’s idea was crystal clear: we class-conscious
      workers, he said, will be the next to shoot; it is to our advantage to
      exchange ballots for bullets (to go over to civil war) at the moment the
      bourgeoisie itself has broken the legal foundation it has laid down. In
      1909 Kautsky voiced the undisputed opinion held by all revolutionary
      Social-Democrats when he said that revolution in Europe cannot now be
      premature and that war means revolution.

 “Peaceful” decades, however, have not passed without leaving
    their mark. They have of necessity given rise to opportunism in all
    countries, and made it prevalent among parliamentarian, trade union,
    journalistic and other “leaders”. There is no country in Europe
    where, in one form or another, a long and stubborn struggle has not been
    conducted against opportunism, the latter being supported in a host of ways
    by the entire bourgeoisie, which is striving to corrupt and weaken the
    revolutionary proletariat. Fifteen years ago, at the outset of the Bernstein
    controversy, the selfsame Kautsky wrote that should opportunism turn from a
    sentiment into a trend, a split would be imminent. In Russia, the old
    Iskra,[4] which created the Social-Democratic Party of the
    working class, declared, in an article which appeared in its second issue
    early in 1901, under the title of “On the Threshold of the Twentieth
    Century”, that the revolutionary class of the twentieth century, like
    the revolutionary class of the eighteenth century—the bourgeoisie, had
    its own Gironde and its own
Mountain.[5]


The European war is a tremendous historical crisis, the beginning of a
    new epoch. Like any crisis, the war has aggravated deep-seated antagonisms
    and brought them to the surface, tearing asunder all veils of hypocrisy,
    rejecting all conventions and deflating all corrupt or rotting
    authorities. (This, incidentally, is the salutary and progressive effect of
    all crises, which only the dull-witted adherents of “peaceful
    evolution” fail to realise.) The Second International, which in its
    twenty-five or forty-five years of existence (according to whether the
    reckoning is from 1870 or 1889) was able to perform the highly important and
    useful work of expanding the influence of socialism and giving the socialist
    forces preparatory, initial and elementary

    

organisation, has played its historical role and has passed away,
      overcome, not so much by the von Kiucks as by opportunism. Let the dead
      bury their dead. Let the empty-headed busy-bodies (if not the intriguing
      lackeys of the chauvinists and the opportunists) labour at the task of
      bringing together Vandervelde and Sembat with Kautsky and Haase, as though
      we had another Ivan Ivanovich, who has called Ivan Nikiforovich a
      “gander”, and has to he urged by his friends to make it up
      with his
enemy.[6] An International does not mean sitting at the
      same table and having hypocritical and pettifogging resolutions written by
      people who think that genuine internationalism consists in German
      socialists justifying the German bourgeoisie’s call to shoot down
      French workers, and in French socialists justifying the French
      bourgeoisie’ call to shoot down German workers in the name of the
      “defence of the fatherland”! The International consists in the
      coming together (first ideologically, then in due time organisationally as
      well) of people who, in these grave days, are capable of defending
      socialist internationalism in deed, i.e., of mustering their forces and
      “being the next to shoot” at the governments and the ruling
      classes of their own respective “fatherlands”. This
      is no easy task; it calls for much preparation and great sacrifices and
      will be accompanied by reverses. However, for the very reason that it, is
      no easy task, it must be accomplished only together with those who
      wish to perform it and are not afraid of a complete break with
      the chauvinists and with the defenders of social-chauvinism.

Such people as Pannekoek are doing more than anyone else for the sincere,
      not hypocritical restoration of a socialist, not a chauvinist,
      International. In an article entitled “The Collapse of the
      International”, Pannekoek said: “If the leaders get together in
      an attempt to patch up their differences, that will be of no significance at
      all.”

Let us frankly state the facts; in any case the war will compel us to do
      so, if not tomorrow, then the day after. Three currents exist in
      international socialism: (1) the chauvinists, who are consistently pursuing
      a policy of opportunism; (2) the consistent opponents of opportunism, who in
      all countries have already begun to make themselves heard (the opportunists
      have routed most of them, but

    

“defeated armies learn fast”), and are capable of conducting
      revolutionary work directed towards civil war; (3) confused and
      vacillating people, who at present are following in the wake of the
      opportunists and are causing the proletariat most harm by their
      hypocritical attempts to justify opportunism, something that they do
      almost scientifically and using the Marxist (sic!) method. Some of those
      who are engulfed in the latter current can be saved and restored to
      socialism, but only through a policy of a most decisive break and split
      with the former current, with all those who are capable of justifying the
      war credits vote, “the defence of the fatherland”,
      “submission to wartime laws”, a willingness to be satisfied
      with legal means only, and the rejection of civil war. Only those who
      pursue a policy like this are really building up a socialist
      International. For our part, we, who have established links with the
      Russian Collegium of the Central Committee and with the leading elements
      of the working-class movement in St. Petersburg, have exchanged opinions
      with them and become convinced that we are agreed on the main points, are
      in a position, as editors of the Central Organ, to declare in the name of
      our Party that only work conducted in this direction is Party work and
      Social-Democratic work.

The idea of a split in the German Social-Democratic movement may seem
      alarming to many in its “unusualness”. The objective
      situation, however, goes to show that either the unusual will come to pass
      (after all, Adler and Kautsky did declare, at the last session of the
      International Socialist
Bureau[7] in July 1914, that they did not believe in
      miracles, and therefore did not believe in a European war!) or we shall
      witness the painful decomposition of what was once German
      Social-Democracy. In conclusion, we would like to remind those who are too
      prone to “trust” the (former) German Social-Democrats that
      people who have been our opponents on a number of issues have arrived at
      the idea of such a split. Thus Martov has written in Gobs: “Vorwarts
      is dead .... A Social-Democracy which publicly renounces the class
      struggle would do better to recognise the facts as they are, temporarily
      disband its organisation, and close down its organs.” Thus Plekhanov
      is quoted by Gobs as having saidin a report: “I am very much against
      splits,

    

but if principles are sacrificed for the integrity of the
      organisation, then better a split than false unity.” Plekhanov was
      referring to the German radicals: he sees a mote in the eye of the
      Germans, but not the beam in his own eye. This is an individual feature in
      him; over the past ten years we have all grown quite used to
      Plekhanov’s radicalism in theory and opportunism in
      practice. However, if even persons with such “oddities” begin
      to talk of a split among the Germans, it is a sign of the times.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
In its
    issue of March 30, 1895, Vorwärts published a summary and
    several extracts from Engels’s preface to Marx’s The
    Class Struggles

   

in France, 1848 to 1850, omitting very important
    propositions on the revolutionary role of the proletariat, which evoked a
    vehement protest from Engels. In his letter to Kautsky of April 1, 1895, he
    wrote: “To my astonishment I see in the Vorwärts today
    an extract from my ‘Introduction’, printed without my prior
    knowledge and trimmed in such a fashion that 1 appear as a peaceful
    worshipper of legality at any price” (Marx and Engels, Selected
    Correspondence, Moscow, 1955, p. 568).
Engels insisted on the “Introduction” being
    published in full. In 1895 it was published in the journal Die Neue
    Zeit, but with considerable deletions, these at the instance of the
    German Social-Democratic Party leadership. Seeking to justify their
    reformist tactics, the leaders of German Social-Democracy subsequently began
    to interpret their version of the “Introduction”  as
    Engels’s renunciation of revolution, armed uprisings and barricade
    fighting. The original text of the “Introduction” was first
    published in the Soviet Union in 1955 (see Marx and Engels, Selected
    Works, Moscow, 1962,Vol. I, pp. 118-38). 



[2]
Millerandtsm—an opportunist trend named after the French
    "socialist" Millerand, who in 1899 joined the reactionary bourgeois
    government of France and helped the bourgeoisie in conducting its
    policy.
The admissibility of socialists’ participation in
    bourgeois governments was discussed at the Paris Congress of the Second
    International in 1900. The Congress adopted Kautsky’s conciliatory
    resolution condemning socialists’ participation in bourgeois
    governments but permitting it in certain “exceptional”
    cases. The French socialists used this proviso to justify their joining the
    bourgeois government at the beginning of the First World War.



[3]
See
    F. Engels, Socialism in Germany, Section I.



[4]
Iskra (The
    Spark)-the first all-Russian illegal Marxist newspaper, founded by Lenin in
    1900. It played a decisive part in the establishmeat of the revolutionary
    Marxist party of the working class. The first issue appeared in Leipzig in
    December 1900; it was subsequently published in Munich, in London (from July
    1902) and in Geneva (from the spring of 1903). On Lenin’s initiative
    and with his direct participation,the fskra editorial hoard drew up the
    Party programme, which was published in Iskra No. 21, and prepared the
    Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. which marked the beginning of a
    revolutionary Marxist party in Russia. Soon after the Congress, the
    Mensheviks, helped by Plekhanov, gained control of Iskra, so that, beginning
    with issue No. 52, Iskra ceased being an organ of revolutionary
    Marxism. 



[5]
The
    Mountain (Montagne) and the Gironde-the two political groups of the
    bourgeoisie during the French bourgeois revolution of 1789. The Montagnards,
    or Jacobins, was the name given to the more resolute representatives of the
    bourgeoisie, the revolutionary

   

class of the time, who stood for the
    abolition of absolutism and the feudal system. Unlike the Jacobins, the
    Girondists vacillated between revolution and counter-revolution, and sought
    agreement with the monarchy.
Lenin called the opportunist trend in Social-Democracy
    the  “socialist Gironde” , and the revolutionary Social-Democrats
    the  “proletarian Jacobins” , “the Mountain”. After
    the R.S.D.L.P. split into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, Lenin frequently
    stressed that the Mensheviks epresented the Girondist trend in the
    working-class movement. 



[6]
Ivan
    Ivanovich and Ivan Nikiforovich-characters in Gogol’s
    Tale of How Ivan Ivanovich Quarrelled with Iran Nikiforovich. The
    quarrel between these two provincial landowners, whose names have become
    proverbial, started on a most insignificant pretext, and dragged on
    endlessly.  



[7]
The
    International Socialist Bureau-the executive body of the Second
    International, established by decision of the ParisCongressof 1900. From
    1905 Lenin was member of the LS.B. as representative of the R.S.D.L.P. 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## On the National Pride of the Great Russians









Lenin: On the National Pride of the Great Russians







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the National Pride of the Great Russians




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 35, December 12, 1914.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 102-106.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

What a lot of talk, argument and vociferation there is nowadays about
      nationality and the fatherland! Liberal and radical cabinet ministers in
      Britain, a host of “forward-looking” journalists in France (who
      have proved in full agreement with their reactionary colleagues), and a
      swarm of official Cadet and progressive scribblers in Russia (including
      several Narodniks and “Marxists”)—all have effusive
      praise for the liberty and independence of their respective countries, the
      grandeur of the principle of national independence. Here one cannot tell
      where the venal eulogist of the butcher Nicholas
Romanov[1] or of the brutal
      oppressors of Negroes and Indians ends, and where the common philistine
      begins, who from sheer stupidity or spinelessness drifts with the streams,
      begins. Nor is that distinction important. We see before us an extensive
      and very deep ideological trend, whose origins are closely interwoven with
      the interests of the landowners and the capitalists of the dominant
      nations. Scores and hundreds of millions are being spent every year for
      the propaganda of ideas advantageous to those classes: it is a pretty big
      mill-race that takes its waters from all sources—from Menshikov, a
      chauvinist by conviction, to chauvinists for reason of opportunism or
      spinelessness such as Plekhanov and Maslov, Rubanovich and Smirnov,
      Kropotkin and Burtsev. 

Let us, Great-Russian Social-Democrats, also try to define our attitude
      to this ideological trend. It would be unseemly for us, representatives of
      a dominant nation in the far east of Europe and a goodly part of Asia, to
      forget the immense significance of the national question—especially

    

in a country which has been rightly called the “prison of the
      peoples”, and particularly at a time when, in the far east of Europe
      and in Asia, capitalism is awakening to life and self-consciousness a
      number of #8220;new” nations, large and small; at a moment when the
      tsarist monarchy has called up millions of Great Russians and
      non-Russians, so as to “solve” a number of national problems in
      accordance with the interests of the Council of the United
Nobility[2] and of
      the Guchkovs, Krestovnikovs, Dolgorukovs, Kutlers and Rodichevs. 

Is a sense of national pride alien to us, Great-Russian class-conscious
    proletarians? Certainly not! We love our language and our country, and we
    are doing our very utmost to raise her toiling masses (i.e.,
    nine-tenths of her population) to the level of a democratic and
    socialist consciousness. To us it is most painful to see and feel the
    outrages, the oppression and the humiliation our fair country suffers at the
    hands of the tsar’s butchers, the nobles and the capitalists. We take
    pride in the resistance to these outrages put up from our midst, from the
    Great Russians; in that midst having produced
Radishchev,[3] the
Decembrists[4] and the revolutionary commoners of the
seventies[5]; in the Great-Russian working class having
    created, in 1905, a mighty revolutionary party of the masses; and in the
    Great-Russian peasantry having begun to turn towards democracy and set about
    overthrowing the clergy and the landed proprietors. 

We remember that Chernyshevsky, the Great-Russian democrat, who dedicated
    his life to the cause of revolution, said half a century ago: “A
    wretched nation, a nation of slaves, from top to bottom—all
slaves."[6] The
    overt and covert Great-Russian slaves (slaves with regard to the tsarist
    monarchy) do not like to recall these words. Yet, in our opinion, these were
    words of genuine love for our country, a love distressed by the absence of a
    revolutionary spirit in the masses of the Great-Russian people. There was
    none of that spirit at the time. There is little of it now, but it already
    exists. We are full of national pride because the Great-Russian nation,
    too, has created a revolutionary class, because it, too,
    has proved capable of providing mankind with great models of the struggle
    for freedom and socialism, and not only with great pogroms, rows of

    

gallows,
    dungeons, great famines and great servility to priests, tsars, landowners
    and capitalists.

We are full of a sense of national pride, and for that very reason we
      particularly hate our slavish past (when the landed
      nobility led the peasants into war to stifle the freedom of Hungary,
      Poland, Persia and China), and our slavish present, when these selfsame
      landed proprietors, aided by the capitalists, are loading us into a war in
      order to throttle Poland and the Ukraine, crush the democratic movement in
      Persia and China, and strengthen the gang of Romanovs, Bobrinskys and
      Purishkeviches, who are a disgrace to our Great-Russian national
      dignity. Nobody is to be blamed for being born a slave; but a slave who
      not only eschews a striving for freedom but justifies and eulogises his
      slavery (e.g., calls the throttling of Poland and the Ukraine, etc., a
      “defence of the fatherland” of the Great Russians)—such a
      slave is a lickspittle and a boor, who arouses a legitimate feeling of
      indignation, contempt, and loathing. 

"No nation can be free if it oppresses other nations,” said Marx and
    Engels, the greatest representatives of consistent nineteenth century
    democracy, who became the teachers of the revolutionary proletariat. And,
    full of a sense of national pride, we Great-Russian workers want, come what
    may, a free and independent, a democratic, republican and proud Great
    Russia, one that will base its relations with its neighbours on the human
    principle of equality, and not on the feudalist principle of privilege,
    which is so degrading to a great nation. Just because we want that, we say:
    it is impossible, in the twentieth century and in Europe (even in the far
    east of Europe), to “defend the fatherland” otherwise than by
    using every revolutionary means to combat the monarchy, the landowners and
    the capitalists of one’s own fatherland, i.e., the worst
    enemies of our country. We say that the Great Russians cannot “defend
    the fatherland” otherwise than by desiring the defeat of tsarism in any
    war, this as the lesser evil to nine-tenths of the inhabitants of Great
    Russia. For tsarism not only oppresses those nine-tenths economically and
    politically, but also demoralises, degrades, dishonours and prostitutes them
    by teaching them to oppress other nations and to cover up this shame with
    hypocritical and quasi-patriotic phrases.
 

The objection may be advanced that, besides tsarism and under its wing,
      another historical force has arisen and become strong, viz., Great-Russian
      capitalism, which is carrying on progressive work by economically
      centralising and welding together vast regions. This objection, however,
      does not excuse, but on the contrary still more condemns our
      socialist-chauvinists, who should be called tsarist-Purishkevich
      socialists[7] (just as Marx called the Lassalleans
      Royal-Prussian
socialists).[8] Let us even assume that history will decide in
      favour of Great-Russian dominant-nation capitalism, and against the
      hundred and one small nations. That is not impossible, for the entire
      history of capital is one of violence and plunder, blood and
      corruption. We do not advocate preserving small nations at all costs;
      other conditions being equal, we are decidedly for centralisation
      and are opposed to the petty-bourgeois ideal of federal
      relationships. Even if our assumption were true, however, it is, firstly,
      not our business, or that of democrats (let alone of socialists), to help
      Romanov-Bobrinsky-Purishkevich throttle the Ukraine, etc. In his own
      Junker fashion, Bismarck accomplished a progressive historical task, but
      he would be a fine “Marxist” indeed who, on such grounds,
      thought of justifying socialist support for Bismarck! Moreover, Bismarck
      promoted economic development by bringing together the disunited Germans,
      who were being oppressed by other nations. The economic prosperity and
      rapid development of Great Russia, however, require that the country be
      liberated from Great-Russian oppression of other nations—that is the
      difference that our admirers of the true-Russian would-be Bismarcks
      overlook. 

Secondly, if history were to decide in favour of Great Russian
      dominant-nation capitalism, it follows hence that the socialist
      role of the Great-Russian proletariat, as the principal driving force of the
      communist revolution engendered by capitalism, will be all the greater. The
      proletarian revolution calls for a prolonged education of the workers in the
      spirit of the fullest national equality and
      brotherhood. Consequently, the interests of the Great-Russian proletariat
      require that the masses be systematically educated to champion—most
      resolutely, consistently, boldly and in a revolutionary
      manner—complete equality and the right to self-determination for all
      the nations oppressed

    

by the Great Russians. The interests of the Great
      Russians’ national pride (understood, not in the slavish sense)
      coincide with the socialist interests of the Great-Russian (and all
      other) proletarians. Our model will always be Marx, who, after living in
      Britain for decades and becoming half-English, demanded freedom and national
      independence for Ireland in the interests of the socialist movement of the
      British workers. 

In the second hypothetical case we have considered, our home-grown
      socialist-chauvinists, Plekhanov, etc., etc., will prove traitors, not only
      to their own country—a free and democratic Great Russia, but also to
      the proletarian brotherhood of all the nations of Russia, i.e., to the cause
      of socialism.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Nicholas II
      (1868-1918)—tsar of Russia (1894-1917).



[2]
The
Council of the United Nobility—a counter-revolutionary
      landowners’ organisation, which was founded in May 1906. The Council
      exercised considerable influence over the policy of the tsarist
      government. Lenin called it the “Council of the United
      Feudalists”.



[3]
Radishchev, A. N. (1749-1802)—Russian writer and
      revolutionary. In his famous work A Journey from St. Petersburg to
Moscow, he launched the first public attack on serfdom in Russia. By
      order of Catherine II he was sentenced to death for the book, but the
      sentence was commuted to 10 years’ exile in Siberia. He returned from
      exile under an amnesty, but committed suicide when faced with the threat of
      fresh persecution. Lenin regarded Radishchev an outstanding representative
      of the Russian people.



[4]
Decembrists—Russian revolutionary noblemen, who in December
      1825 rose in revolt against the autocracy and the serf-owning system.



[5]
Commoners (raznoehintsi in Russian)—the Russian
      commoner intellectuals, drawn from the petty townsfolk, the clergy, the
      merchant classes and the peasantry, as distinct from those coming from the
      nobility.



[6]
A quotation
      from Chernyshevsky’s novel The Prologue. 



[7]
Purishkevich, V. M. (1870-1920)—big landowner,
      Black-Hundred reactionary, and monarchist.



[8]
See Marx and
      Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, p 201.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## What Next?









Lenin: What Next?







V. I.  

      Lenin
What Next?
On the Tasks Confronting the Workers’ Parties with Regard to Opportunism and Social-Chauvinism




Published:
Sotsial-DemokratNo. 36, January 9, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 107-114.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The tremendous crisis created within European socialism by
    the world war has (as is always the case in great crises) resulted first in
    enormous confusion; it then led to a series of new groupings taking shape
    among representatives of various currents, shades and views in socialism;
    finally, it raised, with particular acuteness and insistence, the question
    of what changes in the foundations of socialist policy follow from
    the crisis and are demanded by it. Between August and December 1914, the
    socialists of Russia also passed through these three “stages” in
    a marked fashion. We all know that there was no little confusion at the
    beginning; the confusion was increased by the tsarist persecutions, by the
    behaviour of the “Europeans”, and by the war alarm. In Paris and
    Switzerland, where there was the greatest number of political exiles, the
    greatest links with Russia, and the greatest degree of freedom, a new
    definite line of demarcation between the various attitudes towards problems
    raised by the war was being drawn, during September and October, at
    discussions, lectures, and in the press. It can safely be said that there is
    not a single shade of opinion in any current (or group) of socialism (and
    near-socialism) in Russia which has not found expression and been
    analysed. The general feeling is that the time has come for precise and
    positive conclusions capable of serving as the basis of systematic and
    practical activity, propaganda, agitation, and organisation. The situation
    is clear, all have expressed themselves. Let us now see who is with
    whom, and whither the courses have been taken.
 

On November 23 (N. S.), on the day following the publication in Petrograd
    of a government communique on the arrest of the Russian Social-Democratic
    Labour group in the
Duma,[4] an event took place at the congress of the
    Swedish Social-Democratic Party in Stockholm, which finally and irrevocably
    placed on the order of the day the two questions just
emphasised.[5] Readers
    will find below a description of this event, namely, a full translation,
    from the official Swedish Social-Democratic report, of the speeches both of
    Belenin (representing the Central Committee) and of Larin (representing the
    Organising
Committee),[6] and also the debate on the question raised by
    Branting. 

For the first time since the outbreak of war, a representative of our
    Party, of its Central Committee, and a representative of the liquidationist
    Organising Committee met at a congress of socialists of a neutral
    country. What did their speeches differ in? Belenin took a most definite
    stand regarding the grave, painful but momentous issues of the present-day
    socialist movement; quoting
Sotsial-Demokrat,[7] the Party’s
    Central Organ, he came out with a resolute declaration of war against
    opportunism, branding the behaviour of the German Social-Democratic leaders
    (and “many others”) as treachery. Larin took no stand
    at all; he passed over the essence of the question in silence, confining
    himself to those hackneyed, hollow and moth-eaten phrases that always win
    hand-claps from opportunists and social-chauvinists in all countries. But
    then, Belenin said nothing at all about our attitude towards the other
    Social-Democratic parties or groups in Russia, as though intimating:
    “Such is our stand; as for the others, we shall not express ourselves
    as yet, but shall wait and see which course they will
    take.” Larin, on the contrary, unfurled the banner of
    “unity”, shed a tear over the “bitter fruit of the split
    in Russia”, and depicted in gorgeous colours the “work of
    unification” carried on by the Organising Committee, which, be said,
    had united Plekhanov, the Caucasians, the Bundists, the
Poles,[8] and so
    forth. Larin’s intentions will be dealt with elsewhere (see
    below: The Kind of Unity Larin
Proclaimed”[1]

).

What interests us here is the
    fundamental question of unity.
 

We have before us two slogans. One is: war against the opportunists and
      the social-chauvinists, who are traitors. The other is: unity in Russia,
      in particular with Plekhanov (who, we shall state parenthetically, is
      behaving with us in exactly the same way as
Südekum[2]

with the
      Germans, Hyndman with the British, etc.). Is it not obvious that, though
      he is afraid to call things by their proper names, Larin has in fact come
      out as advocate of the opportunists and social-chauvinists? 

Let us, however, consider in general and in the light of present-day
    events the meaning of the “unity” slogan. The proletariat’s
    unity is its greatest weapon in the struggle for the socialist
    revolution. From this indisputable truth it follows just as indisputably
    that, when a proletarian party is joined by a considerable number of
    petty-bourgeois elements capable of hampering the struggle for the
    socialist revolution, unity with such elements is harmful and perilous to
    the cause of the proletariat. Present-day events have shown that, on the one
    hand, the objective conditions are ripe for an imperialist war (i.e., a war
    reflecting the last and highest stage of capitalism), and, on the other
    hand, that decades of a so-called peaceful epoch have allowed an
    accumulation of petty-bourgeois and opportunist junk
    within the socialist parties of all the European countries. Some
    fifteen years ago, during the celebrated “Bernsteiniad” in
    Germany—and even earlier in many other countries—the question of
    the opportunist and alien elements within the proletarian parties
    had become a burning issue. There is hardly a single Marxist of note who has
    not recognised many times and on various occasions that the opportunists are
    in fact a non-proletarian element hostile to the socialist revolution. The
    particularly rapid growth of this social element of late years is beyond
    doubt: it includes officials of the legal labour unions, parliamentarians
    and the other intellectuals, who have got themselves easy and comfort able
    posts in the legal mass movement, some sections of the better paid workers,
    office employees, etc., etc. The

    

war has clearly proved that at a moment of
      crisis (and the imperialist era will undoubtedly be one of all kinds of
      crises) a sizable mass of opportunists, supported and often directly guided
      by the bourgeoisie (this is of particular importance!), go over to the
      latter’s camp, betray socialism, damage the workers’ cause, and
      attempt to ruin it. In every crisis the bourgeoisie will always aid the
      opportunists, will always try to suppress the revolutionary section of the
      proletariat, stopping short of nothing and employing the most unlawful and
      savage military measures. The opportunists are bourgeois enemies of
      the proletarian revolution, who in peaceful times carry on their bourgeois
      work in secret, concealing themselves within the workers’ parties,
      while in times of crisis they immediately prove to be open allies
      of the entire united bourgeoisie, from the conservative to the most
      radical and democratic part of the latter, from the free thinkers, to the
      religious and clerical sections. Anyone who has failed to understand this
      truth after the events we have gone through is hopelessly deceiving
      both himself and the workers. Individual desertions are inevitable under the
      present conditions, but their significance, it should be remembered, is
      determined by the existence of a section and current of
      petty-bourgeois opportunists. Such social-chauvinists, as Hyndman,
      Vandervelde, Guesde, Plekhanov and Kautsky, would be of no significance
      whatever if their spineless and banal speeches in defence of bourgeois
      patriotism were not taken up by the entire social strata of opportunists and
      by swarms of bourgeois papers and bourgeois politicians. 

Typical of the socialist parties of the epoch of the Second International
    was one that tolerated in its midst an opportunism built up in decades of
    the “peaceful” period, an opportunism that kept itself secret,
    adapting itself to the revolutionary workers, borrowing their
    Marxist terminology, and evading any clear cleavage of principles. This type
    has outlived itself. If the war ends in 1915, will any thinking socialist be
    found willing to begin, in 1916, restoring the workers’ parties
    together with the opportunists, knowing from experience
    that in any new crisis all of them to a man (plus many other spineless and
    muddle-headed people) will be for the bourgeoisie, who will of course find a
    pretext to ban any talk of class hatred and the class struggle?
 

In Italy, the party was the exception for the period of the Second
    International; the opportunists, headed by Bissolati, were expelled from the
    party. In the present crisis, the results have proved excellent :
    people of various trends of opinion have not deceived the workers or blinded
    them with pearls of eloquence regarding “unity"; each of them followed
    his own road. The opportunists (and deserters from the workers’ party
    such as Mussolini) practised social-chauvinism, lauding (as Plekhanov did)
    “gallant Belgium”, thereby shielding the policies, not of a
    gallant, but of a bourgeois Italy, which would plunder the Ukraine and
    Galicia . . . I mean, Albania, Tunisia, etc., etc. Meanwhile, the socialists
    were waging against them a war against war, in preparation of a
    civil war. We are not at all idealising the Italian Socialist Party
    and in no way guarantee that it will stand firm should Italy enter the
    war. We are speaking not of the future of that party, but only of the
    present. We are stating the indisputable fact that the workers in
    most European countries have been deceived by the fictitious unity
    of the opportunists and the revolutionaries, Italy being the happy
    exception, a country where no such deception exists at present. What was a
    happy exception for the Second International should and shall
    become the rule for the Third International. While capitalism persists, the
    proletariat will always be a close neighbour to the petty bourgeoisie. It is
    sometimes unwise to reject temporary alliances with the latter, but
    unity with them, unity with the opportunists can be defended at
    present only by the enemies of the proletariat or by hoodwinked
    traditionalists of a bygone period. 

Today, following 1914, unity of the proletarian struggle for the
    socialist revolution demands that the workers’ parties separate
    themselves completely from the parties of the opportunists. What we
    understand by opportunism has been clearly said in the Manifesto of the
    Central Committee (No. 33, “The War
    and Russian
Social-Democracy”[3]

).



But what do we see in Russia? Is it good or bad for the working-class
    movement of our country to have unity between people who, in one way or
    another and with more or

    

less consistency, are combating chauvinism—of
    both the Purishkevich and the Cadet brand—and people who echo that
    chauvinism, like Maslov, Plekhanov and Smirnov? Is it good to have unity
    between people engaged in anti-war action and such that declare that they
    will not oppose the war, like-the influential authors of
    “Document”
(No. 34)[9]? Only those who wish to turn a blind eye to
    things will find difficulty in answering this question. 

The objection may be made that Martov has polemised with Plekhanov in
    Golos and, together with a number of other friends and partisans of
    the Organising Committee, has battled against social-chauvinism. We do not
    deny this, and had words of praise for Martov in No. 33 of the Central
    Organ. We would be very glad if Martov were not “turned
    about”(see the article, “Martov Turns About”); we would
    very much like a decisive anti-chauvinist line to become the line of the
    Organising Committee. That, however, does not depend upon our wishes, or
    upon any one else’s. What are the objective facts? First, Larin,
    the Organising Committee’s official representative, is for some reason
    silent about Golos, while naming the social-chauvinist Plekhanov,
    and also Axelrod, who wrote an article (in Berner
Tagwacht[10]) so as
    not to say a single definite word there. Moreover, Larin, apart from his
    official position, is more than geographically close to the influential
    central group of the liquidators in Russia. Secondly, there is the European
    press. In France and Germany, the papers are saying nothing about
    Golos, while speaking of Rubanovich, Plekhanov, and Chkheidze. (In
    its issue of December 12, Hamburger Echo, one of the most jingoist
    organs of the jingoist “Social-Democratic” press of Germany,
    called Chkheidze an adherent of Maslov and Plekhanov; this has also been
    hinted at by certain papers in Russia. It is clear that all fellow-thinkers
    of the Südekums fully appreciate the ideological aid Plekhanov has
    given to the Südekums.) In Russia, millions of copies of bourgeois
    papers have brought the “people” tidings of
    Maslov-Plekhanov-Smirnov—but no news of the trend represented by
    Golos. Thirdly, the experience of the legal workers’ press of
    1912-14 has definitely proved that the source of a certain degree of social
    strength and influence enjoyed by the liquidationist movement lies, not in
    the working class, but in that

    

section of bourgeois-democratic
    intelligentsia, which has brought the central group of legalist writers to
    the fore. The national-chauvinist temper of this section as a section is
    testified to by the entire press of Russia, as revealed in the letters of
    the Petrograd worker (Sotsial-Demokrat Nos. 33 and 35) and in the
    “Document”(No. 34). Considerable personal re-groupings within
    that section are quite possible, but it is absolutely improbable that, as a
    section, it should not be “patriotic” and opportunist.

Such are the objective facts. Since we take them into account and are
    aware that it is to the advantage of all bourgeois parties that wish for
    influence over the workers, to have a Left wing for display (particularly
    when that wing is unofficial), we must declare the idea of unity with the
    Organising Committee an illusion detrimental to the workers’
    cause. 

The policy of the Organising Committee who, in far-away Sweden, on
    November 23, proclaimed their unity with Plekhanov and spoke words sweet to
    the hearts of all social-chauvinists, while in Paris and in Switzerland they
    did not bother to make their existence known either on September 13 (when
    Golos appeared) or on November 23 or to this day (December 23),
    strongly resembles political chicanery of the worst kind. The hope that

    Otkliki,[11] scheduled to appear in Zurich, would be of an
    official Party nature has been destroyed by a forthright statement in
    Berner Tagwacht (December 12), to the effect that this paper will
    not be of such a nature. (Incidentally, the editors of Golos
    declared in issue No. 52 that to continue at present the rift with the
    liquidators would be “nationalism” of the worst kind. This
    phrase, which is devoid of grammatical meaning, has only political meaning
    that the editors of Golos prefer having unity with the
    social-chauvinists to drawing closer to those who are irreconcilably hostile
    to social-chauvinism. The editors of Golos have made a bad
    choice.)

To make the picture complete, it remains for us to add a few words
    about
    Mysl,[12] organ of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, which
    is published in Paris. This paper also lauds “unity”, while it
    shields (cf. Sotsial-Demokrat No. 34) the social-chauvinism of
    Rubanovich, its party leader, defends the Franco-Belgian opportunists and
    ministerialists, says

    

nothing of the patriotic motives of the speech by
    Kerensky, one of the extreme radicals among the Russian
Trudoviks,[13] and
    prints well-worn petty-bourgeois vulgarities on the revision of Marxism, in
    a Narodnik and opportunist spirit. What the resolution of the Russian
    Social-Democratic Labour Party’s summer conference of
1913[14] said of the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries has been fully and particularly proved by this
    behaviour of Mysl. 

Some Russian socialists seem to think that internationalism consists in a
    readiness to welcome a resolution containing an international vindication of
    social-chauvinism in all countries, such as is to be drawn up by Plekhanov
    and Südekum, Kautsky and Hervé, Guesde and Hyndman, Vandervelde
    and Bissolati, etc. We permit ourselves the thought that internationalism
    consists only in an unequivocal internationalist policy within one’s
    party. A genuinely proletarian internationalist policy cannot be pursued,
    active opposition to the war cannot be preached, and forces for such action
    cannot be mustered while we are in the company of the opportunists and the
    social-chauvinists. To find refuge in silence, or to wave this truth aside
    which, though bitter, is necessary to the socialist, is detrimental and
    ruinous to the working-class movement.

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 115-17 of this volume.—Ed.


[2]
Plekhanov’s pamphlet, On the War (Paris, 1914), which we have
    just received, confirms very convincingly the truth of the assertions made
    in the text. We shall return to this pamphlet later on.
—Lenin

[3]
See pp. 25–34 of this volume.—Ed.

 



[4]
The Bolshevik deputies to the Fourth Duma were arrested on the night of November
    5-6 (18-19),1914. The pretext for their arrest was their participation in a
    conference they convened in the village of Ozerki, near Petrograd.
Held on November 2-4 (15-17), the conference was attended
    by representatives of the Bolshevik organisations of Petrograd,
    Ivanovo-Voznesensk, Kharkov and Riga, as well as by the Duma Bolshevik
    deputies.
Warned by an agent provocateur the
      police swooped down on Ozerki when the conference had just
      completed its work. During the search of G. I. Petrovsky,
      A. Y. Badayev and other Duma Bolshevik deputies, the police found
      Lenin’s theses on the war and the newspaper
      Sotsial-Demokrat No. 33, which carried the manifesto of
      the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. “The War and Russian
Social-Democracy”. All participants in the conference
      were arrested, but the Duma Bolshevik deputies, who enjoyed
      parliamentary immunity, escaped arrest. Two days later, however,
      they too were arrested, tried and exiled for life to Eastern
      Siberia. Lenin devoted to the trial of the Bolshevik deputies the
      article

      “What Has Been Revealed by the Trial
of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Duma Group” ,

      


      which was
      published in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 40, March 29, 1915 (see this
      volume, pp. 171-77).



[5]
The
    Congress of the Swedish Social-Democratic Party was held in Stockholm on
    November 23,1914. The main item on the agenda dealt with the attitude
    towards the war. A. G. Shlyapnikov, who brought the Congress a message of
    greetings from the R.S.D.L.P’s Central Committee, read a declaration
    calling for a struggle to be waged against the imperialist war and branding
    the treachery of the leaders of the German Social-Democrats and the
    socialist parties of other countries, who had turned
    social-chauvinist. Branting, leader of the Swedish Social-Democratic
    Party’s Right wing, moved that regret be expressed at the section of
    the declaration condemning the conduct of German Social-Democracy, asserting
    that “it does not befit” the Congress “to reprehend other
    parties”. Höglund, leader of the Left Social-Democrats, came out
    against Branting’s proposal, and declared that many Swedish
    Social-Democrats shared the view expressed in the declaration of the
    R.S.D.L.P.’s Central Committee. However, Branting’s proposal was
    carried by a majority of votes. Y. Larin addressed the Congress on behalf of
    the Menshevik Organising Committee. A report on the Congress was published
    in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 36, January 9, 1915. 



[6]
The
    Organizing Committee—the Menshevik guiding centre, was
    established at a conference of the Menshevik liquidators and all anti-Party
    groups and trends, held in August 1912. It existed until the election of the
    Central Committee of the Menshevik party in August 1917.
Belenin—A. G. Shlyapnikov.



[7]
Sotsial-Demokrat—Central Organ of the
    R.S.D.L.P., published illegally from February 1908 to January 1917. In all,
    58 issues appeared. The first issue was published in Russia, and the rest
    abroad, first in Paris and then in Geneva. According to the decision of the
    R.S.D.L.P.’s Central Committee, the editorial board was composed of
    representatives of Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and Polish Social-Democrats.
The newspaper published over 80 articles and items by
    Lenin. While on the editorial board, Lenin maintained a consistent Bolshevik
    stand. Some editors (including Kamenev and Zinoviev) took a conciliatory
    attitude towards the liquidators and tried to disrupt Lenin’s
    line. The Menshevik editors Martov and Dan sabotaged the work of the
    editorial board and openly defended liquidationism in their factional
    newspaper Golos Sotsial-Demokrata.
 Because of Lenin’s uncompromising struggle against
    the liquidators Martov and Dan walked out of the editorial board, in June
    1911. Beginning with December 1911 Lenin became editor of
    Sotsial-Demokrat. 



[8]
Lenin is
    referring to the Caucasian Menshevik liquidators, the Bund (The General
    Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania, Poland and Russia), and
    representatives of the Social-Democratic Party of Poland and Lithuania, who
    supported the liquidators.
    



[9]
The
    reference is to the reply of the St. Petersburg liquidators (Potresov,
    Maslov, Cherevanin and others) to Vandervelde’s telegram urging
    Russian Social-Democrats to abstain from opposing the war. In their reply,
    the Russian liquidators approved Belgian, French and English socialists
    joining bourgeois governments, and declared that in their activities in
    Russia they were not opposed to the war.



[10]
Berner
    Tagwacht—a daily newspaper, organ of the Swiss Social-Democratic
    Party, founded in Berne in 1893. In the early days of the First World War,
    it published articles by Karl Liebknecht Franz Mehring and other Left
    Social-Democrats. Following 1917 the newspaper openly supported
    social-chauvinists.
 Today the newspaper’s line coincides on the main
    issues with that of the bourgeois press. 



[11]
The
    Menshevik Organising Committee announced the forthcoming publication of its
    organ Otkliki (Echoes ), which, however, never appeared.
    



[12]
Mysl(Thought )—a daily Socialist-Revolutionary
    newspaper published in Paris from November 1914 to March 1915.



[13]
Trudoviks—a group of petty-bourgeois democrats in the State
    Duma consisting of peasants and intellectuals of a Narodnik trend. The
    Trudovik group was formed in April 1906 of peasant deputies

   

to the First
    Duma. In the Duma the Trudoviks vacillated between the Cadets and the
    Social-Democrats.
    
During the First World War, most of the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, Popular Socialists and Trudoviks took a
    social-chauvinist stand.



[14]
Lenin is
    referring to the resolution “The Narodniks” which he wrote and
    which was adopted by the joint Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. Central
    Committee and Party officials held between September 23 and October 1
    (October 6-14), 1913, in the village of Poronin (near Cracow). For reasons
    of secrecy, the conference was called the “Summer” or
    “August” Conference. See the resolution in Volume 19 of the
    present edition, pp. 429-31.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Kind of “Unity” Larin Proclaimed at the Swedish Congress









Lenin: The Kind of 'Unity' Larin Proclaimed at the Swedish Congress







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Kind of “Unity” Larin Proclaimed at the Swedish Congress[1]




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 37, February 1, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 115-117.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



 

In the speech cited by us (No. 36), Larin could have been referring only
      to the well-known “July Third”
bloc,[2] i.e., the alliance concluded
      in Brussels, on 3.7.1914, between the Organising Committee, Trotsky, Rosa
      Luxemburg, Alexinsky, Plekhanov, the Bundists, the Caucasians, the
      Lithuanians, the Left
wing,[3] the Polish opposition and so on. Why did Larin
      confine himself to hints? That is strange, to say the least. We are of the
      opinion that, if the O.C. lives on, and likewise the alliance, it is bad
      to make a secret of this truth.
    

The Central Committee of our Party and the Central Committee of the
      Lettish Social-Democrats did not join the alliance. Our Central Committee
      advanced 14 precise conditions of unity, these being rejected by
      the Organising Committee and the “bloc”, who limited
      themselves to a diplomatic and evasive resolution which, in /act, did not
      promise or signify any decisive turn in the previous liquidationist
      policy.
    

Here is the gist of our fourteen points: (1) The December 1908 and
    January 1910 resolutions on liquidationism should be unambiguously
    confirmed, viz., in a way that will recognise as incompatible with
    Social-Democratic Party membership statements against the underground,
    against publicity for the illegal press, for an “open” party (or
    a struggle for one), against revolutionary meetings, etc. (in the way
    Nasha
Zarya[4] and Nasha Rabochaya
Gazeta[5] have
    come out); (2) the same, with reference to statements

    

against the slogan of a
    republic, etc.; (3) the same, with reference to statements against a bloc
    with non.-S.D Left-wing party; (4) in each locality there must be a
    united S.D. organisation, one that is not divided according to nationality;
    (5) “cultural-national autonomy” to be rejected; (6) the workers
    are called upon to show “unity from below”; only one who belongs
    to an illegal organisation can be a member of the party; in the legal press,
    only figures concerning workers’ group contributions since 1913 are to
    be used in order to ascertain a majority; (7) rival newspapers cannot be
    permitted in one and the same city; Nasha Rabochaya Gazeta should
    close down, and a discussion journal to be founded; (8) the resolutions of
    the 1903 and the 1907 congresses regarding the bourgeois character of the
    S.R.s are to be confirmed; agreements between part of the S. D. Party and
    the S.R.s are impermissible; (9) groups abroad are to be subordinated to the
    Central Committee in Russia; (10) regarding work in the trade unions, the
    resolution of the London Central Committee (Jan. 1908) should be confirmed;
    illegal nuclei are necessary; (11) statements against the Insurance
    Council[6] and other insurance institutions are
    indefeasible; . as a competing publication, Strakhovaniye
    Rabochikh[7] should close down; (12) the Caucasian S.D.s
    should give special confirmation for points 5 and 4;(13) the Chkheidze

    group[8]
    should withdraw “cultural-national autonomy” and recognise the
    conditions enumerated above; (14) on matters pertaining to
    “slander” (Malinovsky, X, etc.), the Organising Committee and
    their friends should either retract their accusations and slander, or else
    send a representative to the forthcoming congress of our Party, so as to
    vindicate all their accusations.

It will readily be seen that, without these conditions and with numerous
    verbal “promises” to renounce liquidationism (as took place at
    the 1910 Plenary Meeting), nothing will change; “unity” would be
    a fiction and a recognition of “equality” for the
    liquidators.

The mighty crisis of socialism as a result of the world war has evoked a
      supreme effort in all groups of S.D.s and a striving to muster the forces
      of all who can draw together on the fundamental issues of the attitude
      towards the war. The “July Third” bloc, of which Larin was so
      boastful

    

while reluctant to call it by its own name), at once revealed its
    fictitiousness.

What is necessary is unflagging caution against fictitious
    “unity”, as long as there is an irreconcilable cleavage in
    practice.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin wrote this article in connection with the speech delivered by the
      Monshevik Y. Larin on November 23 (New Style), 1914, at the Congress of
      the Swedish Social-Democratic Party in Stockholm.
 The fourteen conditions of unity listed by Lenin are
      taken from his “Report of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. to the Brussels
      Conference and Instructions to the C,C, Delegation” (see present
      edition, Vol. 20, pp. 495-535).  



[2]
The
    “July Third” (Brussels) bloc was formed at the Brussels
    “Unity” Conference called by the Executive Committee of the
    International Socialist Bureau on July 16-18, 1914, for an “exchange
    of opinions” on the restoration of unity within the R.S.D.L.P. The
    delegates represented the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks),
    the Organising Committee (Mensheviks), and the affiliated organisations-the
    Caucasian Regional Committee and the Borba group, that is,  the
    Duma Social-Democratic group (Mensheviks), Plekhanov’s
    Yedinstvo group, the Vperyod group, the Bund, the
    Social-Democrats of the Lettish Area, the SocialDemocrats of Lithuania, the
    Polish Social-Democrats, the Polish Social-Democratic opposition and the
    P.S.P. (the Left wing).
Though the Conference had been called only for an
    exchange of opinions and was not intended to adopt any binding decisions,
    Kautsky’s resolution on the unification of the RS.D.L.P. was put to
    the vote. Though the Bolsheviks and the Lettish Social-Democrats refused to
    vote, the resolution was carried by a majority.



[3]
The Left
    wing of the petty-bourgeois nationalist Polish Socialist Party arose as an
    independent faction in 1906, after the split in the P.S.P. Though it did not
    fully reject nationalism, the Left wing renounced a number of the
    P.S.P.’s nationalist demands and terrorist methods of struggle. On
    questions of tactics it stood close to the Russian Menshevik liquidators and
    joined forces with the latter against the Bolsheviks. During the First World
    War most of the Left wingers adopted an internationalist stand and drew
    close to the Polish Social-Democratic Party. In December 1918, the Left wing
    of the P.S.P. and the Polish Social-Democratic Party founded the Communist
    Workers’ Party of Poland.



[4]
Nasha Zarya
    (Our Dawn)-a legal monthly of the Menshevik liqui_
      dators, published in St. Petersburg from 1910 to 1914. The liquida-
      tors in Russia centred around this journal.



[5]
Nasha Rabochaya Gazeta (Our Workers’ Newspaper)-a daily
      newspaper of the Menshevik liquidators, published legally in
      St. Petersburg from May to July 1914.



[6]
The
      Menshevik liquidators came out against the legal Insurance Council,
      calling upon the workers to defy its decisions. The Coun- cil was elected
      by the St. Petersburg workers in March 1914 accord- ing to lists submitted
      by the Bolsheviks (Pravdists).



[7]
Strakhovaniye Rabochikh (Workers’ Insurance)-a journal pub-
      lished by the Menshevik liquidators inSt. Petersburg from December
      1912 to June 1918.



[8]
The
      Chkheidze group-the Menshevik group in the Fourth Duma led by
      N. S. Chkheidze. During the First World War the group took a Centrist
      stand, but actually gave full support to the policy of the Russian
      social-chauvinists. 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Russian Brand of Südekum









Lenin: The Russian Brand of Südekum







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Russian Brand of Südekum




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 37, February 1, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 118-124.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The word Südekum has come to be used in a generic sense
    to denote a type of smug and unscrupulous opportunist and
    social-chauvinist. It is a good sign that the Südekums are held in
    general contempt. There is, however, only one way for us to avoid falling
    into chauvinism ourselves in so doing: we must do everything we can to help
    unmask the Russian Südekums.

By his pamphlet On the War, Pleklianov has definitely placed
    himself at the head of the latter. His arguments are a substitution of
    sophistry for dialectics all along the line. He sophistically denounces
    German opportunism so as to shield French and Russian opportunism. The
    result is not a struggle against international opportunism, but support for
    it. He sophistically bemoans the fate of Belgium, while saying nothing about
    Galicia. He sophistically confuses the period of imperialism (i.e., one in
    which, as all Marxists hold, the objective conditions are ripe for the
    collapse of capitalism, and there are masses of socialist proletarians), and
    the period of bourgeois-democratic national movements; in other words, he
    confuses a period in which the destruction of bourgeois fatherlands by an
    international revolution of the proletariat is imminent, and the period of
    their inception and consolidation. He sophistically accuses the German
    bourgeoisie of having broken the peace, while remaining silent about the
    lengthy and elaborate preparations for a war against Germany by the
    bourgeoisie of the “Triple
Entente”.[1] He sophistically evades the
    Basle resolution.. He sophistically substitutes national-liberalism for
    social-democracy: the desirability of tsarism’s victory is ascribed to
    the interests of Russia’s economic progress, while the nationalities
    in Russia, or tsarism’s stunting Russian economic

    

growth, or the
    relatively far more rapid and successful growth of Germany’s
    productive forces, and so on and so forth, are all questions that are shied
    away from. To analyse all of Plekhanov’s sophisms would require a
    series of articles, and many of his ridiculous absurdities are hardly worth
    going into. We shall touch upon only one of his alleged arguments. In 1870
    Engels wrote to Marx that Wilhelm Liebknecht was mistaken in making
    anti-Bismarckism his sole guiding
principle.[2] Plekhanov was glad
    to have discovered the quotation: the same is true, he argues, with regard
    to anti-tsarism! Let us, however, try to replace sophistry (i.e., the method
    of clutching at the outward similarity of instances, without considering the
    nexus between events) with dialectics (i.e., the method of studying all the
    concrete. circumstances of an event and of its development). The unification
    of Germany was a necessity which Marx recognised as such both prior to and
    following 1848. As early as 1859, Engels called forthright upon the German
    people to fight for
unification.[3] When unification through revolution failed,
    Bismarck achieved it in a counter-revolutionary, Junker fashion,
    Anti-Bismarckism became absurd as a sole principle, since the
    necessary unification was an accomplished fact. But what about Russia? Did
    our brave Pleklianov formerly have the courage to declare that
    Russia’s development demanded the conquest of Galicia, Constantinople,
    Armenia, Persia, etc.? Has he the courage to say so now? Has he considered
    that Germany had to progress from the national disunity of the Germans (who
    had been oppressed both by France and Russia in the first two-thirds of the
    nineteenth century) to a unified nation, whereas in Russia the Great
    Russians have crushed rather than united a number of other nations? Without
    giving thought to such things, Pleklianov has simply masked his chauvinism
    by distorting the meaning of the Engels quotation of 1870 in the same
    fashion as Südekum has distorted an 1891 quotation from Engels to the
    effect that the Germans must wage a life-and-death struggle against the
    allied armies of France and Russia.

In a different kind of language and in quite different circumstances, the
      selfsame chauvinism is defended by Nasha  Zarya Nos. 7-8-9, wherein
      Cherevanin predicts and evokes

    

“the defeat of Germany”, asserting that “Europe [!!] has
      risen up” against that country; Mr. A. Potresov berates the German
      Social-Democrats for their “blunder”, which “is worse
      than any crime”, etc., claiming that German militarism is guilty of
      “special, extraordinary sins”, and that it is “not the
      Pan-Slavic dreams of certain Russian circles which have been a menace to
      European peace”, etc.
    

When the legal press thus depicts Germany’s
    “extraordinary” guilt and advocates the necessity of her defeat,
    is it not echoing Purishkevich and the social-chauvinists? The pressure of
    the tsar’s censors imposes silence about “extraordinary”
    sins a hundred times greater in number, committed by Russian militarism. Is
    it not obvious that, in a situation such as this, people who do not wish to
    he chauvinist should at least refrain from speaking of
    Germany’s defeat and her extraordinary sins?
    

Nasha Zarya is not merely pursuing the line of
    “nonresistance to war”; it is doing much more-bringing grist to
    the mill of Great-Russian, tsarist-Purishkevjch chauvinism by using
    “Social-Democratic” arguments for the preachment of
    Germany’s defeat, and shielding the Pan-Slavists. It was none other
    than the Nasha Zarya writers who in 1912-14 conducted mass propaganda of
    liquidationism among the workers.


Finally, there is Axelrod, whom Martov is trying so angrily and so
    unsuccessfully to cover up, defend and shield, in exactly the same way as he
    has been doing for the Nasha Zarya  writers.
    

With Axelrod’s consent, his views were set forth in Nos. 86 and 87
      of Gobs. These views are social-chauvinist. He used the following
      arguments to defend the French and Belgian socialists joining the
      bourgeois governments: (1) “To Marx, historical necessity, which is
      often inappropriately cited nowadays, did not mean a passive attitude
      towards a concrete evil-in expectation of the socialist revolution.”
      What muddied reasoning! What has this got to do with it all? Everything
      that takes place in history takes place of necessity. That is
      elementary. The opponents of social-chauvinism have cited, not historical
      necessity but the imperialist nature of the war. Axeirod pretends
      that he does not understand this, or the consequent appraisal

    

of the
      “concrete evil”, viz., bourgeois domination in all lands, and
      the timeliness of launching revolutionary action leading to a
      “social revolution”. It is the social-chauvinists who are
      “passive” by denying this. (2) It is impossible “to
      ignore the question of who actually started” the war, “thereby
      imposing upon all attacked countries the necessity of defending their
      independence”. On the same page, however, Axeirod admits that
      “of course the French imperialists were out to provoke a war in two
      or three years’ time”.! During that period, he maintains, the
      proletariat would grow stronger, thereby enhancing the chances of peace!
      We know, however, that during that period, opportunism, which is so dear
      to Axelrod’s heart, would grow stronger, thereby enhancing the
      chances of its even more shameful betrayal of socialism. We know that, for
      decades, three robbers (the bourgeoisie and the governments of
      Britain, Russia and France) were arming to pillage Germany. Is there
      anything surprising that two robbers began the attack before the other
      three got the new knives they had ordered? Is it not a sophism
      for phrases about “who started the war” to be used to gloss
      over the equal “guilt” of the bourgeoisie of all
      countries, which was unanimously recognised without question by all
      socialists at Basle? (3) “To blame the Belgian socialists for
      defending their country” is “not Marxism, but
      cynicism”. This was exactly how Marx termed Proudhon’s
      attitude towards the Polish uprising
(of 1863).[4] Beginning with 1848, Marx
      constantly stressed the historical progressiveness of the Polish uprising
      against tsarism. That was something no one dared deny. The concrete
      conditions consisted in an unresolved national problem in the east of
      Europe, i.e., in a bourgeois-democratic, not imperialist, nature of the
      war against tsarism. That is elementary.

If one’s attitude towards the socialist revolution is negative,
    scoffing or negligent (like that of the Axelrods), then one cannot
    help the Belgian “country” in the present and concrete war
    otherwise than by helping tsarism to throttle the Ukraine. That is a fact,
    which it is cynical for a Russian socialist to evade. It is just as cynical
    to raise a clamour over Belgium while remaining silent about Galicia.
    
 

What ought the Belgian socialists to have done? Since they were unable to
      accomplish a social revolution together with the French, etc., they had to
      submit to the majority of the nation at the time, and go to war. But,
      while submitting to the will of the slave-owning class, they should have
      placed the responsibility on the latter, and not have voted for war
      credits; they should have sent Vandervelde, not to engage in ministerial
      missions to the exploiters, but to organise (together with the
      revolutionary Social-Democrats of all countries) illegal revolutionary
      propaganda in favour of the “socialist revolution” and civil
      war; in the army too such work should have been conducted (experience
      having shown that even “fraternisation” between workingmen
      clad in uniforms is possible in the trenches of the fighting
      armies!). Prattling about dialectics and Marxism while revealing inability
      to combine the temporary need to submit to the majority with revolutionary
      work under all conditions mean scoffing at the workers and jeering at
      socialism. “Citizens of Belgium! Our country has met with a great
      calamity brought about by the bourgeoisie of all countries, including
      Belgium. You do not wish to overthrow that bourgeoisie? You do not believe
      in an appeal to the socialists of Germany? We are in the minority; so I
      must submit to you and go to war, but even then I shall call and prepare
      for civil war by the proletariat of all countries, because there is no
      other salvation for the peasants and workers of Belgium and other
      countries!” For a speech like this, a Belgian or French deputy would
      have been sent to prison, not given the post of minister, but he would
      have been a socialist, not a traitor; in the trenches, both the French and
      German workingmen in military uniforms would have spoken of him as their
      own leader, not as a traitor to the working class. (4) “While
      fatherlands exist, while, as at present, the proletariat’s life and
      its movement are compressed into the framework of the fatherlands, and
      while the proletariat does not feel another and international soil under
      its feet, the question of patriotism and self-defence will continue to
      exist for the working class.” Bourgeois fatherlands will exist until
      they are destroyed by the international revolution of the proletariat. The
      existence of conditions suitable for a revolution was recognised even by
      Kautsky

    

as early as 1909; just as it was unanimously recognised later by the Basle
      Congress, and is now proved by the fact of the deep sympathy on the part
      of the workers of all countries for those who do not vote for war credits,
      and are not afraid of prison and the other sacrifices connected with any
      revolution, by virtue of “historical
      necessity”. Axeirod’s phrase is nothing but a pretext
      to avoid revolutionary activity, merely a repetition of the arguments used
      by the chauvinist bourgeoisie. (5) The same is true about his assertions
      that the conduct of the Germans was not treachery, and that their
      behaviour was dictated by “a keen sentiment, the consciousness of an
      organic bond with that piece of land, the fatherland, on which the German
      proletarians live andwork”. In reality, the behaviour of the
      Germans, as well as that of Guesde and the rest, is undoubtedly treachery;
      to mask and to shield it is a disgrace. In reality, it is the bourgeois
      fatherlands that mutilate, cripple, crush and destroy the “living
      bond” between the German workers and the German land by creating a
      “bond” between the slave and the slave-owner. In reality, only
      the destruction of the bourgeois fatherlands can give the workers of all
      countries a “bond with the land”, freedom of their own
      language, bread, and the benefits of civilisation. Axeiroci is simply an
      apologist for the bourgeoisie. (6) To persuade the workers to be
      “cautious in accusing of opportunism” such “tested
      Marxists as Guesde”, etc., means to induce the workers to be servile
      towards their leaders. We would advise the worker to learn from the
      example of Guesde’s whole life, with the exceptiiz of his
      patent betrayal of socialism in 1914. Private and other circumstances may
      be found that mitigate his guilt, but this is not a question of the guilt
      of individuals; what we are interested in is the socialist
      significance of events. (7) To refer to the “formal”
      permissibility of joining government on the ground that there exists some
      minute point somewhere in a resolution, mentioning “exceptionally
      important cases”, is tantamount to the most dishonest pettifogging,
      since this minor point was obviously intended to aid the international
      revolution of the proletariat, not to counteract it. (8)
      Axeirod’s assertion that “the defeat of Russia, while unable
      to hamper the organic development of the country, would

    

help liquidate the
      old regime”, is true if taken by itself, but when it is used to
      justify the German chauvinists, it is nothing but an attempt to curry
      favour with the Südekums. Recognition of the usefulness of
      Russia’s defeat, without openly accusing the German and Austrian
      Social-Democrats of having betrayed socialism means in reality helping
      them justify themselves, wriggle out of a difficult situation, and deceive
      the workers. Axelrod’s article is a double obeisance-one to the
      German social-chauvinists, the other to the French. Taken together, these
      obeisances constitute typical “Russo-Bundist”
      social-chauvinism.

Let the readers now judge for themselves the consistency displayed by the
    Gobs editors who, in publishing these most disgraceful arguments of
    Axeirod’s, have expressed their disagreement only with “some of
    his ideas” while in the editorial of No. 96 of their paper, they
    advocate a “sharp rupture with the elements of active
    social-patriotism”. Are the editors of Gobs so naïve or so inattentive
    that they do not see the truth? Do they not see that Axelrod’s
    reasonings are, from beginning to end, “elements of active
    [his writings being the writer’s activity] social-patriotism”.?
    And what about the Nasha Zarya writers: Messrs. Cherevanin,
    A. Potresov and Co.; are they not elements of active social-patriotism?
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Triple
      Entente—the imperialist bloc of Britain, France and tsarist Russia,
      which took final shape in 1907, and was opposed to the Triple Alliance of
      Germany, Austria-Hungary and Italy. The emergence of the Triple Entente
      was preceded by the conclusion of the Franco-Russian alliance of 1891-93
      and the Anglo-French agreement of 1904. The formation of the Entente was
      concluded by the signing of the Anglo-Russian agreement in 1907. During
      the First World War the military and political alliance between Britain,
      France and Russia was joined by the United States, Japan, Italy and other
      countries.
    



[2]
See
      Engels’s letter to Marx of August 15, 1870.
    



[3]
Lenin is
      referring to Engels’s work “The Po and the
Rhine”.
    



[4]
See Karl
    Marx, The
    Poverty of Philosophy, Moscow, p. 227.
    







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## To the Editors of Nashe Slovo









Lenin: To the Editors of Nashe Slovo







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Editors of Nashe Slovo[4]




Written: 9.2.1915 

Published:

      First published 1931 in Lenin Miscellany XVII.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 125-128.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

      Berne, 9.2.1915
Dear Comrades:

In your letter of February 6 you proposed to us a plan of struggle
    against “official social-patriotism”, in connection with the
    proposed London conference of socialists of the “allied
    countries” of the Triple
Entente.[5] As you have, of course, seen
    from our newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat, we support that struggle in
    general, and are conducting it. That is why we are very glad to have
    received your message. and accept with pleasure your proposal for a
    discussion of a plan of joint action.

The conference, which is said to have been planned for February 15 (we
    have not yet received a single document regarding it), will perhaps be
    postponed until February 25 or later [judging from a letter from Huysmans,
    who wrote of the sitting of the Executive Commission for February 20 and of
    the plan for personal talks between members (the Secretary) of the Executive
    Commission and socialists of France, Britain and Russia]. The conference may
    possibly be contemplated as one, not of official members of the
    International Socialist Bureau, but as private meetings between
    individual “prominent” socialists.

That is why the contraposition to “official
    social-patriotism” of a “clear, revolutionary and
    internationalist” point of view, a contraposition which you write of
    and which has our full sympathy, should be prepared for all possible
    contingencies (both for a conference of the official representatives of
    parties and for a private meeting in all its forms, both for February 15 and
    for any later date).
    
 

For our part and in view of the desire you have expressed, we propose the
      following draft declaration, which contains such a contraposition (so that
      the declaration may be read and printed):
“The undersigned representatives of the Social-Democratic
    organisations of Russia (Britain, etc.) proceed from the conviction:
“that the present war is, on the part, not only of Germany and
    Austro-Hungary, but of Britain and France (acting in alliance with tsarism),
    an imperialist war, i.e., a war of the epoch of the final stage in the
    development of capitalism, an epoch in which bourgeois states, with their
    national boundaries, have outlived themselves; a war aimed exclusively at
    the grabbing of colonies, the plundering of rival countries, and the
    weakening of the proletarian movement by setting the proletarians of one
    country against those of another.
“Consequently it is the absolute duty of the socialists of all
    belligerent countries immediately and resolutely to carry out the Basle
    resolution, viz.:
“(1) the break-up of all national blocs and the
Burgfrteden[1]

in all
    countries;
“(2) a call to the workers of all the belligerent countries to wage
    an energetic class struggle, both economic and political, against the
    bourgeoisie of their country, a bourgeoisie that is amassing unparalleled
    profits from war deliveries and makes use of the military authorities’
    backing so as to gag the workers and intensify oppression of the latter;
“(3) decisive condemnation of any voting for war credits;
“(4) withdrawal from the bourgeois governments of Belgium and
    France, and recognition that entry into governments and voting for war
    credits are the same kind of treachery to the cause of socialism as is the
    entire behaviour of the German and Austrian Social-Democrats;
“(5) that the hand be stretched out to internationalist elements in
    German Social-Democracy that refuse to vote for war credits, and that an
    international committee be set up, together with them, for the conduct of
    agitation for the cessation of the war, not in the spirit of the pacifists,

    

the Christians, and the petty-bourgeois democrats, but in inseparable
    connection with the propaganda and organisation of mass revolutionary action
    by the proletarians of each country, against the governments and the
    bourgeoisie of that country;
“(6) support for any attempts by the socialists of the belligerent
    countries to bring about contacts and fraternisation in the fighting forces
    and the trenches, despite the bans imposed by the military authorities of
    Britain, Germany, etc.;
“(7) a call to women socialists of the belligerent countries to
    intensify agitation in the direction indicated above;
“(8) a call for support by the entire world proletariat of the
    struggle against tsarism, and for support for those -Social-Democrats of
    Russia who have not only refused to vote for credits, but have shown
    disregard of the danger of persecution and are conducting socialist work in
    the spirit of internationalist and revolutionary SocialDemocracy.”
 *     *  * 

As for certain Social-Democratic men of letters in Russia who have come
    out in defence of the official social-patriotism (as, for instance,
    Plekhanov, Alexinsky, Maslov, and others), the undersigned disclaim all
    responsibility for any action or statements by them, energetically protest
    against the latter, and declare that, according to all available
    information, the Social-Democratic workers of Russia do not hold that point
    of view.

It goes without saying that Comrade Litvinov, our Central
    Committee’s official representative in the International Socialist
    Bureau (his
address[2]

:

We are sending him your letter and a copy of
    our reply to you. Please address him directly on all urgent matters), as he
    has been authorised to use his own judgement in the matter of all particular
    amendments, special steps in negotiations, etc.; we can merely state our
    complete solidarity with this comrade on all essential points.
 

As for the Organising Committee and the Bund, who are both represented in
    the International Socialist Bureau, we have grounds for apprehension that
    they stand for “official social-patriotism” (in its Francophile
    or Germanophile form, or in any other that would reconcile these two
    tendencies). At any rate we would appreciate your kindness in sending us
    both your reply (your amendments, your counter-draft of the resolution,
    etc.) and the reply of those organisations (the Organising Committee, the
    Bund, etc.) that you have already addressed or intend doing so.

With comradely greetings,

Lenin


My address
is:[3]


 
Notes
 

[1]
class truce.—Ed.


[2]

    M. M. Litvinov’s address is not given in the
    MS—Ed.


[3]
No address is given in the MS—Ed.

 



[4]
Nashe
    Slovo (Our Word)—a Menshevik daily published in Paris from
    January 1915 to September 1916, instead of the newspaper Gobs.
Lenin’s letter to the newspaper was written in
    reply to the Nashe Slovo editors’ proposal for joint action
    against social  patriotism, in connection with the forthcoming London
    conference of Entente Socialists. Lenin agreed to the proposal and submitted
    a draft declaration addressed to the London Conference. He criticised the
    social-chauvinist position of the Menshevik Organising Committee and the
    Bund, whom the Nashe Slovo editors had approached with the same
    proposal. Nashe Slovo’s editors did not accept Lenin’s
    declaration, but drew up one of their own.

Following the London Conference, the Nashe Slovo
    editors again proposed to the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. that a
    joint conference of “internationalists” be held so as to define
    the attitude towards the war and the social-chauvinists. In his reply to the
    Nashe Slovo editors dated March 10 (23), 1915 (see pp. 165-68 of
    this volume), Lenin laid down a number of fundamental conditions for a union
    of genuine internationalists. Since the Nashe Slovo editors came
    out in defence of the Organising Committee and the Bund, Lenin discontinued
    the talks.
Nashe Slovo’s attempts at unification
    ended in an “ideological-political fiasco”, as Lenin put
    it. Lenin discussed this question in the following works published herein:
    “On the London Conference” (pp. 178-80), “The Question of
    the Unity of Internationalists”  (pp. 188-91), “The Collapse of
    Platonic Internationalism” (pp. 194-98), “The State of Affairs
    in Russian Social-Democracy” (pp.281-86) and “Socialism and
    War” (pp. 335-38).



[5]
The London
    Conference of Socialists of the “allied countries” of the Triple
    Entente met on February 14, 1915. Its delegates represented the
    social-chauvinists and the pacifist groups of the Socialist parties of
    Britain, France, Belgium, as well as the Russian Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries.
Though the Bolsheviks were not invited to the Conference,
    Litvinov (Maximovich) presented to the Conference the declaration of the
    Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., which was based on Lenin’s
    draft. The declaration demanded the withdrawal of socialists from bourgeois
    governments and a complete rupture with the imperialists; it called for an
    end to co-operation with the imperialist governments, a resolute struggle
    against the latter, and condemnation of voting for war credits. The chairman
    interrupted Litvinov as he was reading the declaration, and deprived him of
    the right to speak. The latter handed the declaration over to the presidium
    and left the Conference hail.
See Lenin’s articles “The London
    Conference” and “On the London Conference” (pp. 132-34,
    178-80 of this volume). p. 125







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## How the Police and the Reactionaries Protect the Unity of German Social-Democracy









Lenin: How the Police and the Reactionaries Protect the Unity of German Social-Democracy







V. I.  

      Lenin
How the Police and the Reactionaries Protect the Unity of German Social-Democracy




Published:
Sotsial-Demokra No. 39, March 3, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsia1-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 129-131.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

In its issue of January 9, the German Social-Democrats
    Gothaer Volksblatt published an article entitled, “Police
    Protection for the Policy of the Social-Democratic Parliamentary
    Group”.
“The first two days of the operation of the censorship,” says
    the paper, which has been placed under the gratifying guardianship of the
    military authorities,
“show with full clarity that the central
    authorities are particularly anxious to gag the undesirable critics of the
    policy of the Social-Democratic group within our own ranks. The censorship
    is designed to preserve ‘party peace’ within the ranks of the
    Social-Democrats, in other words, to preserve a “united”,
    “cemented” and powerful German Social-Democratic
    Party. Social-Democracy under governmental tutelage-such is the most
    important event in the internal policies of our “great” time, of
    the era of the rebirth of the German nation.
“Several weeks have passed since the politicians who make up our
    Social-Democratic parliamentary group began an energetic propaganda campaign
    of their views. They have come up against strong opposition in several very
    large party centres. Their propaganda has put the workers in a frame of mind
    unfavourable rather than favourable to those who vote for war credits, which
    is why the military authorities have sought to help the latter now by means
    of the censorship, now by abolishing freedom of assembly. With us in Gotha,
    this help is coming from the military censor, in Hamburg, from the ban on
    meetings.
 

In quoting these words, the Swiss Social-Democratic paper, which is
      published in Berne, adds that a number of Social-Democratic papers in
      Germany have been placed under censorship, and continues with the comment:
      “very soon there will be nothing to disturb the unanimity of the
      German press. If anybody attempts to affect it, the military dictatorship
      will firmly and rapidly put an end to that, acting on information supplied
      directly or indirectly by ‘Social-Democrats’ that stand for
      party peace.”

The opportunist Social-Democratic papers do indeed, directly or
      indirectly, pass on information about the radical press!

Consequently, the facts go to show that we were perfectly right in
      writing in No. 36 of Sotsial-Demokrat: “The opportunists are
      bourgeois enemies of the proletarian revolution .... In times of crisis they
      immediately prove to be open allies of the entire
      united
      bourgeoisie.”[1]

As a slogan of the Social-Democratic Party,
      unity today means unity with the opportunists and submission to them (or to
      their bloc with the bourgeoisie). This is a slogan which in actual
fact aids the police and the reactionaries, and is disastrous to the
      labour movement.

We might, incidentally, mention the appearance of a splendid pamphlet by
    Borchardt (in German) entitled Vor und nach dem 4. August
1914,[2] with the
    sub-title, Hat die deutsche Sozialdemokratie abgedankt? Indeed, it
    has repudiated itself, says the author, revealing the glaring contrast
    between party declarations prior to August 4 and the policies of
    “August 4”. We shall stop at no sacrifice in the war against
    war, the Social-Democrats of Germany (and other countries) said prior to
    August 4, 1914, whereas, on September 28, 1914, Otto Braun, member of the
    Central Committee, made reference to the 20 millions of marks invested in
    legal papers, and their 11,000 employees. The tens of thousands of leaders,
    officials and privileged workers, who have been demoralised by legalism,
    have disorganised the million-strong army of the Social-Democratic
    proletariat.

The lesson to be derived is as clear as clear can be: a decisive break
    with chauvinism and opportunism. Yet,

    

vapid Social-Revolutionary babblers
    (J. Gardenin[3] and Co.) have, in the vapid Paris Mysi,
    repudiated Marxism, in favour of petty-bourgeois ideas! Forgotten are the
    elementary truths provided by political economy, and the world-wide
    development of capitalism, which produces only one revolutionary
    class—the proletariat. Forgotten are Chartism, June 1848, the Paris
    Commune, and October and December, 1905. The workers can advance towards
    their world-wide revolution only through a series of defeats and errors,
    failures and weaknesses, but they are advancing towards it. One must be
    blind not to see bourgeois and petty-bourgeois influence on the proletariat
    as the main and fundamental cause of the International’s disgrace and
    collapse in 1914. However, windbags like Gardenin and Co. would aply a
    remedy to socialism by completely repudiating its only sociohistorical
    foundation—the class struggle of the proletariat—and by diluting
    Marxism with philistine and intellectualist—Narodnik verbiage. The
    call is not for strenuous work towards a rupture between the proletarian
    revolutionary movement and opportunism, but for unification of this movement
    with the opportunists of the
Ropshin[4] and Chernov type, who were
    bomb-throwing liberals the day before yesterday, renegades in the toga of
    liberals yesterday, and today delight in saccharine bourgeois phrases about
    the “labour” principle! The Gardenins are no better than the
    Südekums and the Socialist-Revolutionaries no better than the
    liquidators. This is why they all meet so lovingly in
Sovremennik,[5] a
    journal that advocates a programme of a merger between the Social-Democrats
    and the Socialist-Revolutionaries.

 
Notes
 

[1]
See p. 110 of this
    volume.—Ed.

 



[2]
On August
    4, 1914, the German Social-Democratic parliamentary party voted for war
    credits for the Kaiser’s Government.



[3]
J. Garclenin—leader of the Socialist-Revolutionaries’ party
      V. Chernov. 



[4]
Ropshin—the Socialist-Revolutionary B. Savinkov.



[5]
Sovremennik—The Contemporary—a literary and political
    monthly published in St. Petersburg in 1911-15. A group of Menshevik,
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, Popular-Socialists, and Left liberals formed
    around the journal, which had no roots whatever in the working-class
    masses. In 1914, Lenin defined its trend as a blend of Narodismn and
    Marxism.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The London Conference









Lenin: The London Conference







V. I.  

      Lenin
The London Conference




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 39, March 3, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 132-134.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Below we quote, with abbreviations, a letter from the
    R.S.D.L.P. representative:
“London, Feb. 14, 1915.
“It was only last night that I received from the secretary of the
    British section of the International the address of the Conference, this in
    reply to my letter, in which I informed him of my address, without asking
    for an invitation. I decided to go there so as to try to read the
    declaration. Present were: from the Socialist-Revolutionaries, Rubanovich
    (from the social-chauvinists), Chernov and Bobrov from Mysi; Maisky from the
    Organising Committee, he being delegated together with Martov, who failed to
    appear, as he had received no pass. There were eleven delegates from Britain
    (Keir Hardie as Chairman, MacDonald and others); sixteen from France
    (Sembat, Vaillant and others); three from Belgium (Vandorvelde and
    others).
“The Chairman opened the Conference by declaring that its aim was
    to exchange opinions, not to adopt resolutions. A French delegate proposed
    an amendment, asking why a resolution should not be passed registering the
    opinion of the majority. This was accepted without discussion.
“The agenda: (1) the rights of nations-Belgium and Poland; (2)
    colonies; (3) guarantees of peace. A Credentials Committee was elected
    (Rubanovich and others). It was decided that one representative from each
    country should make a brief report on the attitude to the war.
“I took the floor and protested against the failure to invite our
    Party’s official representative in the International Socialist Bureau
    [Comrade
Maximovich,[2] who has for over a year been a mem ber of the
    I. S. Bureau as representative

    

of our Party, and is permanently resident in
    London]. The Chairman interrupted me, referring to the invitation of all
    ‘whose names are known’. I once more protested against the
    failure to inform the genuine representatives. Then I referred to our
    Manifesto [see Sotsjal-Dernokrat No. 33, “The War and Russian
    Social-Democracy”[1]

],

which shows our over-all attitude towards the
    war, and has been sent to the I. S. Bureau. Prior to speaking of the
    conditions of peace, I said, it was necessary to establish the means by
    which we would endeavour to achieve peace; with that end, the existence of a
    general revolutionary Social-Democratic basis should be ascertained, and
    also whether we were conferring as chauvinists, as pacifists, or as
    SocialDemocrats. I was reading our declaration, but the Chairman interrupted
    me, declaring that my standing as a delegate had not yet been established
    [!] and that they had gathered, ‘not for criticism of various
    parties’ [!]. I stated that I would continue my speech after the
    report of the Credentials Committee. [The text of the declaration we were
    not allowed to read appears in the next issue.]
“Brief statements on the general situation were made by Vaillant,
    V.andervelde, MacDonald, and Ruhanovich. Then, following the report of the
    Credentials Committee, Maisky was asked to himself decide whether he could
    alone represent the Organising Committee, and I was “permitted”
    to attend. I thanked the Conference for their “courtesy” and was
    about to continue reading out the declaration so as to ascertain whether I
    could remain, The Chairman interrupted me, saying he would not allow me to
    present “conditions” to the Conference. Then I asked for
    permission to say why I would not take part in the Conference. This
    was rejected. I then asked for permission to state that the R.S.D.L.P. was
    not taking part in the Conference. As for the reasons, I was leaving a
    written statement with the Chairman. I gathered my papers and left ....
“The Chairman was given a statement from the Chairman of the
    Central Committee of the Lettish Social-Democrats [Berzinj to the effect
    that he fully agreed with our declaration.”
 

The delegates to the Conference were not allowed to give any information
    to the press. This, of course, did not apply to Comrade Maximovich’s
    leaving the Conference, and the Labour
Leader,[3] in which Keir Hardie
    collaborates, made some general comments on Maximovich’s having left
    the Conference and on his point of view.

Owing to lack of space, we shall have to deal with the London Conference
    and its resolutions in our next issue. We shall however note the utter
    uselessness of its resolutions, which merely cover up social-chauvinism.

The following is the set-up of the Russian representation: the Central
    Committee and the Lettish Social-Democrats are resolutely and clearly
    opposed to social-chauvinism. The liquidators’ Organising Committee
    either stay away or else get in the way. As for the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries the “party” (Rubanovich) is for
    social-chauvinism, while Mysl (Bobrov and Chernov) form the
    opposition, which we shall give an appraisal of when we learn the kind of
    statement they have made.

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 25-34 of this
    volume.—Ed.

 



[2]
Maximovich—M. M. Litvinov.



[3]
Labour
    Leader—a weekly published since 1891; since 1893, organ of the
    Independent Labour Party of Briain. As from 1922, the newspaper appeared
    under the name New Leader and in 1946 it became the Socialist
    Leaders.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Under a False Flag









Lenin: Under a False Flag







V. I.  

      Lenin
Under a False Flag[3]




Written: Written not earlier than February 1915 

Published:

      First published in 1917, in the first Collection of the Priliv Publishers, Moscow.

      Signed: N. Konstantinov.

      Published according to the text in the Collection.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 135-157.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



    

 

Issue No. 1 of Nashe Dyelo (Petrograd, January
    1915)[4]
    published a highly characteristic programmatic article by Mr. A. Potresov,
    entitled “At the Juncture of Two Epochs”. Like an earlier
    magazine article by the same author, the present article sets forth the
    ideas underlying an entire bourgeois trend of public thought in
    Russia—the liquidationist—regarding the important and burning
    problems of the times. Strictly speaking, we have before us not articles but
    the manifesto of a definite trend, and anyone who reads them carefully and
    gives thought to their content will see that only fortuitous considerations,
    i.e., such that have nothing in common with purely literary interests, have
    prevented the author’s ideas (and those of his friends, since the
    author does not stand alone) from being expressed in the more appropriate
    form of a declaration or credo.

Potresov’s main idea is that present-day democracy stands at the
      juncture of two epochs, the fundamental difference between the old epoch
      and the new consisting in a transition from national isolation to
      internationalism. By present-day democracy, Potresov understands the kind
      that marked the close of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the
      twentieth, as distinct from the old bourgeois democracy that marked the
      end of the eighteenth century and the first two-thirds of the
      nineteenth.

At first glance it may seem that the author’s idea is absolutely
    correct, that we have before us an opponent to the national-liberal tendency
    predominant in present-day democracy, and that the author is an
    “internationalist”, not a national-liberal.

Indeed, this defence of internationalism, this reference to national
    narrow-mindedness and national exclusiveness as features of an outworn and
    bygone epoch—is it not a breakaway from the wave of
    national-liberalism, that bane

    

of present-day democracy or, rather, of its
    official representatives.

That, at first glance, is not only the possible but the almost inevitable
    impression. Yet it would be a gross error to think so. The author is
    transporting his cargo under a false flag. Consciously or
    otherwise—that does not matter in this instance—he has resorted
    to a stratagem by hoisting the flag of “internationalism” so as
    the more securely to transport under this flag his contraband cargo of
    national-liberalism. After all, Potresov is a most undeniable
    national-liberal. The gist of his article (and of his programme, platform,
    and credo) is in the employment of this little—and if you wish even
    innocent—stratagem, in carrying opportunism under the flag of
    internationalism. One must go into all the details of this manoeuvre, for
    the matter is of prime and tremendous importance. Potresov’s use of a
    false flag is the more dangerous since he not only cloaks himself with the
    principle of “internationalism” but also assumes the title of an
    adherent of “Marxist methodology”. In other words, Potresov
    pretends to be a true follower and exponent of Marxism, whereas in actual
    fact he substitutes national-liberalism for Marxism. Potresov tries to
    “amend” Kautsky, accusing him of “playing the
    advocate”, i.e., of defending liberalism now of one shade, now of
    another, that is to say, the liberalism of shades peculiar to various
    nations. Potresov is out to contrast national-liberalism (for it is
    absolutely indubitable and indisputable that Kautsky has become a
    national-liberal) with internationalism and Marxism. In reality, Potresov is
    contrasting particoloured national-liberalism with
    national-liberalism of a single colour, whereas Marxism is
    hostile—and in the present historical situation, absolutely
    hostile—to any kind of national-liberalism.

We shall now go on to show that such is the case, and why.
    
I

The highlight of Potresov’s misadventures, which led to his setting
    out under a national-liberal flag, can be best understood if the reader
    examines the following passage in his article:
    
 

      “With their
      characteristic temperament, they [Marx and his comrades] attacked the
      problem, no matter how difficult it was; they diagnosed the conflict, and
      attempted to determine the success of which side opened up broader
      vistas for possibilities desirable from their point of view; thus they laid
      down a certain basis on which to build their tactics” (p. 73, our
      italics in excerpts).
“The success of which side is more desirable”—this is
    what has to be determined, and that from an international, not a national
    point of view. This is the essence of the Marxist methodology. This is what
    Kautsky does not do, thus turning from a “judge” (a Marxist)
    into an “advocate” (a national-liberal). Such is
    Potresov’s line of argument. Potresov himself is most deeply convinced
    that he is not “playing the advocate” when he defends the
    desirability of success for one side (namely, his own) and that, conversely,
    he is guided by truly international considerations with regard to the
    egregious sins of the other side.

Potresov, Maslov, Plekhanov, etc., who are all guided by truly
    international considerations, have reached the same conclusions as Potresov
    has. This is a simple-mindedness that borders on—well, we shall not
    make undue haste, but shall first complete an analysis of the purely
    theoretical question.
“The success of which side is more desirable” was established
    by Marx in the Italian war of 1859, for instance. Potresov dwells on this
    particular instance, which, he says, “has a special interest for us
    because of certain of its features”. We too, for our part, are willing
    to take the instance chosen by Potresov.

In 1859 Napoleon III declared war on Austria, allegedly for the
    liberation of Italy, but in reality for his own dynastic aims.
“Behind the back of Napoleon III,” says Potresov,
    “could be discerned the figure of Gorchakov, who had just signed a
    secret agreement with the Emperor of the French.” What we have here is
    a tangle of contradictions: on the one side, the most reactionary European
    monarchy, which has been oppressing Italy; on the other, the representatives
    of revolutionary Italy, including Garibaldi, fighting for her liberation,
    side by side with the ultra-reactionary Napoleon III, etc.

    

“Would it
    not have been simpler,” Potresov writes, “to step aside and to
    say that the two are equally bad? However, neither Engels, Marx, nor
    Lassalle were attracted by the “simplicity” of such a solution,
    but started to search the problem [Potresov means to say, to study and
    explore the problem], of the particular outcome of the conflict which might
    provide the greatest opportunities for a cause dear to all three.”

Lassalle notwithstanding, Marx and Engels came to the conclusion that
    Prussia must intervene. Among their considerations, as Potresov himself
    admits, was that “of the possibility, as a result of a conflict with
    the enemy coalition, of a national movement in Germany, which might develop
    over the heads of its numerous rulers; there was also the consideration as
    to which Power in the Concert of Europe was the main evil: the reactionary
    Danubian monarchy, or other outstanding representatives of this
    Concert”.
“To us, it is not important who was right, Marx or Lassalle,”
    Potresov concludes; “what is important is that all were agreed on the
    necessity of determining, from an international point of view, the success
    of which side was more desirable.”

This is the instance cited by Potresov, and the way our author pursues
    the argument. If Marx was then able “to appraise international
    conflicts” (Potresov’s expression), notwithstanding the highly
    reactionary character of the governments of both belligerent sides,
    then Marxists too are at present obliged to make a similar
    appraisal, Potresov concludes.

This conclusion is either naïve childishness or crass sophistry,
    since it boils down to the following: since, in 1859, Marx was working on
    the problem of the desirability of success for which particular bourgeoisie,
    we, over half a century later, must solve the problem in exactly the same
    way.

Potresov has failed to notice that, to Marx in 1859 (as well as
    in a number of later cases), the question of “the success of which
    side is more desirable” meant asking “the success of which
    bourgeoisie is more desirable”. Potresov has failed to
    notice that Marx was working on the problem at a time when there
    existed indubitably progressive bourgeois movements, which moreover
    did not merely exist, but were

    

in the forefront of the historical process in
    the leading states of Europe. Today, it would be ridiculous even to imagine
    a progressive bourgeoisie, a progressive bourgeois movement, in, for
    instance, such key members of the “Concert” of Europe, as
    Britain and Germany. The old bourgeois “democracy” of these two
    key states has turned reactionary. Potresov has “forgotten”
    this, and has substituted the standpoint of the old (bourgeois)
    so-called democracy for that of present-day (non-bourgeois)
    democracy. This shift to the standpoint of another class, and moreover of an
    old and outmoded class, is sheer opportunism. There cannot be the least
    doubt that a shift like this cannot be justified by an analysis of the
    objective content of the historical process in the old and the new
    epochs.
It is the bourgeoisie—for instance in Germany, and in Britain too,
    for that matter—that endeavours to effect the kind of substitution
    accomplished by Potresov, viz., replacing of the imperialist epoch by that
    of bourgeois-progressive, national and democratic movements for
    liberation. Potresov is uncritically following in the wake of the
    bourgeoisie. This is the more unpardonable, since, in the instance he has
    selected, Potresov has himself been obliged to recognise and specify the
    considerations guiding Marx, Engels, and Lassalle in those bygone
days.[1]


First of all, these were considerations on the national
    movement (in Germany and Italy)—on the latter’s development over
    the heads of the “representatives of medievalism”; secondly,
    these were considerations on the “main evil” of

    

the reactionary
    monarchies (the Austrian, the Napoleonic, etc.) in the Concert of
    Europe.

These considerations are perfectly clear and indisputable. Marxists have
    never denied the progressiveness of bourgeois national-liberation movements
    against feudal and absolutist forces. Potresov cannot but know that
    nothing like this does or can exist in the major, i.e., the leading
    rival states of today. In those days there existed, both in Italy and in
    Germany, popular national-liberation movements with decades of
    struggle behind them. In those days the Western bourgeoisie did not give
    financial support to certain other states; on the contrary, those states
    were really “the main evil”. Potresov cannot but
    know—as he admits in the same article—that today none
    of the other states is or can be the “main evil”.

The bourgeoisie (in Germany, for instance, though not in that country
    alone) is, for selfish reasons, encouraging the ideology of national
    movements, attempting to translate that ideology into the epoch of
    imperialism, i.e., an entirely different epoch. As usual, the opportunists
    are plodding along in the rear of the bourgeoisie, abandoning the
    standpoint of present-day democracy and shifting over to that of
    the old (bourgeois) democracy. That is the chief shortcoming in all
    the articles, as well as in the entire position and the entire line of
    Potresov and his liquidationist fellow-thinkers. At the time of the
    old (bourgeois) democracy Marx and Engels were working on the
    problem of the desirability of success for which particular bourgeoisie;
    they were concerned with a modestly liberal movement developing into a
    tempestuously democratic one. In the period of present-day
    (non-bourgeois) democracy, Potresov is preaching bourgeois
    national-liberalism at a time when one cannot even imagine bourgeois
    progressive movements, whether modestly liberal or tempestuously democratic,
    in Britain, Germany, or France. Marx and Engels were ahead of
    their epoch, that of bourgeois-national progressive movements; they
    wanted to give an impetus to such movements so that they might
    develop “over the heads” of the representatives of
    medievalism.

Like all social-chauvinists, Potresov is moving backwards, away from his
    own period, that of present-day democracy,

    

and skipping over to the outworn,
    dead, and therefore intrinsically false viewpoint of the old (bourgeois)
    democracy.

That is why Potresov’s following appeal to democracy reveals his
    muddled thinking and is highly reactionary:
“Do not retreat, but advance, not towards individualism, but
    towards internationalist consciousness in all its integrity and all its
    vigour. To advance means, in a certain sense, to go also back—back to
    Engels, Marx, and Lassalle, to their method of appraising international
    conflicts, and to their finding it possible to utilise inter-state relations
    for democratic purposes.”

Potresov drags present-day democracy backwards, not “in a
    certain sense” but in all senses; he drags it back to the slogans and
    the ideology of the old bourgeois democracy, to the dependence of the masses
    upon the bourgeoisie. . . . Marx’s method consists, first of all, in
    taking due account of the objective content of a historical process
    at a given moment, in definite and concrete conditions; this in order to
    realise, in the first place, the movement of which class is the
    mainspring of the progress possible in those concrete conditions. In 1859,
    it was not imperialism that comprised the objective content of the
    historical process in continental Europe, but national-bourgeois movements
    for liberation. The mainspring was the movement of the bourgeoisie against
    the feudal and absolutist forces. Fifty-five years later, when the place of
    the old and reactionary feudal lords has been taken by the not unsimilar
    finance capital tycoons of the decrepit bourgeoisie, the knowledgeable
    Potresov is out to appraise international conflicts from the standpoint of
    the bourgeoisie, not of the new
class.[2]


Potresov has not given proper thought to the significance of the truth he
    uttered in the above words. Let us suppose that two countries are at war in
    the epoch of bourgeois, national-liberation movements. Which country should
    we wish success to from the standpoint of present-day

    

democracy? Obviously,
    to that country whose success will give a greater impetus to the
    bourgeoisie’s liberation movement, make its development more speedy,
    and undermine feudalism the more decisively. Let us further suppose that the
    determining feature of the objective historical situation has
    changed, and that the place of capital striving for national liberation has
    been taken by international, reactionary and imperialist finance
    capital. The former country, let us say, possesses three-fourths of Africa,
    whereas the latter possesses one-fourth. A repartition of Africa is the
    objective content of their war. To which side should we wish success? It
    would be absurd to state the problem in its previous form, since we do not
    possess the old criteria of appraisal: there is neither a bourgeois
    liberation movement running into decades, nor a long process of the decay of
    feudalism. It is not the business of present-day democracy either to help
    the former country to assert its “right” to three-fourths of
    Africa, or to help the latter country (even if it is developing economically
    more rapidly than the former) to take over those three-fourths.

Present-day democracy will remain true to itself only if it joins neither
    one nor the other imperialist bourgeoisie, only if it says that the two
    sides are equally bad, and if it wishes the defeat of the imperialist
    bourgeoisie in every country. Any other decision will, in reality, be
    national-liberal and have nothing in common with genuine
    internationalism.


The reader should not let himself be deceived by the pretentious
    terminology Potresov employs to conceal his switch over to the standpoint of
    the bourgeoisie. When Potresov exclaims: “. . . not towards
    individualism, but towards internationalist consciousness in all its
    integrity and all its vigour”, his aim is to contrast his own point of
    view with that of Kautsky. He calls the latter’s view (and that of
    others like him) “individualism”, because of Kautsky’s
    refusal to decide “the success of which side is more desirable”,
    and his justification of the workers’ national-liberalism in each
    “individual” country. We, on the contrary, he, as it were, says,
    we—Potresov, Cherevanin, Muslov,

    

Plekhanov, and others—appeal to
    “internationalist consciousness in all its integrity and all its
    vigour”, for we stand for national-liberalism of a definite shade, in
    no way from the standpoint of an individual state (or an individual nation)
    but from a standpoint that is genuinely internationalist. This line of
    reasoning would be ridiculous if it were not so—disgraceful.

Both Potresov and Co. and Kautsky, who have betrayed the standpoint of
    the class which they are trying hard to represent, are following in the wake
    of the bourgeoisie.
    
II

Potresov has entitled his article “At the Juncture of Two
      Epochs”. We are undoubtedly living at the juncture of two epochs,
      and the historic events that are unfolding before our eyes can be
      understood only if we analyse, in the first place, the objective
      conditions of the transition from one epoch to the other. Here we have
      important historical epochs; in each of them there are and will always be
      individual and partial movements, now forward now backward; there are and
      will always be various deviations from the average type and mean tempo of
      the movement. We cannot know how rapidly and how successfully the various
      historical movements in a given epoch will develop, but we can and do know
      which class stands at the hub of one epoch or another,
      determining its main content, the main direction of its development, the
      main characteristics of the historical situation in that epoch, etc. Only
      on that basis, i.e., by taking into account, in the first place, the
      fundamental distinctive features of the various “epochs” (and
      not single episodes in the history of individual countries), can we
      correctly evolve our tactics; only a knowledge of the basic features of a
      given epoch can serve as the foundation for an understanding of the
      specific features of one country or another.

It is to this region that both Potresov’s and Kautsky’s main
    sophism, or their fundamental historical error, pertains (Kautsky’s
    article was published in the same issue of Nashe Dyelo ), an error
    which has led both of them to national-liberal, not Marxist,
    conclusions.
 

The trouble is that the instance chosen by Potresov, which has
    presented a “special interest” to him, namely, the instance of
    the Italian campaign of 1859, as well as a number of similar
    historical instances quoted by Kautsky, “in no way pertain to
    those historical epochs”, “at the juncture” of which
    we are living. Let us call the epoch we are entering (or have entered, and
    which is in its initial stage) the present-day (or third) epoch. Let us call
    that which we have just emerged from the epoch of yesterday (or the
    second). In that case we shall have to call the epoch from which Potresov
    and Kautsky cite their instances, the day-before-yesterday (or first)
    epoch. Both Potresov’s and Kautsky’s revolting sophistry, the
    intolerable falseness of their arguments, consist in their substituting for
    the conditions of the present-day (or third) epoch the conditions of the
    day-before-yesterday (or first) epoch.

I shall try to explain what I mean.

The usual division into historical epochs, so often cited in Marxist
    literature and so many times repeated by Kautsky and adopted in
    Potresov’s article, is the following: (1) 1789-1871; (2) 1871-1914;
    (3) 1914 - ? Here, of course, as everywhere in Nature and society, the lines
    of division are conventional and variable, relative, not absolute. We take
    the most outstanding and striking historical events only approximately, as
    milestones in important historical movements. The first epoch from the Great
    French Revolution to the Franco-Prussian war is one of the rise of the
    bourgeoisie, of its triumph, of the bourgeoisie on the upgrade, an epoch of
    bourgeois-democratic movements in general and of bourgeois-national
    movements in particular, an epoch of the rapid breakdown of the obsolete
    feudal-absolutist institutions. The second epoch is that of the full
    domination and decline of the bourgeoisie, one of transition from its
    progressive character towards reactionary and even ultra-reactionary finance
    capital. This is an epoch in which a new class—present-day
    democracy—is preparing and slowly mustering its forces. The third
    epoch, which has just set in, places the bourgeoisie in the same
    “position” as that in which the feudal lords found themselves
    during the first epoch. This is the epoch of imperialism and imperialist
    upheavals, as well as of upheavals stemming from the nature of
    imperialism.
 

It was none other than Kautsky who, in a series of articles and in his
    pamphlet Der Weg zur Macht (which appeared in 1909), outlined with
    full clarity the basic features of the third epoch that has set in, and who
    noted the fundamental differences between this epoch and the second (that of
    yesterday), and recognised the change in the immediate tasks as well as in
    the conditions and forms of struggle of present-day democracy, a change
    stemming from the changed objective historical conditions. Kautsky is now
    burning that which he worshipped yesterday; his change of front is most
    incredible, most unbecoming and most shameless. In the above-mentioned
    pamphlet, he spoke forthrightly of symptoms of an approaching war, and
    specifically of the kind of war that became a fact in 1914. It would suffice
    simply to place side by side for comparison a number of passages from that
    pamphlet and from his present writings to show convincingly how Kautsky has
    betrayed his own convictions and solemn declarations. In this respect
    Kautsky is not an individual instance (or even a German instance); he is a
    typical representative of the entire upper crust of present-day democracy,
    which, at a moment of crisis, has deserted to the side of the
    bourgeoisie.

All the historical instances quoted by Potresov and Kautsky belong to the
    first epoch. The main objective content of the historical wartime phenomena,
    not only of 1855, 1859, 1864, 1866, or 1870, but also of 1877 (the
    Russo-Turkish war) and 1896-1897 (the wars between Turkey and Greece and the
    Armenian disturbances) were bourgeois-national movements or
    “convulsions” in a, bourgeois society ridding itself of every
    kind of feudalism. At that time there could have been no possibility of
    really independent action by present-day democracy, action of the kind
    befitting the epoch of the over-maturity, and decay of the bourgeoisie, in a
    number of leading countries. The bourgeoisie was then the chief class, which
    was on the upgrade as a result of its participation in those wars; it alone
    could come out with overwhelming force against the feudal-absolutist
    institutions. Represented by various strata of propertied producers of
    commodities, this bourgeoisie was progressive in various degrees in the
    different countries,

    

sometimes (like part of the Italian bourgeoisie in
    1859) being even revolutionary. The general feature of the epoch, however,
    was the progressiveness of the bourgeoisie, i.e., its unresolved and
    uncompleted struggle against feudalism. It was perfectly natural for the
    elements of present-day democracy, and for Marx as their representative, to
    have been guided at the time by the unquestionable principle of support for
    the progressive bourgeoisie (i.e., capable of waging a struggle) against
    feudalism, and for them to be dealing with the problem as to “the
    success of which side”, i.e., of which bourgeoisie, was more
    desirable. The popular movement in the principal countries affected by the
    war was generally democratic at that time, i.e., bourgeois-democratic in its
    economic and class content. It is quite natural that no other
    question could have been posed at the time except the following: the success
    of which bourgeoisie, the success of which combination of forces,
    the failure of which reactionary forces (the feudal-absolutist forces which
    were hampering the rise of the bourgeoisie) promised contemporary democracy
    more “elbow room”.

As even Potresov has had to admit, Marx was guided, in his
    “appraisal” of international conflicts springing from bourgeois
    national and liberation movements, by considerations as to whose success was
    more capable of contributing to the “development” (p. 74 of
    Potresov’s article) of national and, in general, popular democratic
    movements. That means that, during military conflicts stemming from the
    bourgeoisie’s rise to power within the various nationalities, Marx
    was, as in 1848, most of all concerned with extending the scope of the
    bourgeois-democratic movement and bringing it to a head through the
    participation of broader and more “plebeian” masses, the petty
    bourgeoisie in general, the peasantry in particular, and finally of the poor
    classes as a whole. This concern of Marx for the extension of the
    movement’s social base and its development is the fundamental
    distinction between Marx’s consistently democratic tactics and
    Lassalle’s inconsistent tactics, which veered towards an alliance with
    the national-liberals.

The international conflicts in the third epoch have, in form,
    remained the same kind of international conflicts as those of the first
    epoch, but their social and class content has

    

changed
    radically. The objective historical situation has grown quite different.

The place of the struggle of a rising capital, striving towards national
    liberation from feudalism, has been taken by the struggle waged against the
    new forces by the most reactionary finance capital, the struggle of a force
    that has exhausted and outlived itself and is heading downward towards
    decay. The bourgeois-national state framework, which in the first epoch was
    the mainstay of the development of the productive forces of a
    humanity that was liberating itself from feudalism, has now, in the third
    epoch, become a hindrance to the further development of the
    productive forces. From a rising and progressive class the bourgeoisie has
    turned into a declining, decadent, and reactionary class. It is quite
    another class that is now on the upgrade on a broad historical scale.

Potresov and Kautsky have abandoned the standpoint of that class; they
    have turned back, repeating the false bourgeois assertion that today
    too the objective content of the historical process consists in the
    bourgeoisie’s progressive movement against feudalism. In reality,
    there can now be no talk of present-day democracy following in the
    wake of the reactionary imperialist bourgeoisie, no matter of what
    “shade” the latter may be.

In the first epoch, the objective and historical task was to ascertain
    how, in its struggle against the chief representatives of a dying
    feudalism, the progressive bourgeoisie should “utilise”
    international conflicts so as to bring the greatest possible advantage to
    the entire democratic bourgeoisie of the world. In the first epoch, over
    half a century ago, it was natural and inevitable that the bourgeoisie,
    enslaved by feudalism, should wish the defeat of its “own”
    feudal oppressor, all the more so that the principal and central feudal
    strongholds of all-European importance were not so numerous at the
    time. This is how Marx “appraised” the conflicts: he ascertained
    in which country, in a given and concrete situation, the success of the
    bourgeois-liberation movement was more important in undermining the
    all-European feudal stronghold.

At present, in the third epoch, no feudal fortresses of all-European
    significance remain. Of course, it is the task of

    

present-day democracy to
    “utilise” conflicts, but—despite Potresov and
    Kautsky—this international utilisation must be directed, not
    against individual national finance capital, but against international
    finance capital. The utilisation should not be effected by a class which was
    on the ascendant fifty or a hundred years ago. At that time it was a
    question of “international action” (Potresov’s expression)
    by the most advanced bourgeois democracy; today it is another class that is
    confronted by a similar task created by history and advanced by the
    objective state of affairs.
III

The second epoch or, as Potresov puts it, “a span of forty-five
    years” (1870-1914), is characterised very inconclusively by him. The
    same incompleteness is the shortcoming in Trotsky’s characterisation
    of the same period, given in his German work, although he does not agree
    with Potresov’s practical conclusions (this, of course, standing to
    the former’s credit). Both writers hardly realise the reason for their
    standing so close to each other, in a certain sense.

Here is what Potresov writes of this epoch, which we have called the
    second, that of yesterday:
“A detailed restriction of work and the struggle and an
    all-pervading gradualism—these signs of the times, which by some have
    been elevated to a principle, have become to others an ordinary fact in
    their lives, and, as such, have become part of their mentality, a shade of
    their ideology” (p. 71). “Its [this epoch’s] talent for a
    smooth and cautious advance had, as its reverse, firstly, a pronounced
    non-adaptability to any break in gradualness and to catastrophic phenomena
    of any kind and secondly, an exceptional isolation within the sphere of
    national action—the national milieu. . .”
 (p. 72). “Neither revolution, nor war. . .”
 (p. 70). “Democracy became the more effectively nationalist, the
    longer the period of its ‘position warfare’ was protracted and
    the longer there lingered on the stage that spell of European history which
    . . . knew of no international conflicts in the heart of Europe, and
    consequently

    

experienced no unrest extending beyond the boundaries of
    national state territories, and felt no keen interest on a general European
    or world scale” (75-76).

The chief shortcoming in this characterisation, as in Trotsky’s
    characterisation of the same epoch, is a reluctance to discern and recognise
    the deep contradictions in modern democracy, which has developed on the
    foundation described above. The impression is produced that the democracy
    contemporary with the epoch under review remained a single whole, which,
    generally speaking, was pervaded with gradualism, turned nationalist, was by
    degrees weaned away from breaks in gradualness and from catastrophes, and
    grew petty and mildewed.

In reality this could not have happened, since, side by side with the
    aforesaid tendencies, other and reverse tendencies were undoubtedly
    operating: the day-by-day life of the working masses was undergoing an
    internationalisation—the cities were attracting ever more inhabitants,
    and living conditions in the large cities of the whole world were being
    levelled out; capital was becoming internationalised, and at the big
    factories townsmen and country-folk, both native and alien, were
    intermingling. The class contradictions were growing ever more acute; the
    employers’ associations were exercising ever greater pressure on the
    workers’ unions; sharper and more bitter forms of struggle were
    arising, as, for instance, mass strikes; the cost of living was rising; the
    pressure of finance capital was becoming intolerable, etc., etc.

In actual fact, events did not follow the pattern described by
    Potresov. This we know definitely. In the period under discussion, none,
    literally not one, of the leading capitalist countries of Europe was spared
    by the struggle between the two mutually opposed currents within
    contemporary democracy. In each of the big countries, this struggle at times
    assumed most violent forms, including splits, this despite the general
    “peaceful”, “sluggish”, and somnolent character of
    the epoch. These contradictory currents have affected all the various fields
    of life and all problems of modern democracy without exception, such as the
    attitude towards the bourgeoisie, alliances with the liberals, the voting
    for war credits, the attitude towards such matters as

    

colonial policies,
    reforms, the character of economic struggle, the neutrality of the trade
    unions, etc.
“All-pervading gradualism” was in no way the predominant
    sentiment in all contemporary democracy, as the writings of Potresov and
    Trotsky imply. No, this gradualism was taking shape as a definite political
    trend, which at the time often produced individual groups, and sometimes
    even individual parties, of modern democracy in Europe. That trend had its
    own leaders, its press organs, its policy, and its own particular—and
    specially organised—method of influencing the masses of the
    population. Moreover, this trend was more and more basing itself—and
    ultimately based itself solidly—on the interests of a definite social
    stratum within the democracy of the time.
“All-pervading gradualism” naturally attracted into the
    ranks of that democracy a number of petty-bourgeois fellow-travellers;
    furthermore, the specifically petty-bourgeois conditions, and consequently,
    a petty-bourgeois political orientation, became the rule with a definite
    stratum of parliamentarians, journalists, and trade union officials; a kind
    of bureaucracy and aristocracy of the working class was arising in a manner
    more or less pronounced and clear-cut.
Take, for instance, the possession of colonies and the expansion of
    colonial possessions. These were undoubted features of the period dealt with
    above, and with the majority of big states. What did that mean in the
    economic sense? It meant a sum of super-profits and special privileges for
    the bourgeoisie. It meant, moreover, the possibility of enjoying crumbs from
    this big cake for a small minority of the petty bourgeois, as well as for
    the better placed employees, officials of the labour movement, etc. The
    enjoyment of crumbs of advantage from the colonies, from privileges, by an
    insignificant minority of the working class in Britain, for instance, is an
    established fact, recognised and pointed out by Marx and Engels. Formerly
    confined to Britain alone, this phenomenon became common to all the great
    capitalist countries of Europe, as their colonial possessions expanded, and
    in general as the imperialist period of capitalism grew and developed.
In a word, the “all-pervading gradualism” of the second
    epoch (the one of yesterday) has created, not only a certain

    

“non-adaptability to any break in gradualness”, as Potresov
    thinks, not only certain “possibilist” tendencies, as Trotsky
    supposes, but an entire opportunist trend based on a definite
    social stratum within present-day democracy, and linked with the bourgeoisie
    of its own national “shade” by numerous ties of common economic,
    social, and political interests—a trend directly, openly, consciously,
    and systematically hostile to any idea of a “break in
    gradualness”.

A number of Trotsky’s tactical and organisational errors (to say
    nothing of Potresov’s) spring from his fear, or his reluctance, or
    inability to recognise the fact of the “maturity” achieved by
    the opportunist trend, and also its intimate and unbreakable link with the
    national-liberals (or social-nationalists) of our times. In practice, this
    failure to recognise this “maturity” and this unbreakable link
    leads, at least, to absolute confusion and helplessness in the face of the
    predominant social-nationalist (or national-liberal) evil.

The link between opportunism and social-nationalism is, generally
    speaking, denied by Potresov, by Martov, Axelrod, V. Kosovsky (who has
    talked himself into defending the German democrats’ national-liberal
    vote for war credits) and by Trotsky.

Their main “argument” is that no full coincidence exists
    between yesterday’s division of democracy “along the line of
    opportunism” and today’s division “along the line of
    social-nationalism”. This argument is, firstly, incorrect in point of
    fact, as we shall presently show; secondly, it is absolutely one-sided,
    incomplete and untenable from the standpoint of Marxist principles. Persons
    and groups may shift from one side to the other; that is not only possible,
    but even inevitable in any great social upheaval; however, it does not at
    all affect the nature of a definite trend, or the ideological links
    between definite trends, or their class significance. All these
    considerations might seem so generally known and indisputable that one feels
    almost embarrassed at having to lay such emphasis on them. Yet the
    above-mentioned writers have lost sight of these very considerations. The
    fundamental class significance of opportunism—or, in other words, its
    social-economic content—lies in certain elements of present-day
    democracy

    

having gone over (in fact, though perhaps unconsciously) to the
    bourgeoisie, on a number of individual issues. Opportunism is tantamount to
    a liberal-labour policy. Anyone who is fearful of the
    “factional” look of these words would do well to go to the
    trouble of studying the opinions of Marx, Engels, and Kautsky (is the latter
    not an “authority” highly suitable to the opponents of
    “factionalism”?) on, let us say, British opportunism. There
    cannot be the slightest doubt that such a study would lead to a recognition
    of the coincidence of fundamentals between opportunism and a liberal-labour
    policy. The basic class significance of today’s social-nationalism is
    exactly the same. The fundamental idea of opportunism is an
    alliance or a drawing together (sometimes an agreement, bloc, or the like)
    between the bourgeoisie and its antipode. The fundamental idea of
    social-nationalism is exactly the same. The ideological and political
    affinity, connection, and even identity between opportunism and
    social-nationalism are beyond doubt. Naturally, we must take as our basis,
    not individuals or groups, but a class analysis of the content of
    social trends, and an ideological and political examination of
    their essential and main principles.

Approaching the same subject from a somewhat different angle, we shall
    ask: whence did social-nationalism appear? How did it grow and
    mature? What gave it significance and strength? He who has been
    unable to find answers to these questions has completely failed to
    understand what social nationalism is, and is consequently quite incapable
    of drawing an “ideological line” between himself and
    social-nationalism, no matter how vehemently he may assert that he is ready
    to do so.

There can be only one answer to this question: social nationalism has
    developed from opportunism, and it was the latter that gave it strength. How
    could social-nationalism have appeared “all of a sudden”? In the
    same fashion as a babe appears “all of a sudden” if nine months
    have elapsed since its conception. Each of the numerous manifestations of
    opportunism during the entire second (or yesterday) epoch in all the
    European countries was a rivulet, which now flowed “all of a
    sudden” into a big though very shallow (and, we might add
    parenthetically, muddy and dirty)

    

river of social-nationalism. Nine months
    after conception the babe must separate from its mother; many decades after
    opportunism was conceived, social-nationalism, its ripe fruit, will have to
    separate from present-day democracy within a period that is more or less
    brief (as compared with decades). No matter how good people may scold, rage
    or vociferate over such ideas and words, this is inevitable, since it
    follows from the entire social development of present-day democracy and from
    the objective conditions in the third epoch.

But if division “along the line of opportunism” and division
    “along the line of social-nationalism” do not fully coincide,
    does that not prove that no substantial link exists between these two facts?
    It does not, in the first place, just as the fact that individual bourgeois
    at the end of the eighteenth century went over either to the side of the
    feudal lords or that of the people does not prove that there was “no
    link” between the growth of the bourgeoisie and the Great French
    Revolution of 1789. Secondly, taken by and large, there is such a
    coincidence (and we are speaking only in a general sense and of movements as
    a whole). Take, not one individual country but a number of them, let us say
    ten European countries: Germany, Britain, France,
    Belgium, Russia, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, Holland, and
    Bulgaria. Only the three countries given in italics may seem the
    exceptions. In the others, the trends of uncompromising antagonists
    to opportunism have given birth to trends hostile to
    social-nationalism. Compare the well-known Monatshefte and its
    opponents in Germany, Nashe Dyelo and its opponents in Russia, the
    party of Bissolati and its opponents in Italy, the adherents of Greulich and
    Grimm in Switzerland, Branting and Höglund in

      Sweden, 

      and Troelstra, Pannekoek and Gorter in Holland, and
    finally the Obshcho Dyelo adherents and the Tesnyaki
    in
    Bulgaria.[5] The general coincidence between the old and the
    new division is a fact; as for complete coincidences, they do not occur even
    in the simplest of natural phenomena, any more than there is complete
    coincidence between the Volga before the Kama joins it, and the Volga below
    that point; neither is there full similarity between a child and its
    parents. Britain only seems the exception; in reality, there

    

were two main
    currents in Britain prior to the war, these being identified with two
    dailies—which is the truest objective indication of the mass
    character of these currents—namely, the Daily
Citizen,[6] the
    opportunists’ newspaper, and the Daily
Herald,[7] the organ of the
    opponents of opportunism. Both papers have been swamped by the wave of
    nationalism; yet, opposition has been expressed by under one-tenth of the
    former’s adherents and by some three-sevenths of the adherents of the
    latter. The usual method of comparison, whereby only the British Socialist
    Party is compared with the Independent Labour Party, is erroneous because it
    overlooks the existence of an actual bloc of the latter with
    the
    Fabians[8] and the Labour Party. It follows, then, that
    only two out of the ten countries are exceptions, but even here the
    exceptions are not complete, since the trends have not changed places; only
    (for reasons so obvious that they need not be dwelt on) the wave has swamped
    almost all the opponents of opportunism. This undoubtedly proves the
    strength of the wave, but it does not in any way disprove coincidence
    between the old division and the new for all Europe.

We are told that division “along the line of opportunism” is
    outmoded, and that only one division is of significance, namely, that
    between the adherents of internationalism and the adherents of national
    self-sufficiency. This opinion is fundamentally wrong. The concept of
    “adherents of internationalism” is devoid of all content and
    meaning, if we do not concretely amplify it; any step towards such
    concrete amplification, however, will be an enumeration of features of
    hostility to opportunism. In practice, this will prove truer still. An
    adherent of internationalism who is not at the same time a most consistent
    and determined adversary of opportunism is a phantom, nothing more. Perhaps
    certain individuals of this type will honestly consider themselves
    “internationalists”. However, people are judged, not by what
    they think of themselves but by their political behaviour. The political
    behaviour of “internationalists” who are not consistent and
    determined adversaries of opportunism will always aid and abet the
    nationalist trend. On the other hand, nationalists, too, call themselves
    “internationalists” (Kautsky, Lensch, Haenisch, Vandervelde,

    

Hyndman, and others); not only do they call themselves so, but they fully
    acknowledge an international rapprochement, an agreement, a union
    of persons sharing their views. The opportunists are not against
    “internationalism”; they are only in favour of international
    approval for and international agreement among the opportunists.

      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


 
Notes
 

[1]
Incidentally Potresov refuses to make up his mind as to whether Marx or
      Lassalle was right in appraising the conditions of the war of 1859. We
      think that (Mehring notwithstanding) Marx was right, whereas Lassalle was
      then an opportunist, just as he was during his flirtation with
      Bismarck. Lassalle was adapting himself to the victory of Prussia and
      Bismarck, to the lack of sufficient strength in the democratic national
      movements of Italy and Germany. Thus Lassalle deviated towards a
      national-liberal labour policy, whereas Marx encouraged and developed an
      independent, consistently democratic policy hostile to national-liberal
      cowardice (Prussia’s intervention in 1859 against Napoleon would
      have stimulated the popular movement in Germany). Lassalle was casting
      glances, not downwards but upwards, as he was fascinated by
      Bismarck. Bismarck’s “success” was no justification of
      Lassalle’s opportunism.
—Lenin

[2]

“Indeed,” Potresov writes, “it was
    during that period of seeming stagnation that tremendous molecular processes
    were taking place in every country, the international situation too was
    gradually changing, the policy of colonial acquisitions, of militant
    imperialism becoming its determining feature.”
—Lenin
 



[3]
A number of
    changes were made in Lenin’s article “Under a False Flag”
    by the editors of the Collection issued in March 1917 by
    Priliv Publishers.



[4]
Nashe
    Dyelo (Our Cause )—a monthly of the Menshevik
    liquidators; mouthpiece of social-chauvinists in Russia. It began
    publication in 1915 in Petrograd to replace Nasha Zarya, which had
    been suppressed in October 1914. 



[5]
Obshcho
    Dyelo (The Common Cause ) adherents (also known as
    Shiroki socialists)—an opportunist trend in Bulgarian
    Social-Democratic Party. The journal Obshcho Dyelo was published
    from 1900 onwards. After a split at the Tenth Congress of the
    Social-Democratic Party in 1903 in Ruse they formed a reformist Bulgarian
    Social-Democratic Party (of Shiroki socialists). During the world
    imperialist war of 1914-18 the Obshcho Dyelo adherents took a
    chauvinist stand.
Tesnyaki—a revolutionary trend in the Bulgarian
    Social-Democratic Party, which in 1903 took shape as an independent
    Bulgarian Workers’ Social-Democratic Party. The founder and leader of
    Tesnyaki was D. Blagoyev, his followers, Georgy Dimitrov and Vasil
    Kolarov, among others, later heading that Party. In 1914-18 the
    Tesnyaki came out against the imperialist war. In 1919 they joined
    the Communist International and formed the Communist Party of Bulgaria.



[6]
The Daily Citizen—originally organ of the opportunist
      bloc—the Labour Party, Fabians and the Independent Labour Party of
      Britain, published in London from 1912 to 1915. 



[7]
The Daily Herald—organ of the British Socialist Party,
      published in London since 1912. 



[8]
The Fabians—members of the Fabian Society, a British
      reformist organisation founded in 1884. The name is an allusion to the
      Roman commander Quintus Fabius Maximus (d. 203), called Cunctator, i.e.,
      the Delayer, for his tactics of harassing Hannibal’s army without
      risking a pitched battle. Most of the Society’s members were
      bourgeois intellectuals: scholars, writers, politicians (such as Sidney
      and Beatrice Webb, Bernard Shaw, Ramsay MacDonald), who denied the need
      for the class struggle of the proletariat and a socialist revolution, and
      insisted that the transition from capitalism to socialism lay only through
      petty reform and a gradual transformation of society. Lenin said it was
      “an extremely opportunist trend” (see present
      edition, Vol. 13, p. 358). The Fabian Society, which was

   

affiliated to the
      Labour Party in 1900, is one of the ideological sources of Labour Party
      policy. 

During World War I, the Fabians took a social-chauvinist stand. For
      Lenin’s description of the Fabians, see “British Pacifism and
      the British Dislike of Theory” (the present volume, pp. 260-65).







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. Groups Abroad









Lenin: The Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. Groups Abroad







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. Groups Abroad[3]




Written: Written not later than February 19 (March 4), 1915 

Published:

      First published March 29, 1915 in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 40.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 158-164.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Held in Switzerland, a conference of the R.S.D.L.P. groups whose members
      are resident abroad concluded its work several days ago. Besides
      discussing purely foreign affairs, which we shall try briefly to comment
      on in the next issues of the Central Organ, the conference framed
      resolutions on the important and burning question of the war. We are
      publishing these resolutions forthwith, in the hope that they will prove
      of use to all Social-Democrats who are earnestly seeking the way towards
      live work from the present-day welter of opinions which boil down to an
      acknowledgement of internationalism in word, and an urge to come to terms
      at any cost with social-chauvinism in deed. We might add that, on the
      question of the “United States of Europe” slogan, the
      discussion was purely political, it being decided that the question be
      deferred pending a discussion, in the press, of the economic
      aspect of the matter.
The Conference’s Resolutions

The conference, which stands on the basis of the Central
    Committee’s Manifesto, as published in
No. 33,[1]

lays down the
    following principles designed to bring system into propaganda: 
    

    
      On the Character of the War

The present war is imperialist in character. This war is the outcome of
    conditions in an epoch in which capitalism has reached the highest stage in
    its development; in which the greatest significance attaches, not only to
    the export of commodities, but a]so to the export of capital; an epoch in
    which the cartelisation of production and the internationalisation of
    economic life have assumed impressive proportions, colonial policies have
    brought about the almost complete partition of the globe, world
    capitalism’s productive forces have outgrown the limited boundaries of
    national and state divisions, and the objective conditions are perfectly
    ripe for socialism to be achieved.
    
The “Defence of the Fatherland” Slogan


The present war is, in substance, a struggle between Britain, France and
    Germany for the partition of colonies and for the plunder of rival
    countries; on the part of tsarism and the ruling classes of Russia, it is an
    attempt to seize Persia, Mongolia, Turkey in Asia, Constantinople, Galicia,
    etc. The national element in the Austro-Serbian war is an entirely secondary
    consideration and does not affect the general imperialist character of the
    war.

The entire economic and diplomatic history of the last few decades shows
    that both groups of belligerent nations were systematically preparing the
    very kind of war such as the present. The question of which group dealt the
    first military blow or first declared war is immaterial in any determination
    of the tactics of socialists. Both sides’ phrases on the defence of
    the fatherland, resistance to enemy invasion, a war of defence, etc., are
    nothing but deception of the people.

At the bottom of genuinely national wars, such as took place especially
    between 1789 and 1871, was a long process of mass national movements, of a
    struggle against absolutism and feudalism, the overthrow of national
    oppression, and the formation of states on a national basis, as a
    prerequisite of capitalist development.
 

The national ideology created by that epoch left a deep impress on the
    mass of the petty bourgeoisie and a section of the proletariat. This is now
    being utilised in a totally different and imperialist epoch by the sophists
    of the bourgeoisie, and by the traitors to socialism who are following in
    their wake, so as to split the workers, and divert them from their class
    aims and from the revolutionary struggle against the bourgeoisie.

The words in the Communist
    Manifesto that “the working men have no country” are
    today truer than ever before. Only the proletariat’s international
    struggle against the bourgeoisie can preserve what it has won, and open to
    the oppressed masses the road to a better future.
    
The Slogans of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats
“The conversion of the present imperialist war into a civil war is
    the only correct proletarian slogan, one that follows from the experience of
    the Commune, and outlined in the Basle resolution (1912); it has been
    dictated by all the conditions of an imperialist war between highly
    developed bourgeois
countries.”[2]


Civil war, for which revolutionary Social-Democracy today calls, is an
    armed struggle of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie, for the
    expropriation of the capitalist class in the advanced capitalist countries,
    and for a democratic revolution in Russia (a democratic republic, an
    eight-hour working day, the confiscation of the landowners’ estates),
    for a republic to be formed in the backward monarchist countries in general,
    etc.

The appalling misery of the masses, which has been created by the war,
    cannot fail to evoke revolutionary sentiments and movements. The civil war
    slogan must serve to co-ordinate and direct such sentiments and
    movements.

The organisation of the working class has been badly
    damaged. Nevertheless, a revolutionary crisis is maturing. After the war,
    the ruling classes of all countries will make a still greater effort to
    throw the proletariat’s emancipation movement back for decades. The
    task of the revolutionary

    

      Social-Democrats—both in the event of a
    rapid revolutionary development and in that of a protracted crisis, will not
    consist in renouncing lengthy and day-by-day work, or in discarding any of
    the old methods of the class struggle. To direct both the parliamentary and
    the economic struggle against opportunism, in the spirit of revolutionary
    struggle of the masses—such will be the task.

The following should be indicated as the first steps to wards converting
    the present imperialist war into a civil war: (1) an absolute refusal to
    vote for war credits, and resignation from bourgeois governments; (2) a
    complete break with the policy of a class truce (bloc national,
    Burgfrieden ); (3) formation of an underground organisation
    wherever the governments and the bourgeoisie abolish constitutional
    liberties by introducing martial law; (4) support for fraternisation between
    soldiers of the belligerent nations, in the trenches and on battlefields in
    general; (5) support for every kind of revolutionary mass action by the
    proletariat in general.
    
Opportunism And The Collapse Of The Second International

The collapse of the Second International is the collapse of socialist
    opportunism. The latter has grown as a product of the preceding
    “peaceful” period in the development of the labour
    movement. That period taught the working class to utilise such important
    means of struggle as parliamentarianism and all legal opportunities, create
    mass economic and political organisations, a widespread labour press, etc.;
    on the other hand, the period engendered a tendency to repudiate the class
    struggle and to preach a class truce, repudiate the socialist revolution,
    repudiate the very principle of illegal organisations, recognise bourgeois
    patriotism, etc. Certain strata of the working class (the bureaucracy of the
    labour movement and the labour aristocracy, who get a fraction of the
    profits from the exploitation of the colonies and from the privileged
    position of their “fatherlands” in the world market), as well as
    petty-bourgeois sympathisers within the socialist parties, have proved the
    social mainstay of these tendencies and channels of bourgeois influence over
    the proletariat.
 

The baneful influence of opportunism has made itself felt most strongly
    in the policies of most of the official Social-Democratic parties of the
    Second International during the war. Voting for war credits, participation
    in governments, the policy of a class truce, the repudiation of an illegal
    organisation when legality has been rescinded—all this is a violation
    of the International’s most important decisions, and a downright
    betrayal of socialism.
    
The Third International

The war-created crisis has exposed the real essence of opportunism as the
    bourgeoisie’s accomplice against the proletariat. The so-called
    Social-Democratic “Centre”, headed by Kautsky, has in practice
    completely slid into opportunism, behind a cover of exceedingly harmful and
    hypocritical phrases and a Marxism falsified to resemble
    imperialism. Experience shows that in Germany, for instance, a defence of
    the socialist standpoint has been possible only by resolute opposition to
    the will of the majority of the Party leadership. It would be a harmful
    illusion to hope that a genuinely socialist International can be restored
    without a full organisational severance from the opportunists.

The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party must support all and every
    international and revolutionary mass action by the proletariat, and strive
    to bring together all anti-chauvinist elements in the International.
    
Pacifism and the Peace Slogan

Pacifism, the preaching of peace in the abstract, is one of the means of
    duping the working class. Under capitalism, particularly in its imperialist
    stage, wars are inevitable. On the other hand, however, Social-Democrats
    cannot over look the positive significance of revolutionary wars, i.e., not
    imperialist wars, but such as were fought, for instance, between 1789 and
    1871, with the aim of doing away with national oppression, and creating
    national capitalist states out of the feudal decentralised states, or such
    wars

    

that may be waged to defend the conquests of the proletariat victorious
    in its struggle against the bourgeoisie.

At the present time, the propaganda of peace unaccompanied by a call for
    revolutionary mass action can only sow illusions and demoralise the
    proletariat, for it makes the proletariat believe that the bourgeoisie is
    humane, and turns it into a plaything in the hands of the secret diplomacy
    of the belligerent countries. In particular, the idea of a so-called
    democratic peace being possible without a series of revolutions is
    profoundly erroneous.
    
The Defeat Of The Tsarist Monarchy

In each country, the struggle against a government that is waging an
    imperialist war should not falter at the possibility of that country’s
    defeat as a result of revolutionary propaganda. The defeat of the
    government’s army weakens the government, promotes the liberation of
    the nationalities it oppresses, and facilitates civil war against the ruling
    classes.

This holds particularly true in respect of Russia. A victory for Russia
    will bring in its train a strengthening of reaction, both throughout the
    world and within the country, and will be accompanied by the complete
    enslavement of the peoples living in areas already seized. In view of this,
    we consider the defeat of Russia the lesser evil in all conditions.
    
 The Attitude Towards Other Parties And Groups


The war, which has engendered a spate of chauvinism, has revealed that
    the democratic (Narodnik) intelligentsia, the party of the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries (with complete instability of the oppositional
    trend, which is centred in Mysl), and the main group of liquidators
    (Nasha Zarya ) which is supported by Plekhanov, are all in the grip
    of chauvinism. In practice, the Organising Committee is also on the side of
    chauvinism, beginning with Larin and Martov’s camouflaged support of
    chauvinism and ending with Axelrod’s defence of the principle of
    patriotism; so is the Bund, in which a Germanophile chauvinism prevails. The
    Brussels bloc (of July 3, 1914) has disintegrated, while the elements

    

that
    are grouped around Nashe Slovo are vacillating between a Platonic
    sympathy with internationalism and a striving for unity, at any price, with
    Nasha Zarya and the Organising Committee. The same vacillation is
    manifest in Chkheidze’s Social-Democratic group. The latter has, on
    the one hand, expelled the Plekhanovite, i.e., the chauvinist, Mankov; on
    the other hand, it wishes to cover up, by all possible means, the chauvinism
    of Plekhanov, Nasha Zarya, Axelrod, the Bund, etc.

It is the task of the Social-Democratic Labour Party in Russia to
    consolidate the proletarian unity created in 1912-14, mainly by
    Pravda,[4] and to re-establish the Social-Democratic Party
    organisations of the working class, on the basis of a decisive
    organisational break with the social-chauvinists. Temporary agreements are
    possible only with those Social-Democrats who stand for a decisive
    organisational rupture with the Organising Committee, Nasha Zarya
    and the Bund.

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 25–34 of this volume.—Ed.


[2]
See pp. 34 of this volume.—Ed.

 



[3]
The
    reference is to the Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. groups abroad, held in
    Berne on February 27-March 4, 1915. Convened on Lenin’s initiative, it
    was in fact a general conference of the Party, since neither a party
    congress nor an all-Russia conference could be convened during the war.
 The Conference was attended by representatives of the
    R.S.D.L.P. Central Committee, the R.S.D.L.P. Central Organ,
    Sotsial-Demokrat, and delegates from R.S.D.L.P. (Bolshevik) groups
    in Paris, Zurich, Geneva, Berne, Lausanne and from the Baugy group. Lenin
    was delegated by the Central Committee and the Central Organ, directed the
    work of the Conference, and made a report on the main item on the agenda,
    “The War and the Tasks of the Party". The Conference adopted
    resolutions on war as drafted by Lenin.



[4]
Pravda—a legal Bolshevik daily published in St. Petersburg.
      Founded in April 1912, on the initiative of the St. Petersburg
      workers.
 Pravda was a popular working-class newspaper,
    published with money collected by the workers themselves. A wide circle of
    worker correspondents and worker-publicists formed around the
    newspaper. Over eleven thousand correspondence items from workers were
    published in a single year. Pravda had an average daily circulation
    of 40,000, with some issues running into 60,000 copies. 
 Lenin directed Pravda from abroad, where he was
    living. He wrote for the paper almost daily, gave instructions to the
    editorial board, and rallied the Party’s best literary forces around
    the newspaper. 
 Pravda was constantly persecuted by the
    police. During its first year of existence it was confiscated forty-one
    times, and thirty-six legal actions were brought against its editors, who
    served prison sentences totalling forty-seven and a half months. In the
    course of twenty-seven months Pravda was banned eight times by the
    tsarist government, but reissued under the new names of Rabochaya
    Pravda, Severnaya Pravda, Pravda Truda, Za
    Pravdu, Proletarskaya Pravda, Put Pravdy,
    Rabochy, and Trudovaya Pravda. The paper was closed down
    on July 8 (21), 1914, on the eve of World War I. 
 Publication was not resumed until after the February
    Revolution. Beginning from March 5 (18), 1917, Pravda appeared as
    the Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P. Lenin joined the editorial board on
    April 5 (18), on his return from abroad, and took over the paper’s
    management. On July 5 (18), 1917, the Pravda editorial office was
    raided by military cadets and Cossacks. In July-October 1817 Pravda
    frequently changed its name as a result of persecution by the Provisional
    Government. It appeared successively under the names

   

of Listok
    Pravdy, Proletary, Rabochy, and Rabochy Put.
    On October 27 (November 9) the newspaper began to appear under its former
    name—Pravda. 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Letter from the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. to the Editors of Nashe Slovo









Lenin: Letter from the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. to the Editors of Nashe Slovo







V. I.  

      Lenin
Letter from the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. to The Editors of Nashe Slovo[2]




Written: Written on March 10 (23), 1915 

Published:

      First published in 1931, in Lenin Miscellany XVII.

      Published according to a copy made by N. K. Krupskaya.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 165-170.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Dear Comrades:


We fully agree with you that the rallying of all genuine
    Social-Democratic internationalists is one of the most pressing tasks of the
    moment .... Before replying to your practical proposal, we consider it
    necessary to clarify with frankness certain preliminary questions, so as to
    know whether we are at one in the main issue. You are quite right in feeling
    indignant about Alexinsky, Plekhanov and the like having come out in the
    foreign press, claiming that theirs is “the voice of the Russian
    proletariat or of influential groups therein”. This must be fought
    against. To carry on the struggle, the root of the evil has to be got
    at. There cannot be the least doubt that there has not been, and there is
    not, any greater vice than the so-called system of representation of the
    notorious “trends” abroad. In this we can hardly lay the blame
    on the foreigners. Let us recall the recent past. Were not Alexinsky and
    Plekhanov (and not these two alone) given the opportunity, at the selfsame
    Brussels Conference (July 3, 1914), to depict themselves as
    “trends”? After this, can it be surprising that even now
    foreigners take them for representatives of “trends”? This evil
    cannot be countered with the aid of some declaration or another. What is
    needed is a long struggle. For that struggle to be successful, we must say
    to ourselves, once and for all, that we recognise only those
    organisations  which for years have been linked up with the working
    masses, and have been empowered by recognised committees, etc., and

    

that we
    brand, as deception of the workers, a system under which a half-dozen
    intellectuals who have brought out two or three issues of a newspaper or
    journal declare themselves a “trend”, or lay claim to
    “equal rights” with the Party.

Does agreement exist between us on this, comrades?

Then, about the internationalists. In one of your recent editorials, you
    enumerated those organisations which, in your opinion, hold an
    internationalist stand. High on that list is-the Bund. We would like to know
    what grounds you have to number the Bund among the internationalists. The
    resolution of its Central Committee does not contain a single definite word
    on the major problems of socialism. It breathes a most unprincipled
    eclecticism. The Bund’s organ (Information
Bulletin)[3] indubitably
    adheres to the standpoint of Germanophile chauvinism, or else gives a
    “synthesis” of French and German chauvinism. It was with good
    reason that an article by Kosovsky adorned the pages of Die Neue Zeit,
     a journal which (we hope you agree with us on this) is now among the
    most disreputable of the so-called “socialist” press organs.

We stand heart and soul for unity among all internationalists. We would
    very much like their number to be greater. We must not, however, go in for
    self-deception; we cannot count among the internationalists people and
    organisations whose internationalism exists only on paper.

What should be understood by internationalism? Is it, for instance,
    possible to number among the internationalists those who stand for the
    International being restored on the principle of a mutual
    “amnesty”? As you know, Kautsky is the leading representative of
    the “amnesty” theory. Victor Adior has come out in the same
    vein. We consider the adherents of an amnesty the most dangerous opponents
    of internationalism. Restored on the basis of an “amnesty”, the
    International would cheapen socialism. All concessions and all agreements
    with Kautsky and Co. are inexcusable. A most determined struggle against the
    “amnesty” theory is a conditio sine qua non  of
    internationalism. It is vain to speak of internationalism if there is no
    desire and no readiness to make a complete break with the defenders of an
    “amnesty”. The question arises: does agreement on this
    fundamental issue exist between us? A negative attitude towards

    

the
    “amnesty” policy seems to have been hinted at in your
    newspaper. You will, however, argee that before any practical steps can be
    made we are entitled to ask you to let us know in detail how you regard this
    issue.

Connected with this is the question of the attitude towards the
    Organising Committee. In our very first letter to
you,[1]

we considered it
    necessary to tell you quite frankly that there are serious grounds to doubt
    the internationalism of that body. You have not made any attempt to dispel
    that opinion. We again ask you: what facts do you possess to consider that
    the Organising Committee adheres to an internationalist stand? It cannot be
    positively denied that Axelrod’s stand, set forth on several occasions
    in print, is patently chauvinist (almost Plekhanovite). Axelrod is without
    doubt the Organising Committee’s leading representative. Further,
    consider the Organising Committee’s official statements. Its report to
    the Copenhagen
Conference[4] was couched in a vein that led to its being
    published by the most extreme chauvinists in Germany. Statements by the
    Organising Committee’s “Secretariat Abroad” are much the
    same. At best, they say nothing that is definite. On the other hand,
    Larin—officially, on behalf of the Organising Committee and not of
    some kind of secretariat abroad—has made statements designed to defend
    chauvinism. What is there internationalist about this? Is it not clear that
    the Organising Committee adheres completely to the standpoint of a mutual
    “amnesty”?

Furthermore, what guarantees are there that the Organising Committee
    represents some force in Russia? Today, following the statement in Nasha
    Zarya,  this question is most pertinent. For years, the Nasha Zarya
     group conducted their line; they brought out a daily paper, and went
    in for mass agitation of their own brand. But what about the Organising
    Committee?

We all acknowledge that the issue will be settled, not by the alignment
    of forces in groups abroad-in Zurich, Paris, etc.-but by the influence
    enjoyed among the workers of St. Petersburg and of all Russia. This should
    be kept in view, whatever the steps we take.
 

Such are the considerations we have wanted to inform you of. We shall be
    very glad to get a detailed and clear reply to all these questions. Then we
    shall be able to think of what is to come next.

    


 

Notes
 

[1]
See pages 125–28 of this
    volume.—Transcriber–DW
—Lenin
 



[2]
This
    document has no original heading. The title has been provided by the
    Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee, C.P.S.U.



[3]
This refers
    to the Information Bulletin, an organ of the Bund Organization
    Abroad. It was published in Geneva from June 1911 to June 1916. In all,
    eleven issues appeared.
It was succeeded by the Bulletin of the Bund
    Committee Abroad. Only two issues appeared, in September and December
    1916.



[4]
The
    reference is to the Copenhagen Conference of Socialists of Neutral Countries
    (Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Holland), which took place on January 17-18,
    1915, with the aim of restoring the Second International. The Conference
    resolved to appeal, through the socialist parties’ members of
    parliaments, to the respective governments, offering to act as mediators
    between the belligerent countries and attempt to bring about the termination
    of the war.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## What Has Been Revealed By the Trial of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Duma Group









Lenin: What Has Been Revealed By the Trial of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Duma Group







V. I.  

      Lenin
What Has Been Revealed By the Trial of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Duma Group[1]




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 40, March 29, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 171-177.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The trial, by the tsar’s court, of five members of the R.S.D.L. Duma
      group and six other Social-Democrats seized on November 4, 1914 at a
      conference near Petrograd has ended. They have all been sentenced to life
      exile in Siberia. The censor has deleted from accounts of the trial
      published in the legal press all the passages that may be unpleasant to
      tsarism and the patriots. The “internal enemies” have been
      rapidly dealt with and again nothing is to be seen or heard on the surface
      of public life except the savage howling of a pack of bourgeois
      chauvinists, echoed by some handfuls of social-chauvinists.

What, then, has the trial of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour group
    proved?

First of all, it has shown that this advance contingent of revolutionary
    Social-Democracy in Russia failed to display sufficient firmness at the
    trial. It was the aim of the accused to prevent the State Prosecutor from
    finding out the names of the members of the Central Committee in Russia and
    of the Party’s representatives in its contacts with workers’
    organisations. That aim has been achieved. To continue achieving that aim in
    the future, we muse resort to a method long recommended officially by the
    Party, i.e., refuse to give evidence. However, to attempt to prove
    one’s solidarity with the social-patriot Mr. Yordansky, as Rosenfeld
    did, or one’s disagreement with the Central Committee, is a wrong
    method, one that is inexcusable from the standpoint of a revolutionary
    Social-Democrat.
 

We shall note that, according to a Dyen report
(No. 40)[2]—there is no official or complete record of
    the trial—Comrade Petrovsky stated: “In the same period
    [November] I received the Central Committee resolution . . . and besides I
    was given resolutions adopted by workers in seven various places concerning
    their attitude towards the war, resolutions coinciding with the Central
    Committee’s attitude. ”

This declaration does Petrovsky credit. The tide of chauvinism was
    running high on all sides. In Petrovsky’s diary there is an entry to
    the effect that even the radical-minded Chkheidze spoke with enthusiasm of a
    war for “liberty”. This chauvinism was resisted by the
    R.S.D.L. group deputies when they were free, but it was also their duty, at
    the trial, to draw a line of distinction between themselves and
    chauvinism.

The Cadet
Rech[3] had servilely “thanked” the
    tsar’s court for “dispelling the legend” that the Russian
    Social-Democratic deputies wanted the defeat of the tsar’s
    armies. Taking advantage of the fact that in Russia the Social-Democrats are
    tied hand and foot in their activities, the Cadets are pretending to take
    seriously the so-called “conflict” between the Party and the Duma
    group, and declare that the accused gave their evidence without the least
    compulsion. What innocent babes? They pretend ignorance of the threat of a
    court-martial and the death sentence that hung over the deputies in the
    early stage of the trial.

The comrades should have refused to give evidence concerning the illegal
    organisation, and, in view of the historic importance of the moment, they
    should have taken advantage of a public trial to openly set forth the
    Social-Democratic views, which are hostile, not only to tsarism in general,
    but also to social-chauvinism of all and every shade.

Let the government and bourgeois press wrathfully attack the
    R.S.D.L. group; let the Social-Revolutionaries, liquidators and
    social-chauvinists (who must fight us somehow, if they cannot fight us on
    the issue of principles!) with gleeful malice “discover” signs of
    weakness or of fictitious “disagreement with the Central
    Committee”. The Party of the revolutionary proletariat is strong
    enough to openly criticise itself, and unequivocally call mistakes and
    weaknesses by their proper names. The class-conscious

    

workers of Russia have
    created a party and have placed in the forefront an advance contingent
    which, during a world war and the world-wide collapse of international
    opportunism have revealed more than anyone else the ability to perform their
    duty as internationalist revolutionary Social-Democrats. The road we have
    been travelling has been tested by the greatest of all crises, and has
    proved, over and over again, the only correct road. We shall follow it still
    more firmly and resolutely; we shall throw out fresh advance contingents,
    and shall see to it that they not only carry out the same work, but carry it
    through more correctly.

Secondly, the trial has revealed a picture without precedent in world
    socialism—that of revolutionary Social-Democracy making use
    of parliamentarianism. More than any speeches, this example will appeal to
    the minds and hearts of the proletarian masses; more convincingly than any
    arguments, it will refute the legalist opportunists and anarchist
    phrase-mongers. The report on Muranov’s illegal work and
    Petrovsky’s notes will long remain a model of that kind of
    work carried out by our deputies, which we have had diligently to conceal,
    and the meaning of which will give all class-conscious workers in Russia
    more and more food for thought. At a time when nearly all
    “socialist”(forgive the debasement of the word!) deputies in
    Europe have proved chauvinists and servants of chauvinists, when the famous
    “Europeanism” that once charmed our liberals and liquidators has
    proved an obtuse habitude of slavish legality, there was to be found in
    Russia a workers’ party whose deputies excelled, not in high-flown
    speech, or being “received” in bourgeois, intellectualist salons,
    or in the business acumen of the “European” lawyer and
    parliamentarian, but in ties with the working masses, in dedicated work
    among those masses, in carrying on modest, unpretentious, arduous, thankless
    and highly dangerous duties of illegal propagandists and organisers. To
    climb higher, towards the rank of a deputy or minister influential in
    “society” such has been the actual meaning of
    “European” (i.e., servile)
    “socialist” parliamentarism. To go into the midst of the masses,
    to help enlighten and unite the exploited and the oppressed—such is
    the slogan advanced by the examples set by Muranov and Petrovsky.
 

This slogan will acquire historic significance. In no country in the
    world will a single thinking worker agree to confine himself to the old
    legality of bourgeois parliamentarism, when that legality has been abolished
    with a stroke of the pen in all the advanced countries, and has led to
    merely a closer actual alliance between the opportunists and the
    bourgeoisie. Whoever dreams of “unity” between revolutionary
    Social-Democratic workers and the “European” Social-Democratic
    legalists of yesterday, and of today, has learned nothing and
    forgotten everything, and is in fact an ally of the bourgeoisie and an enemy
    of the proletariat. Whoever has to this day failed to realise why the
    R.S.D.L. group broke away from the Social-Democratic group that was making
    its peace with legalism and opportunism can now learn a lessen from the
    activities of Muranov and Petrovsky as described in the report on the
    trial. It was not only by these two deputies that this work was
    conducted, and only hopelessly naïve people can dream of a
    compatibility between such work and a “friendly and tolerant
    attitude” towards Nasha Zarya or Severnaya Rabochaya

    Gazeta,[4] towards Sovremennik, the Organising
    Committee, or the Bund.

Do the government hope to intimidate the workers by sending the members
    of the R.S.D.L. group to Siberia? They will find themselves mistaken. The
    workers will not be intimidated, but will the better understand their aims,
    those of a workers’ party as distinct from the liquidators and the
    social-chauvinists. The workers will learn to elect to the Duma only men
    such as the members of the R.S.D.L. group, and for similar and ever more
    extensive work, such that will be conducted among the masses with still more
    secrecy. Do the government intend to do away with “illegal
    parliamentarianism” in Russia? They will merely consolidate the links
    between the proletariat exclusively with that kind of
    parliamentarism.

Thirdly, and most important, the court proceedings against the
    R.S.D.L. group have, for the first time, produced open and objective
    material, disseminated all over Russia in millions of copies, concerning the
    most fundamental, the most significant and most vital question of the
    attitude of the various classes in Russian society towards

    

the
    war. Have we not had enough of nauseating intellectualist jabber about the
    compatibility between “defence of the fatherland” and
    internationalism “in principle”(i.e., purely verbal and
    hypocritical internationalism)? Has not the time come to examine the
    facts that bear upon classes, i.e., millions of living
    people, not some dozens of phrase-mongers?

Over half a year has passed since the outbreak of war. The press, both
    legal and illegal, and expressing all trends, has had its say; all the party
    groups in the Duma have defined their stands—a highly insufficient
    index of our class groupings, but the only objective one. The trial of the
    R.S.D.L. group and the press comment on it have summed up all this
    material. The trial has shown that the finest representatives of the
    proletariat in Russia are not only hostile to chauvinism in general but, in
    particular, share the stand of our Central Organ. The deputies were arrested
    on November 4, 1914. Consequently, they had been conducting their work for
    over two months. How and with whom did they carry it on? Which currents in
    the working class did they reflect and express? The answer is found in the
    fact that the “theses” and Sotsial-Demokrat provided the
    material for the conference, and that, on several occasions, the Petrograd
    Committee of our Party issued leaflets of the same nature. There was no
    other material at the conference. The deputies had no intention of reporting
    to the conference on other currents in the working class, because no other
    currents existed.

Perhaps the members of the R.S.D.L. group were expressing the opinion of
    a mere minority of, the workers? We have no grounds to suppose so, since, in
    the two and a half years, between the spring of 1912 and the autumn of 1914,
    four-fifths of the class-conscious workers of Russia rallied around
    Pravda, with which these deputies were working in complete
    ideological solidarity. That is a fact. Had there been a more or less
    appreciable protest among the workers against the Central Committee’s
    stand, that protest would have surely found expression in the resolutions
    proposed. Nothing of the kind emerged at the trial, though the latter, it
    might be said, did “reveal” much of the work done by the
    R.S.D.L. group. The corrections

    

made in Petrovsky’s handwriting do not
    reveal even the slightest hint at any difference of opinion.

The facts show that, in the very first months after the outbreak of the
    war, the class-conscious vanguard of the workers of Russia rallied, in
    deed, about the Central Committee and the Central Organ. However
    unpleasant this fact may be to certain “groups”, it is
    undeniable. Thanks to the trial, the words cited in the indictment:
    “The guns should be directed, not against our brothers, the wage
    slaves of other countries, but against the reactionary and bourgeois
    governments and parties of all countries"—these words will
    spread—and have already done so—all over Russia as a call for
    proletarian internationalism, for the proletarian revolution. Thanks to the
    trial, the class slogan of the vanguard of the workers of Russia has reached
    the masses of the workers.

An epidemic of chauvinism among the bourgeoisie and a certain section of
    the petty bourgeoisie, vacillation in the other section of the latter, and a
    working class call of this nature—such is the actual and objective
    picture of our political divisions. It is to this actual situation, not to
    the pious wishes of intellectuals and founders of grouplets, that one must
    gear one’s “prospects”, hopes, and slogans.

The Pravdist papers and the “Muranov type” of work have
    brought about the unity of four-fifths of the class-conscious workers of
    Russia. About forty thousand workers have been buying Pravda ; far
    more read it. Even if war, prison, Siberia, and hard labour should destroy
    five or even ten times as many—this section of the workers
    cannot be annihilated. It is alive. It is imbued with the
    revolutionary spirit, is anti-chauvinist. It alone stands in the
    midst of the masses, with deep roots in the latter, as the champion of the
    internationalism of the toilers, the exploited, and the oppressed. It
    alone has held its ground in the general debâcle. It
    alone is leading the semi-proletarian elements away from the
    social-chauvinism of the Cadets, the Trudoviks, Plekhanov and Nasha
    Zarya, and towards socialism. Its existence, its ideas, its
    work, and its call for the “brotherhood of wage slaves of other
    countries” have been revealed to the whole of Russia by the trial of
    the R.S.D.L. group.
 

It is with this section that we must work, and its unity must be defended
    against social-chauvinists. That is the only road along which the
    working-class movement of Russia can develop towards social revolution, and
    not towards national-liberalism of the “European” type.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The trial
    of the Bolshevik deputies to the Fourth Duma (A. E. Badayev, M. K. Muranov,
    G. I. Petrovsky, F. N. Samoilov, N. R. Shagov) and other Social-Democrats,
    who took part in the illegal Party Conference in Ozerki, took place on
    February 10 (23), 1915. The case was tried by the Special Court in
    Petrograd. They were charged under Article 102, i.e. accused of
    participation in an organisation aiming at the overthrow of the existing
    state system. The main circumstantial evidence against the Bolshevik
    deputies was Lenin’s theses The
    Tasks of Revolutionary Social-Democracy in the European War and the
    C.C. R.S.D.L.P. manifesto The War and
    Russian Social-Democracy, which were confiscated during the
    search.
The five Bolshevik deputies were exiled for life to
    Turukhansk Territory {Eastern Siberia).



[2]
Dyen (Day )—a daily of a bourgeois-liberal trend,
    which began publication in St. Petersburg in 1912. Among its contributors
    were Menshevik liquidators, who took over complete control of the paper
    after February 1917. Closed down by the Revolutionary-Military Committee of
    the Petrograd Soviet on October 26 (November 8), 1917.



[3]
Rech (Speech )—the central daily newspaper of the
      Cadet Party, published in St. Petersburg from February 1906 onwards. It
      was suppressed by the Revolutionary-Military Committee of the

   

Petrograd
      Soviet on October 26 (November 8), 1917, but continued to appear under
      other names until August 1918. 



[4]
Severnaya Rabochaya Gazeta (Workers’ Northern
      Gazette)—a legal daily of the Menshevik liquidators, published
      in St. Petersburg from January to May 1914.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## On the London Conference









Lenin: On the London Conference







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the London Conference




Published:
Sotstal-Demokrat, No. 40, March 29, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotstal-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 178-180.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The declaration by Comrade Maximovich, representative of the
      R.S.D.L.P,’s Central Committee, which we are publishing here, fully
      expresses our Party’s views on this Conference. The French bourgeois
      press has excellently revealed its significance as an expedient or a
      stratagem of the Anglo-French bourgeoisie. The roles have been distributed
      as follows: Le Temps and L’Echo de
Paris[1] have attacked the
      French socialists for their allegedly excessive concessions to
      internationalism. These attacks have been merely a stratagem designed to
      pave the way for Premier Viviani’s well-known declaration in the
      Chamber, which was marked by an aggressive patriotism. On the other hand,
      Journal des
Débats[2] laid the cards on the table by stating that the
      whole point was in getting the British socialists, under Keir Hardie, who
      had hitherto been opposed to the war and to conscription, to vote, at the
      Conference, for the war to be prosecuted until victory is won over
      Germany. This is tangible and important as the political outcome of the
      British and French socialists having been won over to the side of the
      Anglo-French bourgeoisie. As for the phrases on internationalism, socialism,
      a referendum, etc., these are merely phrases, idle words of no
      significance whatever.

No doubt, the clever reactionaries of the French bourgeoisie have blurted
    out the real truth. The war is being conducted by the Anglo-French
    bourgeoisie, plus their Russian counterpart, with the aim of ravaging and
    plundering Germany, Austria and Turkey. It stands in need of recruiting
    officers, as well as of socialist consent to fight on until victory over
    Germany is won. The rest is idle and shameful

    

phrase-mongering, which
    prostitutes such great words as socialism, internationalism, etc. To follow
    the bourgeoisie and help it plunder other countries in deed, and to regale
    the masses with hypocritical recognition of “socialism and the
    International” in word-such is opportunism’s cardinal sin and
    the main reason why the Second International has collapsed.

The task confronting the opponents of social-chauvinism at the London
    Conference was therefore clear: in the name of clear-cut anti-chauvinist
    principles, they had to walk out from the Conference, without at
    the same time falling into Germanophilism, since, for no other
    motive but chauvinism, the pro-Germans are decidedly opposed to the London
    Conference. Comrade Maximovich accomplished that task when he spoke in
    definite terms of the treachery of the German socialists. 

The Bundists and the adherents of the Organising Committee are unable to
    grasp this simple and obvious fact. The former are Germanophiles, in the way
    Kosovsky is, who frankly justifies the German
    Social-Democrats’ vote for war credits (see Information Bulletin
    of the Bund No. 7, January 1915, p. 7, beginning of § 5); The editors
    of the bulletin made no mention of their disagreeing with Kosovsky, although
    they did emphasise that they were in disagreement with Borisov, that
    champion of Russian patriotism. The Manifesto of the Bund’s Central
    Committee (ibid., p. 3) does not contain a single explicit word against
    social-chauvinism.

The Organising Committee’s supporters want a reconciliation between
    the Germanophile and the Francophile brands of chauvinism as can be seen
    from Axelrod’s statements (Gobs Nos. 86 and 87 and from the first
    issue of Izvestia of the Organising Committee’s secretariat
    abroad.[3] Feb. 22, 1915). When the editors of Nashe
    Shovo proposed that we take joint action against “official
    social-chauvinism”, we replied outright that the Organising
    Committee and the Bund had themselves sided with official
    social-patriotism. In our reply we enclosed our draft declaration and
    referred to Comrade Maximovich’s decisive vote.

Why is Nashe Sbovo trying to deceive itself and others in
failing to mention this in its editorial of No. 32? Why is

    

it silent about our declaration having also spoken of the

      German Social-Democrats’ treachery? The Nashe
      Slovo declaration omitted this most important and
      fundamental point: neither we nor Comrade Maximovich adopted that
      declaration, or could have done so. That was why joint action by the
      Organising Committee and ourselves did not result. Why, then, is
      Nashe Slovo deceiving itself and others in asserting that a basis
      exists for unity of action?
“Official social-patriotism” is the main evil in present day
    socialism. To combat that evil (and not to become reconciled to it, or to
    declare a mutual international “amnesty” on this point), all
    forces must be prepared and mustered. Kautsky and others have produced a
    clear-cut programme for an “amnesty” and a peace with
    social-chauvinism. We have tried to give a clear-cut programme for the
    struggle against it: see, in particular, No. 33 of
    Sotsial-Demokrat, and the resolutions published therein. It remains
    for us to express the wish that Nashe Slovo go over to something
    more definite than vacillation between “platonic sympathy with
    internationalism”, and peace with social-chauvinism. 

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
L’Echo de Paris—an extremely reactionary bourgeois
    daily, published in Paris from 1884 to 1938.
    
Le Temps—a bourgeois daily, published in
    Paris from 1861 to 1942. Lenin is referring to the two articles on the
    London Conference, published in this newspaper on February 15 and 10,
    1915.



[2]
Journal
    des Débats politiques et littéraires—a bourgeois weekly
    published in Paris from 1894 to 1934, Lenin is referring to the article
      “The London Conference of Socialists” published in its issue
    of February 19, 1915.



[3]
Izvestia of the Secretariat Abroad of the O.C. R.S.D.L,P. was
    published in Switzerland by the Menshevik Organising Committee from February
    1915 to March 1917. 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Slogan of Civil War Illustrated









Lenin: The Slogan of Civil War Illustrated







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Slogan of Civil War Illustrated




Published:
Sotsial-Demokra No. 40, March 29, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 181-182.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

On January 8 (New Style), Swiss papers received the following message from
      Berlin: “Of late the press has repeatedly carried reports of
      peaceable attempts made by men in the German and French trenches to enter
      into friendly relations. According to Tägliche
Rundschau,[1]
      an army order dated December 29 bans any fraternisation and any kind of
      intercourse with the enemy in the trenches. Disregard of this order is
      punishable as high treason.”

Thus, fraternisation and attempts to enter into friendly relations with
    the enemy are a fact. The German military authorities are showing concern
    over the matter, which means that they attach considerable importance to
    it. The British Labour Leader  of January 7, 1915, published a
    series of quotations from the British bourgeois press on instances of
    fraternisation between British and German soldiers, who arranged a
    “forty-eight-hour truce” at Christmas, met amicably in no-man’s
    land, and so on. The British military authorities issued a special order
    forbidding fraternisation. And yet, with the utmost complacency and the
    comfortable feeling that the military censorship will protect them against
    any denials, the socialist opportunists and their viridicators (or lackeys?)
    have assured the workers, through the press (as Kautsky has done), that no
    understanding on. anti-war action by the socialists of the belligerent
    countries is possible (the expression literally used by Kautsky in Die
    Neue Zeit )!

Try to imagine Hyndman, Guesde, Vandervelde, Plekhanov, Kautsky and the
    rest—instead of aiding the bourgeoisie (something they are now engaged
    in)—forming an international committee to agitate for
    “fraternisation and attempts

    

to establish friendly relations”
    between the socialists of the belligerent countries, both in the
    “trenches” and among the troops in general. What would the
    results be several months from now, if today, only six months after the
    outbreak of the war and despite all the political bosses, leaders
    and luminaries who have betrayed socialism, opposition is mounting on all
    sides against those who have voted for war credits and those who have
    accepted ministerial jobs, and the military authorities are threatening that
    “fraternisatiosi” carries the death sentence?
“There is only one practical issue—victory or defeat for
    one’s country”, Kautsky, lackey of the opportunists, has written, in
    concord with Guesde, Plekhanov and Co. Indeed, if one were to forget
    socialism and the class struggle, that would be the truth. However, if one
    does not lose sight of socialism, that is untrue. Then there is another
    practical issue: should we perish as blind and helpless slaves, in a war
    between slave-holders, or should we fall in “attempts at
    fraternisation” between the slaves, with the aim of casting off
    slavery?

Such, in reality, is the “practical” issue.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Tägliche Runclschau (Daily Review)— a daily of a
    bourgeois nationalist trend, published in Berlin from October 1880
    onwards. In 1922 it was sold to Deutsche A ilgemeine-Zeitung. From December
    1924 to 1928 it appeared under the name of Neue Tägliche
    Runclschau. It ceased publication in 1933.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Social-Chauvinists’ Sophisms









Lenin: The Social-Chauvinists' Sophisms







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Social-Chauvinists’ Sophisms




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 41, May 1, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 183-187.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Nashe Dyelo (No. 1, 1915), which is published in
    Petrograd by the liquidators, is bringing out a translation of
    Internationalism and War, a pamphlet by Kautsky. At the same time,
    Mr. A. Potresov says he does not agree with Kautsky who; in his opinion,
    acts now like an “advocate” (i.e., a pleader for German
    social-chauvinism, who denies recognition of the Franco-Russian brand of the
    species), now like a “judge” (i.e., a Marxist who tries to apply
    the Marxist method without prejudice).

In actual fact, both Mr. A. Potresov and Kautsky have betrayed Marxism in
    the main issues, defending as they do national liberal-labour policies, by
    using obvious sophisms. Mr. A. Potresov is distracting his readers’
    attention from the fundamentals, while arguing with Kautsky over
    details. According to Mr. Potresov, the “solution” of the
    problem of the attitude of the British and the French
    “democracies” towards the war (the author is referring to
    working-class democracy) is “on the whole a good solution”
 (p. 69); these democracies, he says, “have acted correctly”,
    although their solution has been, not so conscious as “in accord with
    a national solution, through a happy coincidence”.

The meaning of these words is clear. Under Anglo-French cover,
    Mr. A. Potresov, is defending Russian chauvinism, and justifying the
    patriotic tactics used by the socialists of the Triple Entente. Mr. Potresov
    argues against Kautsky, not in the way a Marxist should argue against a
    chauvinist, but like a Russian chauvinist against a German counterpart. This
    is an old and threadbare method; it should, however, be noted that
    Mr. A. Potresov disguises and confuses in every possible way the clear and
    simple import of his words.
 

Itle points on which Mr. A. Potresov and Kautsky agree  are the
      gist of the matter. For instance, they agree that: “the present-day
      proletariat’s internationalism is compatible with defence of
      country” (K. Kautsky, p. 34 in the German edition of his
      pamphlet). Mr. A. Potresov speaks of the special situation of a country
      “that has been subjected to an attack”. “The people fear
      nothing more than an enemy invasion...”, Kautsky
      writes. “If the inhabitants of a country see the cause of war, not
      in their own government, but in the evil designs of a neighbouring
      state-and what government does not attempt to inculcate such a view upon
      the masses through the press, etc.!—then... the unanimous desire to
      defend the borders against the enemy flares up in the entire population
      .... The infuriated mob would kill those who would attempt to
      hamper the dispatch of armies to the borders” (K. Kautsky, p. 33 in
      the article of 1911).

This is a would-be Marxist defence of the fundamental idea of all
    social-chauvinists.

As early as 1911, Kautsky saw very clearly that the government (and the
    bourgeoisie) would deceive “the people, the population, the
    mob” by placing the blame on the “evil designs” of another
    country. The question arises whether support for such deception-whether by
    voting for war credits or by speeches, articles, etc.-is compatible with
    internationalism and socialism, or whether it is tantamount to a national
    liberal-labour policy! Kautsky is behaving like a most shameless
    “advocate”, like the worst kind of sophist, when he substitutes
    for this question another one, namely, whether it is reasonable for
    “individuals” to “hamper the dispatch of armies”, in
    the teeth of the will of the majority of a people that have been deceived by
    their government. That is not the point at issue. That is not the gist of
    the matter. Deceived petty bourgeois must be dissuaded, and the deception
    made clear to them. It is sometimes necessary to go with them to the
    battleground and be able to wait until they have been sobered by the
    experience of war. Not this is under discussion but the question whether it
    is permissible for socialists to participate in the bourgeoisie’s
    deception of the “people”. Kautsky and Potresov justify such
    deception, though they know perfectly well that the guilt for the
    imperialist war of 1914 falls equally on

    

the “evil designs” of the governments and the bourgeoisie of
      all the “Great” Powers-Britain and France, Germany and
      Russia. This is clearly stated, for instance, in the Basle resolution of
      1912.

There can he no doubt that the “people”, i.e., the mass of
    petty bourgeois and part of the deceived workers, believe in the bourgeois
    fable of the enemy’s “evil designs”. Yet it is the duty of
    Social-Democrats to combat this deception, not support it. Long before the
    war, all Social-Democrats in all countries said that any Great
    Power strives in fact to build up and extend its domination over the
    colonies, oppress small nations, etc. This was reiterated at Basle. The war
    is being waged for the partitioning of colonies and for the plunder of other
    lands; thieves have fallen out, and i is a brazen bourgeois lie to claim
    that, at this particular moment, some thief is getting the worse of it; to
    do so is to present the thieves’ interests as those of the people or
    the fatherland. We must speak the truth to the “people”, who are
    suffering from the war; that truth is that no defence can be put up against
    sufferings of wartime unless the government and the bourgeoisie of every
    belligerent country are overthrown. To defend Belgium by means of
    throttling Galicia or Hungary is no “defence of the
    fatherland”.

However, Marx himself, who condemned wars, as, for instance, in 1854-76,
    took sides with one of the belligerents when, despite the will of the
    socialists, wat had become a fact. That is the main contention and the chief
    trump card in Kautsky’s pamphlet. It is also the stand of
    Mr. Potresov, who by “internationalism” understands finding out
    the success of which side in the war is more desirable or less
    harmful from the standpoint of the interests of the proletariat, not in a
    particular country but the world over. The war, he says, is being
    conducted by governments and the bourgeoisie; it is for the proletariat to
    decide which government’s victory presents the least danger
    to the workers of the world.

The sophistry of this reasoning consists in a bygone period of history
    being substituted for the present. The following were the main features of
    the old wars referred to by Kautsky: (1) they dealt with the problems of
    bourgeois-democratic reforms and the overthrow of absolutism or foreign
    oppression; (2) the objective prerequisites for a socialist revolution had

    

not yet matured, and prior to the war, no socialist could speak of
    utilising it to “hasten the downfall of capitalism”, as the
    Stuttgart (1907) and Basle (1912) resolutions do; (3) in the countries of
    neither of the belligerent groups were there any socialist parties
    of any strength or mass appeal, and tested in the struggle.

In short, it is not surprising that Marx and the Marxists confined
    themselves to determining which bourgeoisie’s victory would
    be more harmless to (or more favourable to) the world proletariat, at a time
    when one could not speak of a general proletarian movement against the
    governments and the bourgeoisie of all the belligerent countries.

Long before the war and for the first time in world history, the
    socialists of all the countries now engaged in hostilities gathered together
    and declared that they would make use of the war “to hasten the
    downfall of capitalism” (the Stuttgart resolution, 1907). In
    other words, they recognised that objective conditions had matured for that
    “hastening of the downfall”, i. e., for a socialist
    revolution. That is to say, they threatened the governments with a
    revolution. In Basle (1912) they said the same thing in still clearer terms,
    referring to the Commune and to October-December
1906,[1] i. e., civil
    war.

When war broke out, the socialists who had threatened the governments
    with revolution and had called upon the proletariat to bring about that
    revolution began to refer to what had happened half a century before, and
    today are justifying socialist support for the governments and the
    bourgeoisie! The Marxist Gorter is absolutely right in comparing, in his
    Dutch brochure, Imperialism, the World War and Social-Democracy
 (p. 84), “radicals” of the Kautsky type with the liberals
    of 1848, who were courageous in word and traitors in deed.

For decades, a conflict between revolutionary Social-Democratic and the
    opportunist elements was developing within European socialism. The crisis
    has come to a head. The abscess has burst as a result of the war. Most
    official parties have yielded to the national liberal-labour politicians,
    who defend the privileges of their “own” bourgeoisie, and
    the latter’s privilege to possess colonies, oppress small
    nations, etc. Both Kautsky and Potresov defend and justify

    

the national liberal-labour policy instead of exposing it to the
      proletariat. That is the essence of the social-chauvinists’
      sophisms.

Mr. A. Potresov has inadvertently let the cat out of the bag by his
    assertion that “the Stuttgart formula was untenable in
    principle” (p. 79). What of that? To the proletariat, open renegades
    are better than covert ones. Carry on, Mr. A. Potresov; to repudiate
    Stuttgart and Basle is the more honest course.

Kautsky, the diplomat, is more wily than Mr. A. Potresoy; he does not
    repudiate Stuttgart and Basle, He merely—“merely”!—quotes
    the Basic Manifesto, omitting all references to revolution! Can it
    he that the censor has been using his blue pencil oi both Potresov and
    Kautsky? Potresov and Kautsky seem ready to speak of revolution when that is
    permitted by the censor.

Let us hope that Potresov, Kautsky and their adherents will propose that
    the Stuttgart and the Basle resolutions he replaced by something like the
    following: “Should war break out despite our efforts, we must decide,
    from the standpoint of the world proletariat, what is most to its advantage:
    that India be plundered by Britain or by Germany; that the Negroes of Africa
    be taught the use of “firewater” and pillaged by the French or
    by the Germans; that Turkey be oppressed by the Austro-Germans or by the
    AngloFranco-Russian alliance; that the Germans should throttle Belgium or
    the Russians, Galicia; that China be partitioned by the Japanese or by the
    Americans”, etc.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This refers
    to the October all-Russia political strike and the December armed uprising
    in Moscow, in 1905.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Question of the Unity of Internationalists







Lenin: The Question of the Unity of Internationalists







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Question of the Unity of Internationalists




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 41, May 1, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 188-191.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The war has led to a grave crisis in the whole of international
      socialism. Like any other crisis, the present crisis of socialism has
      revealed ever more clearly the inner contradictions lying deep within it;
      it has torn off many a false and conventional mask, and has shown up in
      the sharpest light what is outmoded and rotten in socialism, and what its
      further growth and advance towards victory will depend on.

Practically all Social-Democrats in Russia realise that. the old
    divisions and groupings are, if not obsolescent, then at least undergoing a
    transformation. In the forefront is the division on the main issue raised by
    the war, viz., the division into “internationalists” and
    “social-patriots”. We have taken these terms from the editorial
    in Nashe Slovo  No. 42, and for the time being shall not
    deal with the question of whether they should be supplemented by contrasting
    revolutionary Social-Democrats with national liberal-labour politicians.

It is not a matter of names, to be sure; the gist of the main
    present-day division has been correctly indicated in Nashe Slovo
    . The internationalists, it says, are “united in their negative
    attitude towards social-patriotism as represented by Plekhanov”. The
    editors call upon the “now disunited groups” “to come to
    an understanding and unite for at least a single act-expressing the attitude
    of Russian Social-Democrats towards the present. war and Russian
    social-patriotism”.

Besides this appeal through the press, the editors of Nashe
    Slovo have sent a letter to us and the Organising

    

Committee, proposing
    that, with their participation, a conference be called to discuss the
    matter. In our reply we spoke of the necessity “to clarify certain
    preliminary questions, so as to know whether we are at one in the main
    issue”. We stressed two such preliminary questions: (1) no declaration
    would help unmask the “social-patriots” (the editors naming
    Plekhanov, Alexinsky, and the well-known group of Petrograd liquidationist
    writers who support the XYZ
journal[1]  who “falsify the will of
    the advanced proletariat of Russia” (the expression used by the
    editors of Nashe Slovo); to unmask the social-patriots, a
    protracted struggle is necessary; (2) what grounds were there to count the
    Organising Committee among the “internationalists”?

On the other hand, the Organising Committee’s secretariat abroad
    sent us a copy of its reply to Nashe Slovo, which, in short,
    asserted that a “preliminary” selection of certain
    groups and the “exclusion of others” were out of the question;
    and that “invitations to the conference should be sent to the
    representatives abroad of all party centres and groups that attended ...
    the Brussels Conference of the International Socialist Bureau before the
    war” (letter of March 25, 1915).

Thus, the Organising Committee has declined on principle to confer with
    the internationalists alone, since it wishes also to confer with
    the social-patriots (the Plekhanov and the Alexinsky trends are known to
    have been represented at Brussels). The same spirit marked the resolution of
    the Social-Democrats gathered in Nervi (Nashe Slovo  No. 53), which
    was adopted following Yonov’s report (and obviously expressed the
    views of this representative of the most radical and internationalist
    elements in the Bund).

This resolution, which is highly characteristic and valuable in helping
    us specify the “middle road” being sought by many socialists
    living abroad, expresses sympathy with Nashe Slovo’s
    “principles”, but at the same time expresses disagreement with
    Nashe S/ova’s stand, “which consists in creating
    organisational divisions, uniting internationalist socialists alone, and
    defending the necessity of splits within socialist proletarian parties that
    have historically come into being”. In the opinion of the gathering,
    Nashe Slovo’s  “one-sided handling” (of these
    questions) is “highly

    

detrimental to clarification of problems
    connected with the restoration of the International”.

We have already pointed out that the views of Axeirod, the Organising
    Committee’s official representative, are social-chauvinist. Neither in
    the press nor in its correspondence has Nashe Slovo made any reply
    to this. We have pointed out that the Burid’s stand is the same, with
    a bias towards Germanophile chauvinism. The Nervi resolution has born this
    out in a manner which, if indirect, is highly significant: it has declared
    that unification of internationalists alone is harmful and
    schismatic. The question has been presented with a clarity that is most
    praiseworthy.

Still clearer is the Organising Committee’s reply, which expresses,
    not an oblique attitude towards the issue, but one that is straightforward
    and formal. We must confer, it says, not without the
    social-patriots, but with  them.

We should be thankful to the Organising Committee for its letter to
    Nashe Slovo, confirming the correctness of our opinion of that
    body.

Does that mean that Nashe Slovo’s entire idea of uniting
    the internationalists has been wrecked? No, it does not. While there exist
    ideological solidarity and a sincere desire to combat social-patriotism, no
    failure of any conferences can check unity among internationalists. At the
    disposal of the editors of Nashe Slovo  is the great instrument of
    a daily paper. They can do something immeasurably more businesslike and
    serious than calling conferences and issuing declarations; they can invite
    all groups, and themselves start: (1) to immediately evolve full,
    precise, unequivocal and perfectly clear definitions of the content of
    internationalism (it being a fact that Vandervelde, Kautsky, Plekhanov,
    Lensch, and Haenisch also call themselves internationalists!), of
    opportunism, the collapse of the Second International, the tasks and the
    methods of combating socialpatriotism, etc.; (2) to rally forces for a
    severe struggle for certain principles, not only abroad, but mainly in
    Russia.

Indeed, can anyone deny that there is no other way towards the
    victory of internationalism over social-patriotism, and that there can be
    none? Half a century of Russian political emigration (and thirty years of
    Social-Democratic  emigration)-have these not shown that all
    declarations,

    

conferences, etc., abroad are powerless, insignificant, and
    empty, unless they are supported by a lasting movement of
    some social stratum in Russia? Does not the present war also teach us that
    everything that is immature or decaying, everything that is conventional or
    diplomatic, will collapse at the first blow?

During the eight months of war, all Social-Democratic centres, groups,
    currents, and shades of opinion have held conferences with all and sundry,
    and have come out with “declarations”, i.e., made their opinions
    known to the public. Today the task is different, and closer to
    action: more distrust of resonant declarations and
    spectacular conferences; more energy in evolving precise replies
    and advice to writers, propagandists, agitators, and all thinking workers,
    written in a way that cannot but be understood; more clarity and
    purposefulness in mustering the forces for a long-term effort to give effect
    to such advice.

Much has been given to the editors of Nashe  Slovo—after
    all, they are a daily paper!—and they will have much to answer for if
    they fail to carry out even this “minimum programme”.

A final remark: in May 1910, exactly five years ago, we made mention, in
    our press abroad, of a highly outstanding political fact, of “far
    greater significance” than the conferences and declarations of many
    very “powerful” Social-Democratic centres, i. e., the
    fact of the formation in Russia of a group of legalist writers working in
    the selfsame XYZ journal. What has been shown by the facts
    during these five years, so eventful in the history of the labour movement
    in Russia and the whole world? Have not the facts shown that in Russia we
    have a certain social nucleus to rally the elements of a
    national liberal-labour party (after the “European”
    pattern)? What are the conclusions forced on all Social-Democrats by the
    circumstance that, with the exception of Voprosy
Strakhovaniya,[2] we
    see, in Russia, the open expression only of this current, Nashe
    Dyelo, Strahhovaniye Rabochikh, Severny
Gobs,[3] Maslov and Plekhanov?

So we repeat: more distrust of resonant declarations, and more courage in
    facing grave political realities.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is
    referring to Nasha Zarya, a journal of the Menshevik liquidators.



[2]
Voprosy Strakhovaniya (Problems of Insurance)—a Bolshevik
    legal journal, published at intervals in St. Petersburg from October 1913 to
    March 1918. It worked, not only for the achievement of workers’
    insurance, but also for the Bolshevik “uncurtailed slogans” of
    an eight-hour day, confiscation of the landed estates, and a democratic
    republic. The Bolsheviks A. N. Vinokurov, N. A. Skripnik, P. I. Stuka,
    N. M. Shvernik and others contributed to the journal.



[3]
Severny Gales (Voice of the North)—Menshevik weekly, publshed
    in Petrograd from January to March 1915.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Bourgeois Philanthropists and Revolutionary Social-Democracy




Lenin: Bourgeois Philanthropists and Revolutionary Social-Democracy







V. I.  

      Lenin
Bourgeois Philanthropists and Revolutionary Social-Democracy




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 41, May 1, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 192-193.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The
Economist,[1] a journal that speaks for the British
    millionaires, is pursuing a very instructive line in relation to the
    war. Representatives of advanced capital in the oldest and richest
    capitalist country, are shedding tears over the war and incessantly voicing
    a wish for peace. Those Social-Democrats who, together with the opportunists
    and Kautsky, think that a socialist programme consists in the propaganda of
    peace, will find proof of their error if they read The Economist.
    Their programme is not socialist, but bourgeois-pacifist. Dreams of peace,
    without propaganda of revolutionary action, express only a horror of war,
    but have nothing in common with socialism.

Moreover, The Economist stands for peace just because it is
    afraid of revolution. For instance, its issue for February 13, 1915,
    contains the following passage:
“Philanthropists profess to hope that the peace settlement will
    bring with it a great international reduction of armies .... But those who
    know the forces which really control the diplomacy of Europe see no
    Utopias. The outlook is for bloody revolutions and fierce wars between
    labour and capital, or between the masses and the governing classes of
    Continental Europe ....”

In the issue of March 27, 1915, we again find expression of a desire for
    a peace that will guarantee freedom of nationalities, etc., as promised by
    Sir Edward Grey. If this hope is not realised, the paper says, the war
    “will end in revolutionary chaos, beginning no one can say where, and
    ending in no one can say what”.

The British pacifist millionaires have a better understanding of
    present-day politics than the opportunists, the

    

followers of Kautsky and
    similar socialist whimperers after peace. The bourgeois know, first, that
    phrases about a democratic peace are an idle and foolish Utopia while the
    old “forces... really control the diplomacy”, i.e., until the
    class of capitalists has been expropriated. Secondly, the bourgeoisie have
    made a sober appraisal of the outlook, foreseeing “bloody
    revolutions” and “revolutionary chaos”. To the bourgeoisie
    a socialist revolution always seems “revolutionary chaos”.

In the realistic politics of the capitalist countries, three kinds of
    peace sympathies can be seen:

(1) The more enlightened millionaires wish an early peace because they
    are afraid of revolutions. They have soberly and correctly described any
    “democratic” peace (without annexations, but with limited
    armaments, etc.) as Utopian under capitalism.

This philistine Utopia is being advocated by the opportunists, the
    adherents of Kautsky, and the like.

(2) The unenlightened masses of the people (the petty bourgeois,
    semi-proletarians, part of the workers, etc.) whose desire for peace is very
    vague, are thereby expressing a growing protest against the war and a
    growing but as yet vague revolutionary sentiment.

(3) The revolutionary Social-Democrats, the enlightened advance guard of
    the proletariat, are attentively studying the sentiments of the masses,
    utilising the latter’s growing striving for peace, not in order to
    bolster the vulgar utopias of a “democratic” peace under
    capitalism, not in order to encourage hopes being placed in the
    philanthropists, the authorities, and the bourgeoisie, but to bring clarity
    into vague revolutionary sentiments, to enlighten the masses with a thousand
    facts of pre-war politics; basing that work on the experience of the masses
    and on their sent iments,they are out to prove systematically, steadfastly
    and unswervingly the need for mass revolutionary action against the
    bourgeoisie and the governments of their respective countries as the
    only road towards democracy and socialism.

 
Notes

[1]
The
Economist—a capitalist weekly published in London since
    1843.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Collapse of Platonic Internationalism









Lenin: The Collapse of Platonic Internationalism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Collapse of Platonic Internationalism




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 42, May 21, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 194-198.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

We have already pointed out (see Sotsial-Demokrat
No. 41)[1]

that Nashe Slovo  should at least come
out with a definite platform if it wishes its internationalism to be taken
seriously. As though in reply to us, No. 85 of Nashe Slovo  (May
    9), published the resolution passed at a meeting of its Paris staff and
    contributors. “Two members of the editorial staff,” we are
    informed, “while in agreement with the general content of the
    resolution, declared they would submit a dissenting opinion on the
    organisational methods of the Party’s internal policy in
    Russia.” This resolution is a most noteworthy document of political
    bewilderment and ineptness.

The word internationalism is reiterated time and again; “complete
      ideological divorcement from all the varieties of socialist
      nationalism” is announced, and the Stuttgart and Basle resolutions
      are quoted. The intentions are of the best, no doubt, but-it is all a mere
      phrase, since it is impossible and unnecessary to have a really
      “complete” divorcement from “all” extant varieties
      of social-nationalism, just as it is impossible and unnecessary to have a
      complete list of all the varieties of capitalist exploitation in order to
      become an enemy of capitalism. But it is necessary and possible to have an
      unmistakable line of cleavage with the main varieties, for instance, with
      that of Plekhanov, Potresov (Nashe Dyelo),  the Build, Axelrod,
      and Kautsky. The resolution promises too much, but gives nothing; it
      threatens a complete cleavage with all varieties, but is afraid to mention
      by name at least the most significant of them.

In the British Parliament it is considered a discourtesy to call a man by
    his name, the practice being to speak only

    

of the respective “Noble
    Lord” or of the “Honourable Member” for whatever
    constituency he may represent. What excellent Anglomaniacs, what highly
    refined diplomats these Nashe Slovo  people are! They evade the
    gist of the issue so gracefully, and are so polite when they provide their
    readers with formulas that serve to conceal their thoughts. They avow
    “friendship”(“Guizot in the flesh”, as one of
    Turgenev’s characters puts
it[3]) for all organisations
    “inasmuch as they apply... the principles of revolutionary
    internationalism”, but manifest “friendship” for those who
    do not apply those principles.

The “ideological divorcement” the Nashe Slovo  people
    proclaim the more solemnly, the less willing and able they are to carry it
    out, must consist in explaining the origin.  of social-natibnalism,
    the source of  its strength, and the means  to combat
    it. The social-nationalists do not call themselves, and do not admit to
    being, social-nationalists. They are bending, and are compelled to bend,
    every effort to hide behind a pseudonym, to throw dust in the eyes of the
    working masses, to cover up the traces of their links with opportunism, to
    conceal their betrayal, i.e., their having gone over in fact to the side of
    the bourgeoisie, and their alliance with the governments and the General
    Staffs. Grounding themselves on this alliance, and in control of all the
    important positions, the social-nationalists are, more than anybody else,
    clamouring for “unity” between the Social-Democratic parties and
    levelling the accusation of splitting tendencies, against all those who are
    opposed to opportunism. Consider, for instance, the latest official circular
    released by the Executive (Vorstand)  of the German
    Social-Democratic Party and directed against journals that stand for
    genuine
internationalism—Lichtstrahlen^^113^ and Die
    Internationale.[4]  These journals did not have to avow
    either “friendship” for the revolutionaries or “complete
    ideological divorcement from all varieties of
    social-nationalism”. They just began with the divorcement, and done
    that in such a way that indeed “all varieties” of opportunists
    have raised a savage outcry, thus proving how squarely the arrows have hit
    the mark.

But what about Nashe Slovo? 

It is rising up against social-nationalism, while still on bended knees
    before it, since it has failed to unmask the most

    

dangerous defenders of
    this bourgeois current (such as Kautsky); it has not declared war against
    opportunism, but, on the contrary, has kept silent about it; it has not
    taken or indicated any real steps towards liberating socialism from its
    disgraceful patriotic fetters. By stating that neither unity nor a break
    with those who joined the bourgeoisie is imperative, Nashe Slovo 
    has in fact surrendered to the opportunists, while at the same time making a
    fine gesture, which can be interpreted as meaning either that it is
    threatening the opportunists with its dreadful ire, or that it is waving a
    hand to them. Were the really deft opportunists, who have a fine
    appreciation of a blend of Left phrases and moderate practice, compelled to
    make reply to the Nashe Siovo  resolution, they would most probably
    say something similar to the statement made by the two staff members,
    namely, that they are in agreement with the “general
    content”(because they are certainly not social-nationalists, Oh, no!);
    as for the “organisational methods of the Party’s internal
    policy” they will, in due course, submit, a “dissenting
    opinion”. They run with the hare and hunt with the hounds.

When it had to deal with Russia, however, Nashe Slovo’s
    subtle diplomacy proved abortive.

 “Party unification in the conditions of the previous period proved
    impossible in Russia,” says the resolution, which should be understood
    as meaning that unification of the working-class party with a group of
    legalist liquidators proved impossible. This is oblique recognition of the
    collapse of the Brussels bloc, which was formed to save the liquidators. Why
    is Nashe Siovo  afraid openly to recognise this collapse? Why is it
    afraid openly to make the causes of this collapse clear to the workers? Is
    it not because the bloc’s collapse has proved the actual falseness of
    the policy pursued by all its members? Is it not because Nashe Slovo
     wishes to preserve “friendship” with two (at least two)
    “varieties” of social- nationalism, namely, with the Bundists and
    the Organising Committee (A.xelrod) both of whom have made press statements
    about their plans and their hopes to resurect the Brussels bloc?
“The new conditions... are cutting the ground from under the feet
    of the old groups ....”

Is not the reverse true? Far from eliminating liquidationism, the new
    conditions have not even shaken its basic

    

nucleus (Nasha Zarya), 
    notwithstanding all personal vacillations and changes of front. They have
    deepened and aggravated differences with that nucleus, since, besides being
    liquidationist, it has also turned social-nationalist! Nashe Slovo 
    evades the question of liquidationism, which it finds so unpleasant; the old
    is being undermined by the new, it asserts, but it is silent about the
    new ground,  the social-nationalist, under the feet of the
    old...  liquidationism! What ridiculous shiftiness! We shall say
    nothing about Nasha Zaryc  because it is no more, and nothing about
    Nashe Dyelo, probably because Potresov, Cherevanin, Maslov and Co. may
    be regarded in the political sense, as babes in arms. 

It is not only Potresov and Co., but themselves as well that the Nash
    Slovo  editors would regard as babes in arms. Listen to this:
“Faced by the fact that the factional and inter-factional groupings
    created in the past serve, even at the present transitional moment, as the
    only [!} centres for the organisational unification, however imperfect, of
    the advanced workers, Nashe Slovo  is of the opinion that the
    interests of its main activities in uniting the internationalists exclude
    both organisational submission of the paper, directly or indirectly, to any
    one of the old party groupings, and artificial unification of its
    fellow-thinkers into a separate group politically opposed to the old
    groupings.”

What does this mean? How is it to be taken? Inasmuch as  the new
    conditions are undermining the old groupings, they recognise the latter as
    the only genuine ones! Inasmuch as  the new conditions demand a new
    grouping, not on liquidationist principles, but on internationalism, they
    reject as “artificial” any unification of internationalists. This
    is the very acme of political impotence!

After two hundred days of propaganda of internationalism, Nashe Slovo
     has acknowledged its complete political bankruptcy. It wants neither
    “submission” to the old groupings (why so fear-stricken a word as
    “submission”? Why not “adhesion”,
    “support”, “solidarity with”?), nor the creation of
    new ones. We shall go on living in the old way, it says, in liquidationist
    groupings; we shall “submit” to them, while using Nashe
    Slovo  as a blatant signboard, or regarding it as a promenade through
    the leafy gardens of

    

internationalist phraseology. The Nashe Slovo 
    writers will do the writing, while Nashe Slovo readers will do the
    reading.[5]

For two hundred days these people were talking of uniting the
    internationalists, only to arrive at conclusion that they could unite
    nobody, not even themselves, the editors and staff of Nashe Slovo, 
    and to proclaim that unification “artificial”. What a fillip for
    Potresov, the Bundists, and Axeirod! And what adroit deception of the
    workers! On the surface, resonant internationalist phrases from a truly
    non-factional Nashe Slovo  that has thrown off the old and outworn
    groupings; in fact, however, the old groupings are the
    “only” points of unity.

Nashe Slovo’s  ideological and political bankruptcy which
    it now admits, is no accident, but the inevitable result of vain attempts to
    shrug off, in word, the actual alignment of forces. In the working-class
    movement of Russia this alignment expresses itself in the struggle of the
    liquidationist and social-patriotic trend (Nashe Dyelo)  against
    the Marxist Social-Democratic Labour Party, which has been restored by the
    January 1912
Conference,[6] strengthened by the elections, in the worker
    curia, to the Fourth Duma, consolidated by the Pravdist papers of 1912-14,
    and represented by the Russian Social-Democratic Labour group in the
    Duma. This Party has continued  its struggle against the bourgeois
    trend of liquidationism by combating the no less bourgeois trend of
    social-patriotism. The correctness of the line of this Party, our Party, has
    been borne out by the vast and historic experience of the European war, and
    by the exiguous and lender experience of the latest, the one thousand and
    first non-factional attempt at unification on the part of Nashe
    Slovo: this  attempt has suffered a fiasco, thereby confirming the
    resolution of the Berne Conference (Sotsial-Demokrat  No. 40)
    concerning “platonic”
internationalists.[2]


Genuine internationalists will wish neither to remain in the old
    liquidationist groupings (concealing this from the workers) nor to stand
    outside of the groupings. They will come to our Party.

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 188–91 of this volume.—Ed.


[2]
See pp. 163–164 of this
    volume—Ed.

 



[3]
The
    reference is to the Governor of the town of S., a character in
    Turgenev’s story Virgin Soil.



[4]
Die
    Intiernationale—a journal founded by Rosa Luxemburg and Franz
    Mehring. Only one issue appeared, in Berlin, April 1915. It resumed
    publication in Munich in 1922 under the name of Futurus.



[5]
This refers
    to the phrase in Saltykov-Shchedrin’s “Miscellaneous
    Letters”—the writing is the business of the writer; the
    reader’s
      job is to do the reading. 



[6]
This refers
    to the Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P., which took
    place in Prague on January 5-17 (18-30),







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## On the Struggle Against Social-Chauvinism









Lenin: On the Struggle Against Social-Chauvinism







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Struggle Against Social-Chauvinism




Published:

      Supplement to Sotsial-Demokrat No. 42, June 1, 1915.

      Published according to the text of the Supplement.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 199-204.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The most interesting and most recent material for this
    topical problem has been provided by the International Conference of
    Socialist Women, which adjourned recently in
Berne.[1] The readers will find below an
    account of the Conference and the texts of two resolutions-the one adopted
    and the one rejected. In the present article we would like to discuss only
    one aspect of the question.

Representatives of the women’s organisations attached to the
    Organising Committee; women members of Troelstra’s party in Holland;
    women from the Swiss organisations that are hostile to Berner Tagwacht
     for its allegedly excessive Leftist leanings; the French
    representative, who is unwilling to disagree on any important point with the
    official party, which is known to adhere to the social-chauvinist point of
    view; the women of Britain, who are hostile to the idea of a clear line of
    division between pacifism and revolutionary proletarian tactics-all these
    agreed with the “Left” German Social-Democrat women on one
    resolution. The representatives of women’s organisations connected
    with our Party’s Central Committee disagreed with them, preferring to
    remain in isolation for the time being rather than join a bloc of this
     kind.

What is the gist of this disagreement? What principles and general
    political significance are involved in this conflict?

At first glance, the middle-of-the-road resolution, which has united the
    opportunists and part of the Left wing looks very fitting and correct in
    principle. The war has been declared an imperialist one, the “defence
    of the fatherland” idea has been condemned, the workers have been
    called

    

upon to hold mass demonstrations, etc., etc. It might seem that our
    resolution was different only in the use of several sharper expressions
     such as “betrayal”, “opportunism”,
    “withdrawal from bourgeois governments”, etc.

It is undoubtedly from this standpoint that criticism will he levelled
    against the withdrawal of the representatives of the women’s
    organisations connected with our Party’s Central Committee.

However, if we give the matter more attention, without confining
    ourselves to a purely “formal” recognition of one truth or
    another, we will realise that such criticism is quite groundless.

Two world-outlooks, two appraisals of the war and the tasks of the
    International, two tactics of the proletarian parties clashed at the
    Conference. One view holds that there has been no collapse of the
    international; no deep and grave obstacles to a return from chauvinism to
    socialism; no strong “internal enemy” in the shape of
    opportunism; no direct and obvious betrayal of socialism by opportunism. The
    conclusion to be drawn might be worded as follows: let us condemn nobody;
    let us “amnesty” those who have violated the Stuttgart and the
    Basic resolutions; let us merely advise that the course followed should be
    more to the left and that the masses be called upon to hold
    demonstrations.

The other, view is diametrically opposed to the former on each of the
    points enumerated above. Nothing is more harmful or more disastrous to the
    proletarian cause than a continuation of inner-Party diplomacy 
    towards the opportunists and social-chauvinists. The majority resolution
    proved acceptable to the opportunist delegates and to the adherents of the
    present-day official parties just because it is imbued with the spirit of
    diplomacy. Such diplomacy is being used to throw dust in the eyes of the
    working masses, which at present  are led by the official
    social-patriots. An absolutely erroneous and harmful idea is being
    inculcated upon the working masses, the idea that the present-day
    SocialDemocratic parties, with their present Executives, are capable
     of changing their course from an erroneous to a correct one.

That is not the case. It is a most egregious and pernicious illusion. The
    present-day Social-Democratic parties and

    

their Executives are incapable
     of seriously changing their course. In practice  everything
    will remain as before; the “Left” wishes expressed in the
    majority resolution will remain innocent wishes; an unerring political
    instinct prompted this in the adherents of Troelstra’s party and of
    the present Executive of the French party, when they voted for such a
    resolution. It is only when it is most actively supported by the present
    Executives of the Social-Democratic parties that an appeal for mass
    demonstrations can acquire a serious and practical significance.

Can one expect such support? Obviously not, It is common knowledge that
    such an appeal will meet, not with support, but with stubborn (and mostly
    covert)  resistance from the Executives.

If the workers were told this in a straightforward way, they would know
    the truth;  they would know that to give effect to
    “Left” wishes, a radical change is necessary in the line of the
    Social-Democratic parties; a most stubborn struggle is necessary against the
    opportunists with their “Centrist” friends. As it is, the
    workers have been lulled by “Left” wishes, while the
    Conference re/used  to call by name, loudly and clearly, the evil
    which must be combated if those wishes are to be realised.

The diplomatic leaders, who are at present conducting a chauvinist policy
    within the Social-Democratic parties, will make excellent use of the
    weakness, the indecision and the insufficient clarity of the majority
    resolution. Astute parliamentarians that they are, they will distribute the
    roles among themselves: some of them will say that the “serious”
    arguments of Kautsky and Co. were not appreciated or analysed, and that
    therefore they must be discussed in a wider gathering; others will say,
    “Were we not right when we said that no deep-seated differences
    existed, if the women adherents of the Troelstra and Guesde-Sembat parties
    were able to agree with the Left-wing German women?”

The Women’s Conference should not have aided Scheidemann, Haase,
    Kautsky, Vandervelde, Hyndman, Guesde, Sembat, Plekhanov and others to blunt
    the vigilance of the working masses. On the contrary, it should have tried
    to rouse them and declared a decisive war against opportunism. Only in that
    case would the result have been, not a hope

    

that the “leaders”
    named above would “reform”, but a mustering of forces for an
    arduous and bitter struggle.

Consider the way the opportunists and the “Centrists”
    violated the Stuttgart and Basle resolutions. That is the crux of 
    the matter. Try to visualise, clearly and without diplomacy, what has
    actually taken place.

Foreseeing war, the International convenes and unanimously decides,
    should war break out, to work “to hasten the downfall of
    capitalism”;  to work in the spirit of the Commune, of October
    and December 1905 (the exact words of the Basle resolution!); to work in a
    spirit that will consider it a “crime”  if “the
    workers of one country shoot at the workers of another country”.

A line of action in an internationalist, proletarian, and revolutionary
    spirit is indicated here with perfect clarity, a clarity that cannot be
    improved within the limits of legality.

Then war broke out—the very kind of war and exactly along the lines
    foreseen at Basic. The official parties acted in an absolutely contrary
    spirit: not like internationalists but like nationalists; not in a
    proletarian but in a bourgeois way; not in a revolutionary direction but in
    the direction of ultra-opportunism. If we say to the workers that this was
    downright treachery to  the socialist cause, we thereby reject all
    evasions and subterfuges, all sophisms a la  Kautsky and
    Axeirod. We clearly indicate the extent and the power of the evil; we
    clearly call for a struggle against that evil, not for conciliation with
    it.

What about the  majority resolution? It does not contain a word
    of censure for the traitors, or a single word about opportunism, but merely
    a simple repetition of  the ideas expressed in the Basle
    resolution! One might think that nothing serious has happened, that an
    accidental and minor error has been made which calls merely for a
    repetition  of the old decision, or that a disagreement has arisen
    which is inconsequent and not of principle, and can be papered
    over!

This is downright mockery of  the International’s
    decisions, mockery of the workers. As a matter of fact, the
    social-chauvinists wish nothing else but a simple repetition  of
    the old decisions, if only nothing changes in practice. This is, in fact, a
    tacit and hypocritically disguised amnesty for the social-chauvinist
    adherents of most of the present

    

parties. We know that there are many who
    would follow this path and confine themselves to several Left
    phrases. However, their road is not for us. We have followed a
    different  road, and will go on following it; we want to help the
    working-class movement and the actual  construction of a working
    class party, in the spirit of irreconcilability towards opportunism and
    social-chauvinism.

Part of the German women delegates seem to have been afraid of a very
    clear resolution for reasons relating only to the tempo  of the
    development of the struggle against chauvinism within a single party,
    namely, their own. Such reasoning was obviously out of place and erroneous,
    since the international resolution did not and could not deal with either
    the speed or the concrete conditions of the struggle against
    social-chauvinism within the individual  countries; in this
    respect, the autonomy of the various parties is beyond dispute. The
    proclamation was needed, from an international tribune, of an irrevocable
    break with social-chauvinism in the entire direction and character of
    Social-Democratic work. Instead of that, the majority resolution once more
    reiterated the old error, that of the Second International, which
    diplomatically veiled opportunism and the gap between word and deed. We
    repeat: this is a road we shall not take.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The
    International Conference of Socialist Women held in Berne on March 26-28,
    1915, dealt with the attitude to the war. It was convened on the initiative
    of the women organisations attached to the C.C. R.S.D.L.P., with the active
    participation of Clara Zetkin, loader of the international women’s
    movement. Twenty-nine delegates from Britain, Germany, France, Holland,
    Switzerland, Russia and Poland attended the Conference, the Russian
    delegation including N. K. Krupskaya and Inessa Arrnand.
The report on the International Conference of Socialist
      Women was published in the Supplement to Sotsial-Demokrat No. 42 of
      June 1, 1915.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Collapse of the Second International







Lenin: The Collapse of the Second International








V. I.  

      Lenin
The Collapse of the Second International




Written: Written in the second half of May and the first half of June 1915 

Published:

      Published in 1915 in the journalKommunist No. 1–2.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the text in the journal.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 205-259.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






I
  208



II
  212



III
  217



IV
  223



V
  227



VI
  233



VII
  241



VIII
  251



IX
  256

 
 
 

Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## British Pacifism and the British Dislike of Theory









Lenin: British Pacifism and the British Dislike of Theory







V. I.  

      Lenin
British Pacifism and the British Dislike of Theory




Written: Written in June 1915 

Published:

      First published on July 27, 1924, in Pravda No. 169.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 260-265.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Political freedom has hitherto been far more extensive in
      Britain than elsewhere in Europe. Here, more than anywhere else, the
      bourgeoisie are used to governing and know how to govern. The relations
      between the classes are more developed and in many respects clearer than in
      other countries. The absence of conscription gives the people more liberty
      in their attitude towards the war in the sense that anyone may
      refuse to join the colours, which is why the government (which in Britain is
      a committee, in its purest form, for managing the affairs of the
      bourgeoisie) are compelled to bend every effort to rouse
      “popular” enthusiasm for the war. That aim could never be
      attained without a radical change in the laws, had the mass of proletarians
      not been completely disorganised and demoralised by the desertion to a
      Liberal, i.e., bourgeois, policy, of a minority of the best placed, skilled
      and unionised workers. The British trade unions comprise about one-fifth of
      all wage workers. Most trade union leaders are Liberals; Marx long ago
      called them agents of the bourgeoisie. 

All these features of Britain help us, on the one hand, better to
      understand the essence of present-day social-chauvinism, that essence being
      identical in autocratic and democratic countries, in militarist and
      conscription-free countries; on the other hand, they help us to appreciate,
      on the basis of facts, the significance of that compromise with
      social-chauvinism which is expressed, for instance, in the extolling of the
      slogan of peace, etc. 

The Fabian Society is undoubtedly the most consummate expression of
      opportunism and of Liberal-Labour policy.

    

The reader should look into the correspondence of Marx and Engels with
      Sorge (two Russian translations of which have appeared). There he will
      find an excellent characterisation of that society given by Engels, who
      treats Messrs. Sidney Webb & Co. as a gang of bourgeois rogues who
      would demoralise the workers, influence them in a counter-revolutionary
      spirit. One may vouch for the fact that no Second International leader
      with any responsibility and influence has ever attempted to refute this
      estimation of Engels’s, or even to doubt its correctness.
    

Let us now compare the facts, leaving theory aside for
    a moment. You will see that the Fabians’ behaviour during the war
    (see, for instance, their weekly paper, The New
Statesman[2]), and
    that of the German Social-Democratic Party, including Kautsky, are
    identical. The same direct and indirect defence of
    social-chauvinism; the same combination of that defence with a readiness to
    utter all sorts of kindly, humane and near-Left phrases about peace,
    disarmament, etc., etc. 

The fact stands, and the conclusion to be drawn—however unpleasant
    it may be to various persons—is inescapably and undoubtedly the
    following: in practice the leaders of the present-day German
    Social-Democratic Party, including Kautsky, are exactly the same kind of
    agents of the bourgeoisie that Engels called the Fabians long ago. The
    Fabians’ non-recognition of Marxism and its
    “recognition” by Kautsky and Co. make no difference whatever in
    the essentials, in the facts of politics; the only thing proved is that some
    writers, politicians, etc., have converted Marxism into Struvism. Their
    hypocrisy is not a private vice with them; in individual cases they
    may be highly virtuous heads of families; their hypocrisy is the result of
    the objective falseness of their social status: they are supposed to
    represent the revolutionary proletariat, whereas they are actually agents
    charged with the business of inculcating bourgeois, chauvinist ideas in the
    proletariat. 

The Fabians are more sincere and honest than Kautsky and Co., because
    they have not promised to stand for revolution; politically, however, they
    are of the same kidney. 

The long history of Britain’s political freedom and the developed
    condition of her political life in general, and of her

    

bourgeoisie in particular, have resulted in various shades of
      bourgeois opinion being able to find rapid, free and open expression in
      that country’s new political organisations. One such organisation is
      the Union of Democratic Control, whose secretary and treasurer is
      E. D. Morel, now a regular contributor to The Labour Leader, the
      Independent Labour Party’s central organ. This individual was for
      several years the Liberal Party’s nominee for the Birkenhead
      constituency. When Morel came out against the war, shortly after
      its outbreak, the committee of the Birkenhead Liberal association notified
      him, in a letter dated October 2, 1914, that his candidature would no
      longer be acceptable, i.e., he was simply expelled from the Party. Morel
      replied to this in a letter of October 14, which he subsequently published
      as a pamphlet entitled The Outbreak of the War. Like a number of
      other articles by Morel, the pamphlet exposes his government,
      proving the falseness of assertions that the rape of Belgium’s
      neutrality caused the war, or that the war is aimed at the destruction of
      Prussian imperialism, etc., etc. Morel defends the programme of
      the Union of Democratic Control—peace, disarmament, all territories
      to have the right of self-determination by plebiscite, and the democratic
      control of foreign policy. 

All this shows that as an individual, Morel undoubtedly deserves credit
    for his sincere sympathy with democracy, for turning away from the jingoist
    bourgeoisie to the pacifist bourgeoisie. When Morel cites the facts to prove
    that his government duped the people when it denied the existence of secret
    treaties although such treaties actually existed; that the British
    bourgeoisie, as early as 1887, fully realised that Belgium’s
    neutrality would inevitably be violated in the event of a Franco-German war,
    and emphatically rejected the idea of interfering (Germany not yet being a
    dangerous competitor!); that in a number of books published before the war
    French militarists such as Colonel Boucher quite openly acknowledged the
    existence of plans for an aggressive war by France and Russia
    against Germany; that the well-known British military authority, Colonel
    Repington, admitted in 1911 in the press, that the growth of
    Russian armaments after 1905 had been a threat to Germany—when Morel
    reveals all this, we cannot but admit that

    

we are dealing with an
      exceptionally honest and courageous bourgeois, who is not afraid to break
      with his own party. 

Yet anyone will at once concede that, after all, Morel is a bourgeois,
    whose talk about peace and disarmament is a lot of empty phrases, since
    without revolutionary action by the proletariat there can be neither a
    democratic peace nor disarmament. Though he has broken with the Liberals on
    the question of the present war, Morel remains a Liberal on all other
    economic and political issues. Why is it, then, that when Kautsky, in
    Germany, gives a Marxist guise to the selfsame bourgeois phrases
    about peace and disarmament, this is not considered hypocrisy on his part,
    but stands to his merit? Only the undeveloped character of political
    relations and the absence of political freedom prevent the formation in
    Germany, as rapidly and smoothly as in Britain, of a bourgeois league for
    peace and disarmament, with Kautsky’s programme. 

Let us, then, admit the truth that Kautsky’s stand is that of a
    pacifist bourgeois, not of a revolutionary Social-Democrat. 

The events we are living amidst are great enough for us to be courageous
    in recognising the truth, no matter whom it may concern. 

With their dislike of abstract theory and their pride in their
    practicality, the British often pose political issues more directly, thus
    helping the socialists of other countries to discover the actual content
    beneath the husk of wording of every-kind (including the
    “Marxist”). Instructive in this respect is the pamphlet
    Socialism and
War,[1]

published before the war by the jingoist paper,
    The Clarion. The pamphlet contains an anti-war
    “manifesto” by Upton Sinclair, the U.S. socialist, and also a
    reply to him from the jingoist Robert Blatchford, who has long adopted
    Hyndman’s imperialist viewpoint. 

Sinclair is a socialist of the emotions, without any theoretical
    training. He states the issue in “simple” fashion; incensed by
    the approach of war, he seeks salvation from it in socialism.
    
 

“We are told,” Sinclair writes, “that the socialist
      movement is yet too weak so that we must wait for its evolution. But
      evolution is working in the hearts of men; we are its instruments, and if
      we do not struggle, there is no evolution. We are told that the movement
      [against war] would be crushed out; but I declare my faith that the
      crushing out of any rebellion which sought, from motive of sublime
      humanity to prevent war, would be the greatest victory that socialism has
      ever gained—would shake the conscience of civilisation and rouse the
      workers of the world as nothing in all history has yet done. Let us not be
      too fearful for our movement nor put too much stress upon numbers and the
      outward appearances of power. A thousand men aglow with faith and
      determination are stronger than a million grown cautious and respectable;
      and there is no danger to the socialist movement so great as the danger of
      becoming an established institution.”

This, as can be seen, is a naïve, theoretically unreasoned, but
    profoundly correct warning against any vulgarising of socialism, and a call
    to revolutionary struggle. 

What does Blatchford say in reply to Sinclair? 

"It is capitalists and militarists who make wars. That is
    true. . . ,” he says. Blatchford is as anxious for peace and for
    socialism taking the place of capitalism as any socialist in the world. But
    Sinclair will not convince him, or do away with the facts with
    “rhetoric and fine phrases”. “Facts, my dear Sinclair, are
    obstinate things, and the German danger is a fact.” Neither the British
    nor the German socialists are strong enough to prevent war, and
    “Sinclair greatly exaggerates the power of British socialism. The
    British socialists are not united; they have no money, no arms, no
    discipline”. The only thing they can do is to help the
    British Government build up the navy; there is not, nor can there be, any
    other guarantee of peace. 

Neither before nor since the outbreak of the war have the chauvinists
    ever been so outspoken in Continental Europe. In Germany it is not frankness
    that is prevalent, but Kautsky’s hypocrisy and playing at
    sophistry. The same is true of Plekhanov. That is why it is so instructive
    to cast a glance at the situation in a more advanced country, where nobody
    will be taken in with sophisms or a travesty of Marxism. Here

    

issues are
    stated in a more straightforward and truthful manner. Let us learn from the
    “advanced” British. 

Sinclair is naïve in his appeal, although fundamentally it is a very
    correct one; he is naïve because he ignores the development of mass
    socialism over the last fifty years and the struggle of trends within
    socialism; he ignores the conditions for the growth of revolutionary action
    when an objectively revolutionary situation and a revolutionary organisation
    exist. The “emotional” approach cannot make up for that. The
    intense and bitter struggle between powerful trends in socialism, between
    the opportunist and revolutionary trends, cannot be evaded by the use of
    rhetoric. 

Blatchford speaks out undisguisedly, revealing the most covert argument
    of the Kautskyites and Co., who are afraid to tell the truth. We are still
    weak, that is all, says Blatchford; but his outspokenness at once lays bare
    his opportunism, his jingoism. It at once becomes obvious that he serves the
    bourgeoisie and the opportunists. By declaring that socialism is
    “weak” he himself weakens it by preaching an
    anti-socialist, bourgeois, policy. 

Like Sinclair, but conversely, like a coward and not like a fighter, like
    a traitor and not like the recklessly brave, he, too, ignores the conditions
    making for a revolutionary situation. 

As for his practical conclusions, his policy (the rejection of
    revolutionary action, of propaganda for such action and preparation of it),
    Blatchford, the vulgar jingoist, is in complete accord with
    Plekhanov and Kautsky. 

Marxist words have in our days become a cover for a total renunciation of
    Marxism; to be a Marxist, one must expose the “Marxist
    hypocrisy” of the leaders of the Second International, fearlessly
    recognise the struggle of the two trends in socialism, and get to the bottom
    of the problems relating to that struggle. Such is the conclusion to be
    drawn from British relationships, which show us the Marxist essence
    of the matter, without Marxist words. 

 
Notes
 

[1]
Socialism and War. The Clarion Press, 44 Worship Street, London,
    E. C.
    —Lenin
 



[2]
The
    New Statesman—a Fabian weekly, founded in 1913 in London. Since
    1931, published under the name of New Statesman and Nation.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## How Servility to Reaction is Blended with Playing at Democracy









Lenin: How Servility to Reaction is Blended with Playing at Democracy







V. I.  

      Lenin
How Servility to Reaction is Blended with Playing at Democracy




Written: Written in June 1915 

Published:

      First published in a special issue, entitled Along the Path of Lenin, of the journal Sputnik Kemmunista, January 1925.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 266-269.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The Cadet collection of articles entitled What Russia
    Expects of the War (Petrograd, 1915) is a very useful book for those
    wishing to acquaint themselves with the politics of the liberal
    intelligentsia. The extent to which our Cadets and liberals have turned
    chauvinist is sufficiently known. The present issue of our magazine contains
    a special article on this question. However, the assembly, in one hook, of
    the works of various Cadets dealing with a variety of subjects bearing on
    the war shows concretely the role, not only of the Constitutional-Democratic
    Party in present-day imperialist politics, but also of the liberal
    intelligentsia as a whole.

The specific function of such an intelligentsia and of this particular
    party is to disguise reaction and imperialism with all kinds of democratic
    phrases, assurances, sophisms, and subterfuges. The principal article in the
    book, entitled “Russia’s Territorial Acquisitions”, is by
    Milyukov, the Cadet leader. An article like this could not but set forth the
    actual significance of the present war, as far as Russia is
    concerned: her desire to seize Galicia, and take part of Poland from Austria
    and Germany, and Constantinople, the Straits, and Armenia from Turkey. To
    provide a democratic screen, phrases are pronounced about “Slav
    unity”, the interests of “small nationalities”, and the
    “menace to European peace” presented by Germany. Only in
    passing, almost casually as it were, does Milyukov blurt out the truth in
    one of his sentences.
“To unite Eastern Galicia with Russia has long been the aim of a
    Russian political party which has the backing of

    

one of the political
    parties in Galicia, the so-called Moscowphiles” (p. 49). Exactly! The
    Russian party referred to is the most reactionary in Russia, that of
    Purishkeviclj and Co., a party of the feudalist-minded landowners led by
    tsarism. This “party”—tsarism, the Purishkeviches and the
    rest—have long been intriguing both in Galicia and Armenia, etc,
    spending millions on bribing the “Moscowphiles”, stopping at no
    crime to achieve the lofty aim of “uniting” Eastern Galicia with
    Russia. War is a “continuation of the politics” of this
    party. The war has been useful in having brushed aside all conventions, torn
    away all veils, let the people see the full truth with their own eyes:
    preservation of the tsarist monarchy means the need to sacrifice millions of
    lives (and thousands of millions of the people’s money so as to
    enslave other nations. In practice, it is these policies that have been
    backed and served by the Constitutional-Democratic Party.

This truth is unpalatable to the liberal intellectual, who considers
    himself humane, freedom-loving, and democratic, and is deeply indignant at
    the “calumny” that asserts he is a servant to the
    Purishkeviches. The war, however, has shown this “calumny” to be
    the most obvious truth.

Let us cast a glance at other articles in the book.
“Our future can be happy and bright only when international
    politics rest on a foundation of justice. Faith in life and its value will
    at the same time be the triumph of peace... [215]. Russian women, and with
    them all thinking humanity...” hope that “when peace is
    concluded, all the belligerent states will simultaneously sign a pact
    according to which all international misunderstandings [what a word! As if
    what has happened among states were merely “misunderstandings"!]
    ... shall be settled by arbitration” (216).
“Russian women, who represent the people, will carry into the
    people the ideas of Christian love and the brotherhood of nations ...
    [216]. [Here the censor has deleted one line and a half, apparently
    super-“huinanitarian” expressions such as liberty, equality,
    fraternity.] ... Those who know that the writer of these lines can least of
    all be suspected of nationalism, do not need to be persuaded that the ideas
    propounded here have nothing whatsoever in common

    

with any kind of national
    exclusiveness... [83]. Only now do we realise and actually feel that in
    modern wars we are threatened, not by the loss of colonies, however
    precious, or by failure to free other nations, but by disintegration of the
    state itself...” (147).

Read and give thought to how it is being done! Learn how an
    allegedly democratic party conducts its politics, i.e., leads the
    masses!

To serve the class of the Purisbkeviches, one must, at the decisive
    moments of history (at times when the aims of that class are to be achieved
    by war), help that class, or at least “oer no resistance to the
    war”. At the same time, one must console the
    “people”, the “masses”, and “democracy”,
    with fine words such as justice, peace, national liberation. settling
    international conflicts by arbitration, the brotherhood of nations, liberty,
    reforms, democracy, universal suffrage, etc. In doing so, one must beat
    one’s breast in token of sincerity, aver and swear that
    “we” “can least of all be suspected of nationalism”,
    that “our” ideas have “nothing whatsoever in common with
    any kind of national exclusiveness”, and that we are only fighting
    against “disintegration of the state"!

That is how “it is being done”.

That is how the liberal intellectuals make politics.

The liberal-labour politicians are behaving essentially in exactly the
    same way, but in a different environment and in a slightly modified
    form. These range from Nasha Zarya, which teaches the people and the
    proletariat “to offer no resistance to the war”, continuing with
    Nashe Dyelo, which identifies itself with the views of
    Messrs. Potresov
    and Co. (No. 2, p. 19) and Plekhanov (No. 2, p. 103) and which
    reprints without a single dissenting remark similar ideas of Axeirod (No. 2,
    pp. 107-10), continuing further with Semkovsky, who battles in Nashe
    Slovo and in Izvestia of the Organising Committee against
    “disintegration”, to Chkheidze’s group, the Organising
    Committee and the Bund, who are fighting tooth and nail against a
    “split” (with the Nashe Dyelo group). Moreover, they
    all stand for the brotherhood of the workers, peace, internationalism, and
    whatever you please; they will sign whatever you wish; they will renounce
    “nationalism” millions of times, on the

    

single and “minor” condition—that “unity”
      should not be sundered with that Russian political group which alone (of
      the entire company) has some weight and, in journal and newspaper, has
      been teaching the workers opportunism, nationalism, and non-resistance to
      the war.
    

That is how “it is being done”.


 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Main German Opportunist Work on the War









Lenin: The Main German Opportunist Work on the War







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Main German Opportunist Work on the War




Written: Written in June–July 1915 

Published:

      First published Pravda No. 169, July 27, 1924.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 270-274.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Eduard David’s book Die Sozialdemoleratie im Wellkrieg
(Vorwärts Publishers, Berlin, 1915) provides a good collection
      of facts and arguments on the tactics pursued by the official German
      Social-Democratic Party in the present war. Those who follow opportunist
      literature and that of the German Social-Democrats in general will find
      nothing new in this book. It is, however, quite useful, and not only for
      purposes of reference. Anyone who would gain a deeper insight into the
      historic collapse of German Social-Democracy, anyone who really wishes to
      understand the reasons why a leading Social-Democratic party has
      “suddenly” (allgedly all of a sudden) become a party of
      lackeys of the German bourgeoisie and the Junkers, anyone who wishes to
      inquire into the meaning of the commonplace sophisms which serve, to
      justify or conceal that collapse, will find David’s dull hook far
      from tedious. As a matter of fact, there is an integral quality in
      David’s opinions; he has the conviction of a liberal-labour
      politician, something that is entirely missing in the works of Kautsky,
      for instance, that hypocrite who trims his sails to the wind.

David is an opportunist through and through, a contributor of long
    standing to Sozialistische Monatshefte —the German
    counterpart of Nashe Dyelo; be is the author of a big volume on the
    agrarian question, which contains not even a grain of socialism or
    Marxism. The very fact that a person like this, whose entire life has been
    devoted to corrupting the working-class movement in the bourgeois spirit,
    has become one of many just as opportunist party leaders, a Deputy,
    and even a member of the Executive (Vorstand)
    

of the German
    Social-Democratic parliamentary party, is a serious enough indication of the
    extent, depth and violence of the process of putrefaction within the German
    Social-Democracy.

David’s book is of no scientific value whatever, since the author
    cannot or will not even pose the question of how the principal classes of
    present-day society have for decades been preparing, encouraging and
    building up their present attitude towards the war, this through
    definite politics that stem from definite class
    interests. Even the thought that, without an examination like the one just
    mentioned, no Marxist attitude towards the war can exist, and that only an
    examination such as this can provide the basis for a study of the
    ideology of the various classes in their attitude towards the war,
    is entirely alien to David. He is an advocate of a liberal-labour
    policy, who adapts all his exposition and all his arguments to the task of
    influencing working-class audiences, concealing from thorn the weak points
    in his stand, making liberal tactics acceptable to them, and stifling
    proletarian revolutionary instincts with the aid of the greatest possible
    number of authoritative examples from ‘The Socialists’ Tactics
    in the West-European States” (Chapter 7 in David’s book), etc.,
    etc.

From the ideological standpoint David’s book is therefore
    interesting only inasmuch as it provides an opportunity to analyse how the
    bourgeoisie should speak to the workers in order to influence
    them. The essence of Eduard David’s ideological stand, considered
    from this angle, the only correct one, is contained in the following
    proposition: “The significance of our vote [for war creditslWe
    voted, not for war but against defeat” (p. 3, table of
    contents, and many passages in the book). This is the theme of the entire
    book. To back this main thesis, David has hand-picked examples of the way
    Marx, Engels and Lassalle regarded Germany’s national wars (Chapter
    2), data on the Triple Entente’s vast plans of conquest (Chapter 4),
    as well as facts from the diplomatic history of the war (Chapter 5), the
    latter being nothing more than an attempt to whitewash Germany by referring
    to the ridiculously trivial and no less ridiculously insincere official
    exchange of telegrams on the eve of the war, etc. A special chapter (6)
    entitled “The Magnitude of

    

the Danger” contains considerations
    and figures on the Triple Entente’s preponderance of might, the
    reactionary nature of tsarism, etc. Of course, David is fully in favour of
    peace. The preface to the book, dated May 1, 1915, winds up with
    the slogan, “Peace on Earth!” David, of course, considers
    himself an internationalist: the German Social-Democratic Party, he says,
    “has not betrayed the spirit of the International” (p. 8); it
    has “fought against the sowing of poisonous hatred among the
    peoples” (p. 8); it “has declared since the very first day of
    the war that in principle it is ready for peace as soon as the security of
    the country has been achieved” (p. 8).

David’s book strikingly reveals that, to influence the workers and
    the masses in general, the liberal bourgeoisie (and their agents in the
    labour movement, i. e., the opportunists) are prepared to swear allegiance
    to internationalism any number of times, accept the peace slogan, renounce
    the annxationist aims of the war, condemn chauvinism, and so on and so forth
    anything except revolutionary action against their own government,
    anything in the world, if only they can come out “against
    defeat”. In point of fact, this ideology, in terms of mathematics, is
    both necessary and sufficient to fool the workers. One cannot offer
    them less because the masses cannot be rallied unless they are promised a
    just peace, and scared with the danger of invasion, and unless allegiance to
    internationalism is sworn to; one need not offer them more because
    all that is “more”, i. e., the seizure of colonies, the
    annexation of foreign territories, the pillaging of conquered countries, the
    conclusion of advantageous trade agreements, etc., will be effected, not
    directly by the liberal bourgeoisie, but by the
    imperialist—militarist governmental war clique after the
    war.

The roles are well distributed; while the government and the military
    clique—with the suppoit of the multi-millionaires and all bourgeois
    “men of affairs"—are waging the war, the liberals console and
    dupe the masses with the nationalist ideology of a defensive war, with
    promises of a democratic peace, etc. Eduard David’s ideology is that
    of the liberal and humanitarian pacifist bourgeois; so is the ideology of
    the Russian opportunists in the Organising Committee, who are waging a
    struggle against the desirability

    

of defeat, against the disintegration of
    Russia, for the peace slogan, etc.

A non-liberal brand of tactics, one that differs in principle from the
    above, begins with the onset of a decisive break with any attempts
    to justify participation in the war, with the practical conduct of
    a policy of propaganda and preparation for revolutionary action, in wartime
    and with the full exploitation of wartime difficulties, against the
    respective governments. David does approach this borderline, the
    real line between bourgeois and proletarian politics, but he approaches it
    only with the purpose of glossing over an unpleasant subject. He mentions
    the Basle Manifesto several times, but he carefully steers clear of all its
    revolutionary passages; he recalls how Vaillant appealed in Basic “for
    a military strike and social revolution” (p. 119), but does so only to
    defend himself by using the example of the chauvinist Vaillant, not
    in order to cite and analyse the revolutionary directives of the resolution
    of the Basle Congress.

David quotes a considerable portion of our Central Committee’s
    Manifesto, including its main slogan—the conversion of the imperialist
    war into a civil war—but he does it only to declare that these
    “Russian” tactics are nothing short of “madness” and
    “gross distortion of the decisions of the International”
    (pp. 169, 172). This, he says, is Hervéism (p. 176); Hervé’s
    book, he says “contains the whole theory of Lenin, Luxemburg, Radek,
    Pannekoek, etc.” But, my dear David, is not there some Hervéism in
    the revolutionary passages of the Basic resolution and the Communist
    Manifesto? The mention of the latter document is just as unpleasant to
    David as the name of our journal, which is reminiscent of that very
    document, is unpleasant to Semkovsky. The thesis of the
    CommunistManifesto to the effect that “the workingmen have no
    country” has, as David is convinced, “long been disproved”
 (p. 176 if.). As to the question of nationalities, the entire concluding
    chapter of David’s book offers us the most unmitigated bourgeois
    nonsense about the “biological law of differentiation” (!),
    etc.

What is international is not at all anti-national; we stand for the right
    of nations to self-assertion; we are

    

against the browbeating of weak
    nations, David asserts, failing to understand (or rather pretending not to
    understand) that justifying participation in the imperialist war and
    advancing the “against defeat” slogan in this war means acting,
    not only as an anti-socialist, but also as an anti-national politician. For
    the present-day imperialist war is a war between Great Powers (i.e., powers
    that oppress a number of other nations), conducted for the purpose of
    oppressing new nations. One cannot he “national” in an
    imperialist war otherwise than by being a socialist politician, i.e., by
    recognising the right of oppressed nations to liberation, to secession from
    the Great Powers that oppress them. In the era of imperialism, there can be
    no other salvation for most of the world’s nations than through
    revolutionary action undertaken by the proletariat of the Great Powers,
    spreading beyond the boundaries of nationality, smashing those boundaries,
    and overthrowing the international bourgeoisie. Until the bourgeoisie is
    overthrown, there will remain nations known as “Great Powers”,
    i.e., the oppression will remain of nine-tenths of the nations of the whole
    world. The overthrow of the bourgeoisie will enormously accelerate the
    downfall of national partitions of every kind, this without
    decreasing but, on the contrary, increasing a millionfold the
    “differentiation” of humanity, in the meaning of the wealth and
    the variety in spiritual life, ideological trends, tendencies, and
    shades.

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Defeat of One's Own Government in the Imperialist War









Lenin: The Defeat of One's Own Government in the Imperialist War







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Defeat of One’s Own Government in the Imperialist War




Published:
Sotsial-Demorkrat No. 43, July 26, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demorkrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 275-280.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

During a reactionary war a revolutionary class cannot but desire the defeat of
      its government.

    

This is axiomatic, and disputed only by conscious partisans or helpless
      satellites of the social-chauvinists. Among the former, for instance, is
      Semkovsky of the Organising Committee (No. 2 of its Izvestia),
      and among the latter, Trotsky and
      Bukvoyed,[2]
      and Kautsky in
      Germany. To desire Russia’s defeat, Trotsky writes, is “an
      uncalled-for and absolutely unjustifiable concession to the political
      methodology of social-patriotism, which would replace the revolutionary
      struggle against the war and the conditions causing it, with an
      orientation—highly arbitrary in the present conditions—towards
      the lesser evil” (Nashe Slovo No. 105).

    

This is an instance of high-flown phraseology with which Trotsky always
      justifies opportunism. A “revolutionary struggle against the
      war” is merely an empty and meaning less exclamation, something at
      which the heroes of the Second International excel, unless it
      means revolutionary action against one’s own government even in
      wartime. One has only to do some thinking in order to understand
      this. Wartime revolutionary action against one’s own government
      indubitably means, not only desiring its defeat, but really facilitating
      such a defeat. ("Discerning reader”: note that this does not
      mean “blowing up bridges”, organising unsuccessful strikes in
      the war industries, and ·in general helping the government defeat
      the revolutionaries.)

    

The phrase-bandying Trotsky has completely lost his bearings on a simple
      issue. It seems to him that to desire

    

Russia’s defeat means desiring the victory of Germany. (Bukvoyed
      and Semkovsky give more direct expression to the “thought”, or
      rather want of thought, which they share with Trotsky.) But Trotsky
      regards this as the “methodology of social-patriotism"! To help
      people that are unable to think for themselves, the Berne resolution
      (Sotsial Demokrat
No. 40)[1]

      made it clear, that in all
      imperialist countries the proletariat must now desire the defeat of its
      own government. Bukvoyed and Trotsky preferred to avoid this truth, while
      Semkovsky (an opportunist who is more useful to the working class than all
      the others, thanks to his naively frank reiteration of bourgeois wisdom)
      blurted out the following: “This is nonsense, because either Germany
      or Russia can win” (Izvestia No. 2).

    

Take the example of the Paris Commune. France was defeated by Germany but
      the workers were defeated by Bismarck and Thiers! Had Bukvoyed and Trotsky
      done a little thinking, they would have realised that they have
      adopted the viewpoint on the war held by governments and the
      bourgeoisie, i.e., that they cringe to the “political
      methodology of social-patriotism”, to use Trotsky’s pretentious
      language.

    

A revolution in wartime means civil war; the conversion of a war
      between governments into a civil war is, on the one hand, facilitated by
      military reverses ("defeats") of governments; on the other hand, one
      cannot actually strive for such a conversion without thereby
      facilitating defeat.

    

The reason why the chauvinists (including the Organising Committee and the
      Chkheidze group) repudiate the defeat “slogan” is that
      this slogan alone implies a consistent call for revolutionary
      action against one’s own government in wartime. Without such action,
      millions of ultra-revolutionary phrases such as a war against “the
      war and the conditions, etc." are not worth a brass farthing.

    

Anyone who would in all earnest refute the “slogan” of defeat
      for one’s own government in the imperialist war should prove one of three
      things: (1) that the war of 1914-15 is not reactionary, or (2) that a
      revolution stemming from that war is impossible, or (3) that co-ordination
      and mutual aid are possible between revolutionary movements in
      all the

    

belligerent countries. The third point is particularly important to
      Russia, a most backward country, where an immediate socialist revolution
      is impossible. That is why the Russian Social-Democrats had to be the
      first to advance the “theory and practice” of the defeat
      “slogan”. The tsarist government was perfectly right in
      asserting that the agitation conducted by the Russian Social-Democratic
      Labour group in the Duma—the sole instance in the
      International, not only of parliamentary opposition but of genuine
      revolutionary anti-government agitation among the masses—that this
      agitation has weakened Russia’s “military might” and is likely
      to lead to its defeat. This is a fact to which it is foolish to close
      one’s eyes.

    

The opponents of the defeat slogan are simply afraid of themselves when
      they refuse to recognise the very obvious fact of the inseparable link
      between revolutionary agitation against the government and helping bring
      about its defeat.

    

Are co-ordination and mutual aid possible between the Russian movement,
      which is revolutionary in the bourgeois- democratic sense, and th 
      socialist movement in the West? No socialist who has publicly spoken on
      the matter during the last decade has doubted this, the movement among the
      Austrian proletariat after October 17,
      1905,[3]
actually proving
      it possible.

    

Ask any Social-Democrat who calls himself an internationalist whether or
      not he approves of an understanding between the Social-Democrats of the
      various belligerent countries on joint revolutionary action against all
      belligerent governments. Many of them will reply that it is impossible, as
      Kautsky has done (Die Neue Zeit, October 2, 1914), thereby
      fully proving his social-chauvinism. This, on the one hand, is a
      deliberate and vicious lie, which clashes with the generally known facts
      and the Basle Manifesto. On the other hand, if it were true, the
      opportunists would be quite right in many respects!

    

Many will voice their approval of such an understanding. To this we shall
      say: if this approval is not hypocritical, it is ridiculous to think that,
      in wartime and for the conduct of a war, some “formal”
      understanding is necessary, such as the election of representatives, the
      arrangement of a meeting, the signing of an agreement, and the choice of
      the day

    

and hour! Only the Semkovskys are capable of thinking so. An understanding
      on revolutionary action even in a single country, to say nothing
      of a number of countries, can be achieved only by the force of
      the example of serious revolutionary action, by
      launching such action and developing it. However, such
      action cannot be launched without desiring the defeat of the government,
      and without contributing to such a defeat. The conversion of the
      imperialist war into a civil war cannot be “made”, any more
      than a revolution can be “made”. It develops out of a
      number of diverse phenomena, aspects, features, characteristics and
      consequences of the imperialist war. That development is
      impossible without a series of military reverses and defeats of
      governments that receive blows from their own oppressed classes.

    

To repudiate the defeat slogan means allowing one’s revolutionary ardour
      to degenerate into an empty phrase, or sheer hypocrisy.

    

What is the substitute proposed for the defeat slogan? It is that of
      “neither victory nor defeat” (Semkovsky in Izvestia
      No. 2; also the entire Organising Committee in No. 1).
      This, however, is nothing but a paraphrase of the “defence of
      the fatherland” slogan. It means shifting the issue to the
      level of a war between governments (who, according to the content of this
      slogan, are to keep to their old stand, “retain their
      positions"), and not to the level of the struggle of the
      oppressed classes against their governments! It means justifying the
      chauvinism of all the imperialist nations, whose bourgeoisie are
      always ready to say—and do say to the people—that
      they are “only” fighting “against
      defeat”. “The significance of our August 4 vote was that we
      are not for war but against defeat," David, a leader of the
      opportunists, writes in his book. The Organising Committee, together with
      Bukvoyed and Trotsky, stand on fully the same ground as David
      when they defend the “neither-victory nor-defeat” slogan.

    

On closer examination, this slogan will be found to mean a “class
      truce”, the renunciation of the class struggle by the oppressed
      classes in all belligerent countries, since the class struggle is
      impossible without dealing blows at one’s “own” bourgeoisie,
      one’s “own” government, whereas dealing a

    

blow at one’s own government in wartime is (for Bukvoyed’s
      information) high treason, means contributing to the defeat of
      one’s own country. Those who accept the “neither
      victory-nor-defeat” slogan can only be hypocritically in favour of
      the class struggle, of “disrupting the class truce”; in
      practice, such people are renouncing an independent proletarian
      policy because they subordinate the proletariat of all belligerent
      countries to the absolutely bourgeois task of safeguarding the
      imperialist governments against defeat. The only policy of actual, not
      verbal disruption of the “class truce”, of acceptance of the
      class struggle, is for the proletariat to take advantage of the
      difficulties experienced by its government and its bourgeoisie
      in order to overthrow them. This, however, cannot be achieved or
      striven for, without desiring the defeat of one’s own government
      and without contributing to that defeat.

    

When, before the war, the Italian Social-Democrats raised the question of
      a mass strike, the bourgeoisie replied, no doubt correctly from their
      own point of view, that this would be high treason, and that
      Social-Democrats would be dealt with as traitors. That is true, just as it
      is true that fraternisation in the trenches is high treason. Those who
      write against “high treason”, as Bukvoyed does, or against the
      “disintegration of Russia”, as Semkovsky does, are adopting
      the bourgeois, not the proletarian point of view. A proletarian
      cannot deal a class blow at his government or hold out (in fact)
      a hand to his brother, the proletarian of the “foreign”
      country which is at war with “our side”, without
      committing “high treason”, without contributing
      to the defeat, to the disintegration of his “own”,
      imperialist “Great” Power.

    

Whoever is in favour of the slogan of “neither victory nor
      defeat” is consciously or unconsciously a chauvinist; at best he is
      a conciliatory petty bourgeois but in any case he is an -enemy to
      proletarian policy, a partisan of the existing ·governments, of the
      present-day ruling classes.

    

Let us look at the question from yet another angle. The war cannot but
      evoke among the masses the most turbulent sentiments, which upset the
      usual sluggish state of mass mentality. Revolutionary tactics are
      impossible if they are not adjusted to these new turbulent
      sentiments.

    
 

What are the main currents of these turbulent sentiments? They are:
      (1) Horror and despair. Hence, a growth of religious feeling. Again the
      churches are crowded, the reactionaries joyfully declare. “Wherever
      there is suffering there is religion," says the arch-reactionary
      Barr s. He is right, too.
      (2) Hatred of the “enemy”, a sentiment that is carefully
      fostered by the bourgeoisie (not so much by the priests), arid is of
      economic and political value only to the bourgeoisie.
      (3) Hatred of one’s own government and one’s own
      bourgeoisie—the sentiment of all class-conscious workers who
      understand, on the one hand, that war is a “continuation of the
      politics” of imperialism, which they counter by a
      “continuation” of their hatred of their class enemy, and, on the
      other hand, that “a war against war” is a banal phrase unless
      it means a revolution against their own government. Hatred of
      one’s own government and one’s own bourgeoisie cannot be aroused unless
      their defeat is desired; one cannot be a sincere opponent of a
      civil (i.e., class) truce without arousing hatred of one’s own government
      and bourgeoisie!

    

Those who stand for the “neither-victory-nor-defeat” slogan
      are in fact on the side of the bourgeoisie and the opportunists, for they
      do not believe in the possibility of inter national revolutionary action
      by the working class against their own governments, and do not
      wish to help develop such action, which, though undoubtedly
      difficult, is the only task worthy of a proletarian, the only socialist
      task. It is the proletariat in the most backward of the belligerent. Great
      Powers which, through the medium of their party, have had to
      adopt—especially in view of the shameful treachery of the German and
      French Social-Democrats— revolutionary tactics that are quite
      unfeasible unless they “contribute to the defeat” of their own
      government, but which alone lead to a European revolution, to the
      permanent peace of socialism, to the liberation of humanity from the
      horrors, misery, savagery and brutality now prevailing.

    

 
Notes
 

[1]
See p. 163 of this volume.—Ed.

 



[2]
Bukvoyed-D. Ryazanov.



[3]
This refers
    to the tsar’s manifesto promulgated on October 17 (30), 1905. It promised
    "civil liberties" and a “legislative Duma”. The manifesto was a
    concession wrested from the tsarist regime by the revolution, but that
    concession by no means decided the fate of the revolution as the liberals
    and Mensheviks claimed, The Bolsheviks exposed the real meaning of the
    Manifesto and called upon the masses to continue the struggle and overthrow
    the autocracy.
The first Russian revolution exerted a great
    revolutionising influence on the working-class movement in other countries,
    in particular in Austria-Hungary. Lenin pointed out that the news about the
    tsar’s concession and his manifesto, with its promise of
    “liberties”, “played a decisive part in the final victory
    of universal suffrage in Austria”.
Mass demonstrations took place in Vienna and other
    industrial cities in Austria-Hungary. In Prague barricades were put up. As a
    result, universal suffrage was introduced in Austria.
    







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The State of Affair’s in Russian Social-Democracy









Lenin: The State of Affair's in Russian Social-Democracy







V. I.  

      Lenin
The State of Affair’s in Russian Social-Democracy




Published:
Sotsial-Demorkrat No. 43, July 26, 1915.

      Published according the text in Sotsial-Demorkrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 281-286.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002, 2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The second issues of the Organising Committee’s
    Izvestia and of NasheDyeio reveal this state of affairs in
    a most instructive and illuminating way. Both papers, each in its own way,
    and in accordance with their places of publication and their political aim,
    are purposefully directing their efforts towards strengthening
    social-chauvinism.

Nashe Dyelo has not only failed to inform the readers of any
    differences or shades of opinion among its editors, has not only failed, to
    raise the faintest objection to “Potresovism”, but has
    voiced, in a special “editorial” statement (p. 19), its
    solidarity with Potresovism by declaring that “internationalism”
    calls for an “orientation in the international situation” which
    will help decide the success of which bourgeoisie in the present
    war is more desirable to the proletariat. This means that all the
    editors are basically and essentially social-chauvinists. Besides, it is
    only on shades of social-chauvinism that the editors disagree with Kautsky,
    whose pamphlet, entirely devoted to justification of international
    social-chauvinism, they have endowed with such epithets as
    “brilliant”, “exhaustive” and “theoretically
    valuable”. Whoever has eyes to see cannot but notice that the
    Nashe Dyelo’s editors are, firstly, thereby sanctioning
    Russian chauvinism, and secondly, have expresssed readiness to amnesty
    international social-chauvinism and reconcile themselves to it.

In the section “In Russia and Abroad”, the paper quotes the
    views of Piekhanov and Axeirod, which the editors (with good reason) do not
    distinguish between. A special note, again editorial (p. 103),
    declares that Plekhanov’s “views coincide in many
    respects” with [hose of Nashe Dyelo.
 

The picture could not be clearer. That legalist “current”
    which finds expression in Nashe Dyelo and, thanks to a thousand
    links with the liberal bourgeoisie, has, alone out of the entire
    “Brussels bloc”, been a reality in Russia in 1910-15, has fully
    consolidated arid completed its opportunist development, supplementing
    liquidationism with social-chauvinism. The actual programme of that group,
    which was expelled from our
Party[1] in January 1912, has been augmented with a new
    and very important item: the propagation in the working class of ideas which
    call for the preservation and enlargement, even at the price of war if
    necessary, of the dominantnation advantages and privileges of the
    Great-Russian landowners and bourgeoisie.

An attempt to conceal this political reality with “Left”
    phrases and quasi-Social-Democratic ideology—such is the actual
    political significance of the legal activities of the Chkheidze group and of
    the Organising Committee’s illegal activities. In the realm of
    ideology the “neither-victory-nor-defeat” slogan; in the realm
    of practice—an anti-“split” struggle which permeates
    literally all the articles in Izvestia’s second issue,
    particularly those by Martov, Yonov, and Mashinadze—such is the
    businesslike and (from the opportunists’ standpoint) perfectly correct
    programme of “peace” with Nashe Dyelo and
    Plekhanov. Read the letter of Mr. Aiexinsky, the “former
    revolutionary”, in Rech No. 143 (May 27, 1915), on
    “defence of the country” as the “task of democracy”,
    and you will see that this zealous henchman of Plekhanov, the chauvinist of
    today, will get fully reconciled to the slogan of “neither victory nor
    defeat”. In fact, this is a slogan common to Plekhanov,  Nashe
    Dyelo, Axeirod and Kosovsky, Martov and Semkovsky, who will of course
    (no doubt about that!) keep their “quite legitimate shades” and
    “differences on details”. In the ideological sense and on the
    fundamentals, this fraternity are content with accepting as common ground
    the slogan of “neither victory nor defeat” (speaking
    parenthetically; whose victories or defeats? Obviously, those of
    the existing governments, of the present-day ruling classes!). In
    the sphere of practical policies, they are content with the
    “unity” slogan, i.e., unity with Nashe Dyelo, which
    means acceptance of the fact that, in Russia, Nashe Dyelo will,
    with the aid of the Chkheidze

    

group, continue to conduct serious policies
    and do serious work among the masses (“serious” in the bourgeois
    sense), while abroad and underground, the Organising Committee and Co. will
    permit themselves “Left” petty reservations and
    near-revolutionary phrases, and so on and so forth. Let us harbour no
    illusions: the Brussels bloc which immediately fell apart, thus proving that
    it contained nothing but hypocrisy, is, for that very reason, highly suited
    to covering up a politically unsavoury situation. In July 1914, it covered
    Nasha Zarya and Severnaya Rahochaya Gazeta with
    non-committal near-Left resolutions. In July 1915, there is as yet no
    “meeting of friends” and no “Minutes”, but there is
    already an agreement, in principle, between the chief “actors”
    regarding joint concealment of the social-chauvinism of Nashe
    Dyelo, Plekhanov and Axeirod by using the same kind of near-Left
    phrases. A year has passed, a grave and important year in the history of
    Europe. It has become apparent that the abscess of national liberal-labour
    politics has asphyxiated most of the Social-Democratic parties of
    Europe and that it has come to a head within liquidationism too—but
    the “friends”, like the musicians in Krylov’s fable
    “The
Quartet”[2] have only changed seats to strike up in chorus
    and in false tones the same old song: Unity, unity—(with Nashe
    Dyelo)!

The example of Nashe Slovo, which comes out in Paris, is
    particularly instructive to sincere adherents of “unity”. Issue
    No. 2 of the Organising Committee’s Izvestia has dealt
    Naslie Sieve a mortal blow so that the latter’s demise
    (political or “physical”, it does not matter very much) is now
    only a matter of time. Issue No. 2 of the Organising Committee’s
    Izvestia has “killed” Nashe Slovo simply by declaring
    that Martov (who found himself a member of the Organising Committee’s
    secretariat, evidently having been “unanimously” co-opted by
    Semkovsky and Axelrod, probably in exchange for his consent to repeat no
    more unguarded phrases about the “death” of
    Vorwärts) and “a good half of the contributors to
    Nashe Slovo, who are organisationally attached to the Organising
    Committee”, have admitted their error; they have admitted
    that they “naïvely” (Martov in the role of an
    ingénu, quite an eyeful!) considered Nashe Slovo the
    “joint organ of the Russian internationlists”,

    

whereas in
    reality Nashe Slovo proved to be both “factional” and
    “pursuing splitting [for his part, Semkovsky has added
    “anarcho-syndicalist”] tendencies”, and also “making
    excuses to Lenin’s Sotsial-Demokrat”.

The public have seen three Nashe Slovo elements, which for seven
    or eight months have been unsuccessfully trying to unite. These are: (1) two
    Left-wing members of the editorial staff (Nashe Siovo No, 107) who
    sincerely sympathise with internationalism and gravitate towards
    Sotsial-Demokrat (see the resolution of greeting addressed to them
    by the Paris group of our Party, in Nashe Slovo No. 122); (2)
    Martov and the Organising Committee members ("a good half"); (3) Trotsky,
    who as always entirely disagrees with the social-chauvinists in principle,
    but agrees with them in everything in practice (incidentally, thanks to the
    “felicitous mediation”—is that what they call it in
    diplomatic language?—of the Chkheidze group).

Sincere friends of unity must he asking themselves: why did Nashe
    Slovo collapse and split? It is customary to explain splits by the
    misanthropic “splitting policy” of the horrible
    “Leninists” (the articles by Semkovsky in Izvestia
    No. 2, by Axeirod in Nashe Slovo, etc., etc.). These horrible
    people, however, took no part at all in Nashe Siovo and for this
    simple reason they could not have split away or left it.

What, then, is the reason? Was it accidental? Or was it because unity
    between Social-Democratic workers and the conductors of bourgeois influence
    (in reality agents of liberal and chauvinist bourgeoisie) who are centred in
    Nashe Dyelo is impossible and damaging?

Let the friends of “unity” ponder over this.

Of the European Social-Democrats, Kautsky and Haase, jointly with
    Bernstein himself, have come out—in some-what different surroundings
    and form—in favour of “unity”. Sensing that the masses are
    swinging towards the Left, these “authorities” are proposing
    peace to the Left Social-Democrats, on the tacit condition of peace with the
    Sfldekums. To renounce, in word, the “policy of August 4”; to
    paper over the rift between the national liberal-labour policies and the
    Social-Democratic working-class policies, with the aid of some non-committal
    (in certain respects not unfavourable even to Hindenburg and Joifre)
    “peace” phrases

    

(the peace slogan being highly suited to the
    purpose), and by platonically denouncing annexations, etc.—such,
    approximately, is Kautsky’s and Bernstein’s programme, which the
    French social-chauvinists would not he loath to join, as may be seen from
    the tone of some statements in l’Humanité. The British
    in the Independent Labour Party will, of course, heartily support such an
    amnesty for social-chauvinism if only it is concealed by a number of
    compliments for the Left. The Organising Committee members and Trotsky seem
    to be predestined to hang on to the coat-tails of Kautsky and Bernstein, at
    the present juncture.

We consider this leftward turn by the leader of the opportunists and the
    loader of the hypocritical chauvinists of the “radical” camp a
    farce designed to save what is rotten in Social-Democracy, by means of a
    bow towards the Left, with the aim of bolstering the national liberal-labour
    policies at the price of petty verbal concessions to the
    “Lefts”.

The objective situation in Europe is such that, among the masses,
    disappointment, dissatisfaction, protest, indignation, and revolutionary
    temper are mounting, which, at a certain stage of that temper’s
    development, may turn into action with incredible speed. Either aid the
    growth and development of revolutionary action against one’s own
    bourgeoisie and one’s own government, or else hamper, soothe and
    extinguish the revolutionary temper—this is the only practical way in
    which the issue now stands. To achieve the latter of these alternatives, the
    liberal bourgeoisie and the opportunists will agree (and, from the
    standpoint of their interests must agree) to any verbal
    concessions to the Left, to any number of promises concerning disarmament,
    peace, the repudiation of annexations, reforms of every kind, anything under
    the sun, if only a rupture between the masses and their opportunist leaders,
    and a resumption of more and more serious revolutionary action can be
    averted.

Do not trust any high-sounding programmes, we say to the masses; rely on
    your own mass revolutionary action against your governments and your
    bourgeoisie and try to build up such action; there is no escape from
    barbarism, no possibility of progress in Europe, without a civil war for
    socialism.
 

P. S. This article had already been set when we received a collection of
    articles under the title of The War, by Mr. Plekhanov and the
    “former revolutionary” Mr. Alexinsky and Co. This is an
    assortment of sophisms and lies by social-chauvinists, who would make the
    tsarism’s reactionary war of plunder appear “just”,
    “defensive”, etc.! We would bring this disgraceful sheaf of
    servility to tsarism to the attention of all those who honestly wish to
    understand why the Second International has collapsed. It is, incidentally,
    noteworthy that these outspoken social-chauvinists are eniireiy
    satisfied both with Chkheidzo and his entire group. The Organising
    Committee, Trotsky, Plekhanov, and Alexinsky and Co. are naturally also
    satisfied with the Chkheidze group because for years the latter have proved
    their skill in shielding the opportunists and serving them.

Messrs. Plekhanov and Alexinsky are shamelessly lying about the Russian
    Social-Democratic Labour group in the Duma, now exiled to Siberia. The time
    is probably at hand when it will be possible to cite documents to refute
    these lies.

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is
    referring to the Mensheviks explled from the R.S.D.L.P. at the Prague
    Confernce, January 1912.



[2]
The
    allusion is the Krylov’s fable “The Quartet”. 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The “Peace” Slogan Appraised









Lenin: The 'Peace' Slogan Appraised







V. I.  

      Lenin
The “Peace” Slogan Appraised




Written: Written in July–August 1915 

Published:

      First published in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia No. 5 (28), 1924.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 287-289.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2002

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

In its issue of June 27, 1915, the Vienna
    Arbeiter-Zeitwig, central organ of the Austrian Social-Democrats,
    cites a very instructive declaration contained in the German governmental
    Norddeutsche Aligemeine Zeitung.

The declaration deals with an article by one of the best known (and
    vilest) opportunists of the “Social-Democratic.” Party of
    Germany named Quarck, who said inter alia:
“We German Social-Democrats and our Austrian comrades have
    repeatedly declared ourselves ready to establish contacts (with the British
    and French Social-Democrats) for the purpose of beginning peace
    talks. The German Imperial Government know of this, and have not placed
    the slightest obstacle in our way.”

Nationalliberale Korrespondenz, a German national-liberal paper,
    has said that the concluding words permit of a double interpretation. The
    first is that the government have put no obstacles in the way of
    “international political action” by the Social-Democrats,
    insofar as it does not transgress the limits of legality and “is not
    dangerous to the State”. This, the paper says, is perfectly
    intelligible from the angle of  “political freedom”.

The second interpretation is that the German Government “at least
    tacitly approve of the Social-Democratic internationalist peace propaganda,
    and even consider it a suitable means of laying down the initial basis for
    exploring the possibility of peace”.

The national-liberal paper naturally considers this latter interpretation
    out of the question. In this it has the official support of the government
    newspaper, which goes on to say that “the government have nothing in
    common with

    

internationalist peace propaganda and have authorised neither
    Social-Democratic nor any other intermediaries to conduct that
    propaganda”.

An edifying farce, is it not? Will anybody believe that the German
    Government, who have forbidden Vorwärts to write about the
    class struggle, have introduced harsh military laws against popular meetings
    and veritable “military slavery” for the proletariat—that
    this government have, out of sheer liberalism, “put no
    obstacles” in the way of Messrs. Quarck and Südekum, or that they
    are not in constant communication with the latter gentlemen?

Is it not a thousand times more likely that Quarck inadvertently
    told the truth (namely, that the peace propaganda was started by the German
    Social-Democrats when they had reached a direct or indirect understanding
    with their government), and that he was “officially refuted”
    only for the purpose of concealing the truth.

This is a lesson to those phrase-lovers who, like Trotsky (see No. 105 of
    Nashe Slovo), defend—in opposition to us—the peace
    slogan, alleging among other things that “all Left-wingers” have
    united for the purpose of “action” under this very slogan! The
    Junker government have now demonstrated the correctness of our Berne
    resolution (Sotsial-Demokrat No. 40), which says that the
    propaganda of peace “unaccompanied by a call for revolutionary mass
    action” can only “sow illusions” and “turn the
    proletariat into a plaything in the hands of the secret diplomacy
    of the belligerent
countries”.[1]


This has been literally proved!

In a few years diplomatic history will prove that there was an
    understanding, direct or indirect, between the opportunists and the
    governments on peace palaver and this, not in Germany alone!
    Diplomacy may conceal such things, but murder will out!

When the Lefts began to unite under the peace slogan, this deserved
    encouragement, provided it was the first step in protest
    against the chauvinists, in the same fashion as the Gaponade was the Russian
    worker’s first timid protest against the tsar. But since the Lefts are
    even

    

now confining themselves to this slogan (slogans are the
    business of intelligent political leaders), they are shoddy Lefts,
    there is consequently not a grain of “action” in their
    resolutions, and they are consequently a plaything in the hands of the
    Sudekums, Quarcks, Sembats, Hyndmans, Joffres, and Hindenburgs.

Anyone who fails to understand this even today, when the peace slogan
    ("unaccompanied by a call for revolutionary mass action") has been
    prostituted by the Vienna
Conference[2] of Bernstein, Kautsky and
    Co. with the Scheidernanns (the German Vorstand, their Executive),
    is simply an unwitting participant in the social-chauvinist humbugging of
    the people.

 
Notes
 

[1]
See p. 163 of this volume.—Ed.
    
 



[2]
The
    reference is to the Conference of Socialists of Germany and Austria-Hungary,
    held in Vianna in April 1915. The Conference approved of the
    social-chauvinist stand taken by the leadership of the German and Austrian
    socialist parties, wich justified the war and stated, in their resolutions,
    that this did not run counter to proletarian unity and to the workers’
    international solidarity in the struggle for peace.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## The Question of Peace









Lenin: The Question of Peace







V. I.  
      Lenin
The Question of Peace




Written: Written in July–August 1915 
Published:
      First published in the magazine Prolelorshaya Revolulsia No. 5 (28), 1921.
      Signed: Lenin.
      Published according to the manuscript.
      Source:
Lenin  Collected Works,
      Progress Publishers,
      [197[4]],
      Moscow,
      Volume 21,
      pages 290-294.
      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:
      Lenin Internet Archive
      2003
     (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The question of peace as an immediate programme of action for
      the socialists, and in this connection the question of peace terms,
      presents a universal interest. One can only be grateful to Berner
      Tagwacht for its efforts to pose the question, not from the usual
      petty-bourgeois national angle, but from one that is genuinely proletarian
      and internationalist. The editorial note in No. 73
      (“Friedenssehnsucht”), that the German
      Social-Democrats who wish for peace must break (sich lossagen with the
      policies of the Junker government, was excellent. Also excellent was
      Comrade
A. P.’s[1] attack (Nos. 73 and 75) on the “pompous
      airs of impotent phrase-mongers” (Wichtigtuerei macht loser
      Schönredner), who are vainly attempting to solve the peace
      question from the petty-bourgeois point of view.

Let us see how this question should be posed by socialists.

The peace slogan can be advanced either in connection with definite peace
    terms, or without any conditions at all, as a struggle, not for a definite
    kind of peace, but for peace in general (Frieden ohne weiters). In
    the latter case, we obviously have a slogan that is not only non-socialist
    but entirely devoid of meaning and content. Most people are definitely in
    favour of peace in general, including even Kitchener, Joffre, Hindenburg,
    and Nicholas the Bloodstained, for each of them wants an end to the
    war. The trouble is that every one of them advances peace terms that are
    imperialist (i.e., predatory and oppressive, towards other peoples), and to
    the advantage of his “own” nation. Slogans must be brought
    forward so as to enable the masses, through propaganda and agitation, to see
    the unbridgeable distinction between socialism and capitalism (imperialism),
      and not
    

for the purpose of reconciling two hostile classes and two
    hostile political lines, with the aid of a formula that “unites”
    the most different things.

To continue: can the socialists of different countries be united on
    definite terms of peace? If so, such terms must undoubtedly include
    the recognition of the right to selfdetermination for all nations, and also
    renunciation of all “annexations”, i.e., infringements of that
    right. If, however, that right is recognised only for some nations,
    then you are defending the privileges of certain nations, i.e., you
    are a nationalist and imperialist, not a socialist. If, however, that right
    is recognised for all nations, then you cannot single out Belgium
    alone, for instance; you must take all the oppressed peoples, both in Europe
    (the Irish in Britain, the Italians in Nice, the Danes in Germany,
    fifty-seven per cent of Russia’s population, etc.) and outside of
    Europe, i.e., all colonies. Comrade A. P. has done well to remind us
    of them. Britain, France, and Germany have a total population of some one
    hundred and fifty million, whereas the populations they oppress in the
    colonies number over four hundred million! The essence of the imperialist
    war, i.e., a war waged for the interests of the capitalists, consists, not
    only in the war being waged with the aim of oppressing new nations, of
    carving up the colonies, but also in its being waged primarily by the
    advanced nations, which oppress a number of other peoples comprising the
    majority of the earth’s population.

The German Social-Democrats, who justify the seizure of Belgium or
    reconcile themselves to it, are actually imperialists and nationalists, not
    Social-Democrats, since they defend the “right” of the German
    bourgeoisie (partly also of the German workers) to oppress the Belgians, the
    Alsatians, the Danes, the Poles, the Negroes in Africa, etc. They are not
    socialists, but menials to the German bourgeoisie, whom they are
    aiding to rob other nations. The Belgian socialists who demand the
    liberation and indemnification of Belgium alone are also actually
    defending a demand of the Belgian bourgeoisie, who would go on plundering
    the 15,000,000 Congolese population and obtaining concessions and privileges
    in other countries. The Belgian bourgeoisie’s foreign investments
    amount to something like three thousand

    

million francs. Safeguarding the
    profits from these investments by using every kind of fraud and machinations
    is the real “national interest” of “gallant
    Belgium”. The same applies in a still greater degree to Russia,
    Britain, France and Japan.

It follows that if the demand for the freedom of nations is not to be a
    false phrase covering up the imperialism and the nationalism of certain
    individual countries, it must be extended to all peoples and to all
    colonies. Such a demand, however, is obviously meaningless unless
    it is accompanied by a series of revolutions in all the advanced
    countries. Moreover, it cannot be accomplished without a successful
    socialist revolution.

Should this be taken to mean that socialists can remain indifferent to
    the peace demand that is coming from ever greater masses of the people? By
    no means. The slogans of the workers’ class-conscious vanguard are one
    thing, while the spontaneous demands of the masses are something quite
    different. The yearning for peace is one of the most important symptoms
    revealing the beginnings of disappointment in the bourgeois lie
    about a war of “liberation”, the “defence of the
    fatherland”, and similar falsehoods that the class of capitalists
    beguiles the mob with. This symptom should attract the closest attention
    from socialists. All efforts must be bent towards utilising the
    masses’ desire for peace. But how is it to be utilised? To recognise
    the peace slogan and repeat it would mean encouraging
    “pompous airs of impotent [and frequently what is worse: hypocritical]
    phrase-mongers”; it would mean deceiving the people with
    illusion that the existing governments, the present-day master classes, are
    capable-without being “taught” a lesson (or rather without being
    eliminated) by a series of revolutions-of granting a peace in any way
    satisfactory to democracy and the working class. Nothing is more harmful
    than such deception. Nothing throws more dust in the eyes of the workers,
    nothing imbues them with a more deceptive idea about the absence of
    deep contradictions between capitalism and socialism, nothing
    embellishes capitalist slavery more than this deception does. No,
    we must make use of the desire for peace so as to explain to the masses that
    the benefits they expect from peace cannot be obtained without a series of
    revolutions.
 

An end to wars, peace among the nations, the cessation of pillaging and
    violence-such is our ideal, but only bourgeois sophists can seduce the
    masses with this ideal, if the latter is divorced from a direct and
    immediate call for revolutionary action. The ground for such propaganda is
    prepared; to practice that propaganda, one need only break with the
    opportunists, those allies of the bourgeoisie, who are hampering
    revolutionary work both directly (even to the extent of passing information
    to the authorities) and indirectly.

The slogan of self-determination of nations should also be advanced in
    connection with the imperialist era of capitalism. We do not stand
    for the status quo, or for the philistine Utopia of standing aside
    in great wars. We stand for a revolutionary struggle against imperialism,
    i.e., capitalism. Imperialism consists in a striving of nations that oppress
    a number of other nations to extend and increase that oppression and to
    repartition the colonies. That is why the question of self-determination of
    nations today hinges on the conduct of socialists of the
    oppressor nations. A socialist of any of the oppressor
    nations (Britain. France, Germany, Japan, Russia, the United States of
    America, etc.) who does not recognise and does not struggle for the right of
    oppressed nations to self-determination (i.e., the right to secession) is in
    reality a chauvinist, not a socialist.

Only this point of view can lead to a sincere and consistent struggle
    against imperialism, to a proletarian, not a philistine approach (today) to
    the national question. Only this point of view can load to a consistent
    application of the principle of combating any form of the oppression of
    nations; it removes mistrust among the proletarians of the oppressor and
    oppressed nations, makes for a united international struggle for the
    socialist revolution (i.e., for the only accomplishable regime of complete
    national equality), as distinct from the philistine Utopia of freedom for
    all small states in general, under capitalism.

This is the point of view adopted by our Party, i.e., by those
    Social-Democrats of Russia who have rallied around the Central
    Committee. This was the point of view adopted by Marx when he taught the
    proletariat that “no nation can he free if it oppresses other
    nations”. It was from this point of view that Marx demanded the
    separation of Ireland from

    

Britain, this in the interests of the freedom
    movement, not only of the Irish, but especially of the British
    workers.

If the socialists of Britain do not recognise and uphold Ireland’s
    right to secession, if the French do not do the same for Italian Nice, the
    Germans for Alsace-Lorraine, Danish Schleswig, and Poland, the Russians for
    Poland, Finland, the Ukraine, etc., and the Poles for the Ukraine-if all the
    socialists of the “Great” Powers, i.e., the great robber powers,
    do not uphold that right in respect of the colonies, it is solely because
    they are in fact imperialists, not socialists. It is ridiculous to cherish
    illusions that people who do not fight for “the right to
    self-determination” of the oppressed nations, while they themselves
    belong to the oppressor nations, are capable of practising socialist
    policies.

Instead of leaving it to the hypocritical phrase-mongers to deceive the
    people by phrases and promises concerning the possibility of a democratic
    peace, socialists must explain to the masses the impossibility of anything
    resembling a democratic peace, unless there are a series of revolutions and
    unless a revolutionary struggle is waged in every country against the
    respective government. Instead of allowing the bourgeois
    politicians to deceive the peoples with talk about the freedom of nations,
    socialists must explain to the masses in the oppressor nations that
    they cannot hope for their liberation, as long as they help oppress other
    nations, and do not recognise and uphold the right of those nations to
    self-determination, i.e., the freedom to secede. That is the socialist, as
    distinct from the imperialist, policy to be applied to all countries, on the
    question of peace and the national question. True, this line is in most
    cases incompatible with the laws punishing high treason-but so is the Basle
    resolution, which has been so shamefully betrayed by almost all the
    socialists of the oppressor nations.

The choice is between socialism and submission to the laws of Joffre and
    Hindenburg, between revolutionary struggle and servility to
    imperialism. There is no middle course. The greatest harm is caused to the
    proletariat by the hypocritical (or obtuse) authors of the
    “middle-course” policy.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
A. P.—Anton
    Pannekoek, the Dutch Left socialist








<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





 







==========

## Socialism and War










Lenin: Socialism and War



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
[with G. Y. Zinoviev][*]
Socialism and War
The Attitude of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party 
Towards the War[1]



Written: Written in July—August 1915.
Published:
    Published in pamphlet form in the autumn of 1915 by the Sotsial-Demokrat Editorial Board in Geneva.
    Published according to the pamphlet text.
Source:
Lenin Collected Works, Foreign Languages Press, 1970, Peking,
    Volume 21,
    pages 295-338.
Proofed and Corrected: Alvaro Miranda and Andy Blunden, 2022.
Transcription\Markup:
E. O'Callaghan
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2005).
    You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



Contents




*.


PREFACE TO THE FIRST (Foreign) EDITION
  297

*.


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
  298

Chapter I.


The Principles of Socialism and the War of 1914–1915
  299

Chapter II.


Classes and Parties in Russia
  317

Chapter III.


The Restoration of the International
  323

Chapter IV.


The History of the Split and the Present State of Social-Democracy in Russia
  331

 
 
 

Notes


[*][Note: All
    early editions of Socialism and War in several languages, including
    those published while Lenin was still alive, clearly acknowledged
    Zinoviev as co-author of the document. The Soviet English language
    edition of the Lenin Collected Works acknowledges Zinoviev’s 
involvement (see footnote [1] below), but, without explanation, 
omits him as co-author.—Ed.].
    

[1]Lenin
    decided to write the pamphlet Socialism and War (The
    Attitude of the R.S.D.L.P. Towards the War) in connection
    with the preparations for the First International Socialist Conference.
    G. Y. Zinoviev helped write the pamphlet, though most of it was
    drawn up by Lenin, who, moreover, edited the entire text. 
The pamphlet was
    published in German in September 1915 and distributed among the
    delegates to the Zimmerwald Socialist Conference. In 1916 it was
    published in French.
    






Works Index
     |    Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works
        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward




forward >





Updated:   January 12, 2023




==========

## Preface to the
  First









Lenin: 1915/s+w: PREFACE TO THE FIRST (Foreign) EDITION







V. I.  

      Lenin
Socialism and War
The Attitude of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Towards the War



    

    

 
*
PREFACE TO THE FIRST (Foreign) EDITION
The war has been going on for a year already. Our Party
defined its attitude towards it at its very beginning, in the Central
Committee’s manifesto that was drawn up in September 1914 and printed
(after it had been sent to the members of the C.C., and to our Party’s
responsible representatives in Russia, and after their consent had been
received) on November 1, 1914, in No.33 of our Party’s Central Organ,

Sotsial-Demokrat.[1]

Later, in No. 40 (March 29, 1915), were printed the
resolutions of the Berne
Conference[2]

in which our principles and tactics were more
precisely enunciated.
At the present time, in Russia, there is an obvious growth of
revolutionary temper among the masses. In other countries, symptoms of the
same phenomenon are observed everywhere, in spite of the suppression of the
revolutionary strivings of the proletariat by the majority of the official
Social-Democratic parties, which have taken the side of their governments and
their bourgeoisie. This state of things makes particularly urgent the
publication of a pamphlet that sums up Social-Democratic tactics in
relation to the war. Reprinting in full the above-mentioned Party documents,
we provide them with brief explanations, endeavouring to take into account
all the chief arguments in favour of bourgeois and of proletarian tactics
that have been expressed in literature and at Party meetings.

    

     

Notes
 

[1]

See V.I. Lenin, The War
and Russian Social-Democracy, Selected Works,
Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow 1952, Vol.I, Part 2, pp.397-406.

Sotsial-Demokrat –
central organ of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, published as an
underground newspaper from February 1908 to January 1917. Altogether 58
issues appeared—the first in Russia, the rest abroad: at Paris and,
later, at Geneva. The Sotsial-Demokrat published more than
80 articles and other items by Lenin, who became its editor in December
1911.—Ed.


[2]

See V.I. Lenin,
Conference of the Sections of the R.S.D.L.P. Abroad,
Selected Works, Eng. ed., Lawrence and Wishart, London
1944, Vol. V, pp. 131–37.


The Berne Conference—a conference of the
sections of the R.S.D.L.P. abroad held in Berne, Switzerland, from February
27 to March 4, 1915. Called on Lenin’s initiative, it had the standing
of a Bolshevik general Party conference, since it was impossible to convene
an all-Russian conference during the war. Representatives were present at
the conference from the Bolshevik sections in Paris, Zurich, Geneva, Seine,
Lausanne, and from the “Baugy” group. Lenin represented the
Central Committee and the central organ (Sotsial-Demokrat),
directed the proceedings of the conference, and made a report on the main
item on the agenda, The War and the Tasks of the Party. The
conference adopted resolutions on the war that were drafted by
Lenin.—Ed.

 

 
  


|

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

  
   






<
  backward
     
Contents
     
forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





Updated:   March 30, 2005







==========

## Preface to the
    Second









Lenin: 1915/s+w: PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION







V. I.  

      Lenin
Socialism and War
The Attitude of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Towards the War



    

*
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


Printed in the 1918 edition of the pamphlet.


This pamphlet was written in the summer of 1915, just before
the Zimmerwald
Conference.[1]  It also appeared in German and French, and was
reprinted in full in Norwegian in the organ of the Norwegian
Social-Democratic youth league. The German edition of the pamphlet was
secretly smuggled into Germany – into Berlin, Leipzig, Bremen and other
cities, where it was secretly distributed by supporters of the Zimmerwald
Left and by the Karl Liebknecht group. The French edition was secretly
printed in Paris and distributed there by the French Zimmerwaldists. The
Russian edition reached Russia in a very limited quantity, and in Moscow
was copied out by hand by workers.


We are now reprinting this pamphlet in full as a document. The reader
must remember all the time that the pamphlet was written in August 1915.
This must be remembered particularly in connection with those passages which
refer to Russia: Russia at that time was still tsarist, Romanov Russia.


    

     
Notes
 
 



[1]

Zimmerwald
    Conference – the first conference of internationalist
    socialists, held in Zimmerwald, Switzerland, on September 5-8, 1915. A
    struggle flared up at the conference between the Kautskyite majority and
    the revolutionary internationalists headed by Lenin. At the conference,
    Lenin organised the internationalists into the Zimmerwald Left group.


The conference adopted a manifesto which exposed the
    imperialist nature of the world war, denounced the “Socialists”
    for voting for war credits and for participating in the bourgeois
    governments and called on the workers of the European countries to wage
    struggles against the war and to strive for the conclusion of peace without
    annexation or payment of indemnities.
The conference also adopted a resolution expressing
    sympathy for war victims and elected the International Socialist Committee
    (I.S.C.). For an appraisal of the conference, see Lenin’s articles
    The First Step and Revolutionary Marxists at the International
    Socialist Conference, September 5-8, 1915 (V.I. Lenin,
    Collected Works, Eng. ed., International Publishers, New
    York 1930, Vol.XVIII, pp.40-45, 346-49).


 
  

PREFACE TO THE FIRST (Foreign) EDITION

|

The Principles of Socialism and the War of 1914–1915

  
   






<
  backward
     
Contents
     
forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





Updated:   March 30, 2005







==========

## The
  Principles of Socialism and the War






Lenin: 1915/s+w: The Principles of Socialism and the War of 1914–1915







V. I.  

 Lenin
Socialism and War
The Attitude of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Towards the War

Chapter I
The Principles of Socialism and the War of 1914–1915
The Attitude of Socialists Towards Wars
 Socialists have always condemned war between nations as barbarous and brutal. But our attitude towards war is fundamentally different from that of the bourgeois pacifists (supporters and advocates of peace) and of the Anarchists. We differ froth the former in that we understand the inevitable connection between wars and the class struggle within the country; we understand that war cannot be abolished unless classes are abolished and Socialism is created; and we also differ in that we fully regard civil wars, i.e., wars waged by the oppressed class against the oppressing class, slaves against slave-owners, serfs against land-owners, and wage-workers against the bourgeoisie, as legitimate, progressive and necessary. We Marxists differ from both the pacifists and the Anarchists in that we deem it necessary historically (from the standpoint of Marx’s dialectical materialism) to study each war separately. In history there have been numerous wars which, in spite of all the horrors, atrocities, distress and suffering that inevitably accompany all wars, were progressive, i.e., benefited the development of mankind by helping to destroy the exceptionally harmful and reactionary institutions (for example, autocracy or serfdom), the most barbarous despotisms in Europe (Turkish and Russian). Therefore, it is necessary to examine the historically specific features of precisely the present war.   
Historical Types of Wars in Modern Times
The Great French Revolution ushered in a new epoch in the history of mankind. From that time to the Paris Commune, from 1789 to 1871, one of the types of wars were wars of a bourgeois-progressive, national-liberating character. In other words, the chief content and historical significance of these wars were the overthrow of absolutism and feudalism, the undermining of these institutions, the overthrow of alien oppression. Therefore, those were progressive wars, and during such wars, all honest, revolutionary democrats, and also all Socialists, always sympathised with the success of that country (i.e., with that bourgeoisie), which had helped to overthrow, or sap, the most dangerous foundation of feudalism, absolutism and the oppression of other nations. For example, the revolutionary wars waged by France contained an element of plunder and conquest of alien territory by the French, but this does not in the least alter the fundamental historical significance of these wars, which destroyed and shattered feudalism and absolutism in the whole of old, serf-ridden Europe. In the Franco-Prussian War, Germany plundered France, but this does not alter the fundamental historical significance of this war, which liberated tens of millions of German people from feudal disintegration and from the oppression of two despots, the Russian tsar and Napoleon III. 
 The Difference Between Aggressive and Defensive War
The epoch of 1789-1871 left deep marks and revolutionary memories. Before feudalism, absolutism and alien oppression were overthrown, the development of the proletarian struggle for Socialism was out of the question. When speaking of the legitimacy of “defensive” war in relation to the wars of such an epoch, Socialists always had in mind precisely these objects, which amounted to revolution against medievalism and serfdom. By “defensive” war Socialists always meant a “just” war in this sense (W. Liebknecht once expressed himself precisely in this way). Only in this sense have Socialists regarded, and now regard, wars “for the defence of the fatherland,” or “defensive” wars, as legitimate, progressive and just. For example, if tomorrow, Morocco were to declare war on France, India on England, Persia or China on Russia, and so forth, those would be “just,” “defensive” wars, irrespective of who attacked first; and every Socialist would sympathise with the victory of the oppressed, dependent, unequal states against the oppressing, slaveowning, predatory “great” powers. 
But picture to yourselves a slave-owner who owned 100 slaves warring against a slave-owner who owned 200 slaves for a more “just” distribution of slaves. Clearly, the application of the term “defensive” war, or war “for the defence of the fatherland” in such a case would be historically false, and in practice would be sheer deception of the common people, of philistines, of ignorant people, by the astute slaveowners. Precisely in this way are the present-day imperialist bourgeoisie deceiving the peoples by means of “national ideology and the term “defence of the fatherland in the present war between slave-owners for fortifying and strengthening slavery.   
The Present War is An Imperialist War
Nearly everybody admits that the present war is an imperialist war, but in most cases this term is distorted or applied to one side, or a loophole is left for the assertion that this war may, after all, have a bourgeois-progressive, national-liberating significance. Imperialism is the highest stage in the development of capitalism, reached only in the twentieth century. Capitalism now finds the old national states, without the formation of which it could not have overthrown feudalism, too tight for it. Capitalism has developed concentration to such a degree that whole branches of industry have been seized by syndicates, trusts and associations of capitalist billionaires, and almost the entire globe has been divided up among the “lords of capital, either in the form of colonies, or by enmeshing other countries in thousands of threads of financial exploitation. Free trade and competition have been superseded by the striving for monopoly, for the seizure of territory for the investment of capital, for the export of raw materials from them, and so forth. From the liberator of nations that capitalism was in the struggle against feudalism, imperialist capitalism has become the greatest oppressor of nations. Formerly progressive, capitalism has become reactionary; it has developed the forces of production to such a degree that mankind is faced with the alternative of going over to Socialism or of suffering years and   even decades of armed struggle between the “great powers for the artificial preservation of capitalism by means of colonies, monopolies, privileges and national oppression of every kind.”   
War Between the Biggest Slave-Owners for Preserving and Fortifying Slavery
To explain the significance of imperialism, we will quote exact figures showing the division of the world among the so-called “great” (i.e., successful in great plunder) powers:
   Division of the World Among the “Great” Slave-owning Powers       Colonies   Metropolises   Total     1876   1914   1914       “Great” Powers   Square kilo- metres   Inhab- itants   Square kilo- metres   Inhab- itants   Square kilo- metres   Inhab- itants   Square kilo- metres   Inhab- itants       millions   millions   millions   millions     England   22.5   251.9   33.5   393.5     0.3     46.5     33.8      440.0     Russia   17.0     15.9   17.4     33.2     5.4   136.2     22.8      169.4     France     0.9       6.0   10.6     55.5     0.5     39.6     11.1        95.1     Germany   –   –     2.9     12.3     0.5     64.9       3.4        77.2     Japan   –   –     0.3     19.2     0.4     53.0       0.7        72.2     United States of America   –   –     0.3       9.7     9.4     97.0       9.7      106.7     Six “great” powers   40.4   273.8   65.0   523.4   16.5   437.2     81.5      960.6      Colonies belonging not to great powers (but to Belgium, Holland and other states)     9.9     45.3               9.9        45.3     Three “semi-colonial” countries (Turkey, China and Persia)       14.5      361.2       Total   105.9   1,367.1     Other states and countries       28.0      289.9     Entire globe (without Polar regions)     133.9   1,657.0      From this it is seen how most of the nations which fought at the head of others for freedom in 1798-1871, have now, after 1876, on the basis of highly developed and “overripe” capitalism, become the oppressors and enslavers of the majority of the populations and nations of the globe. From 1876 to 1914, six “great” powers grabbed 25 million sq. kilometres, i.e., an area two and a half times that of Europe! Six powers are enslaving over half a billion (521 million) inhabitants of colonies. For every four inhabitants of the “great” powers there are five inhabitants of “their” colonies. And everybody knows that colonies are conquered by fire and sword, that the populations of colonies are brutally treated, that they are exploited in a thousand ways (by exporting capital, concessions, etc., cheating when selling them goods, subordination to the authorities of the “ruling” nation, and so on and so forth). The Anglo-French bourgeoisie are deceiving the people when they say that they are waging war for the freedom of nations and for Belgium; actually they are waging war for the purpose of retaining the colonies they have inordinately grabbed. The German imperialists would free Belgium, etc., at once if the British and French would agree “fairly” to share their colonies with them. The peculiarity of the situation lies in that in this war the fate of the colonies is being decided by war on the Continent. From the standpoint of bourgeois justice and national freedom (or the right of nations to existence), Germany would be absolutely right as against England and France, for she has been “done out” of colonies, her enemies are oppressing an immeasurably far larger number of nations than she is, and the Slavs who are oppressed by her ally Austria undoubtedly enjoy far more freedom than those in tsarist Russia, that real “prison of nations.” But Germany is fighting not for the liberation, but for the oppression of nations. It is not the business of Socialists to help the younger and stronger robber (Germany) to rob the older and overgorged robbers. Socialists must take advantage of the struggle between the robbers to overthrow them all. To be able to do this, the Socialists must first of all tell the people the truth, namely, that this war is in a treble sense a war between slave-owners to fortify slavery. This is a war firstly, to fortify the enslavement of the colonies by means of a “fairer” distribution and subsequent more “concerted exploitation of them”; secondly, to fortify the oppression of other nations within the “great” powers, for both Austria and Russia (Russia more and much worse than Austria) maintain their rule only by such oppression, intensifying it by means of war; and thirdly, to fortify and prolong wage slavery, for the proletariat is split up and suppressed, while the capitalists gain, making fortunes out of the war, aggravating national prejudices and intensifying reaction, which has raised its head in all countries. even in the freest and most republican.   
“War is the Continuation of Politics by Other” (i.e., Violent) “Means”[1] 
This famous aphorism was uttered by one of the profoundest writers on the problems of war, Clausewitz. Marxists have always rightly regarded this thesis as the theoretical basis of views concerning the significance of every given war. It was precisely from this viewpoint that Marx and Engels always regarded different wars.
Apply this view to the present war. You will see that for decades, for almost half a century, the governments and the ruling classes of England, and France, and Germany, and Italy, and Austria, and Russia, pursued a policy of plundering colonies, of oppressing other nations, of suppressing the working-class movement. It is this, and only this policy that is being continued in the present war. In particular, the policy of both Austria and Russia peace-time as well as in war, is a policy of enslaving and not of liberating nations. In China, Persia, India and other dependent countries, on the contrary, we have seen during the past decades a policy of rousing tens and hundreds of millions of people to national life, of liberating them from the oppression of the reactionary “great” powers. A war on such a historical ground can even today be a bourgeois-progressive, national-liberation war.
  It is sufficient to glance at the present war from the viewpoint that it is a continuation of the politics of the great powers, and of the principal classes within them, to see at once the howling anti-historicalness, falsity and hypocrisy of the view that the “defence of the fatherland” idea can be justified in the present war.   
The Example of Belgium
 The favourite plea of the social-chauvinist triple (now quadruple) entente[2] (in Russia, Plekhanov and Co.), is the example of Belgium. But this example goes against them. The German imperialists shamelessly violated the neutrality of Belgium, as belligerent states have done always and everywhere, trampling upon all treaties and obligations if necessary. Let us suppose that all the states interested in the observation of international treaties declared war on Germany with the demand for the liberation and indemnification of Belgium. In such a case, the sympathies of Socialists would, of course, be on the side of Germany’s enemies. But the whole point is that the “triple (and quadruple) entente” is waging war not over Belgium, this is perfectly well known, and only hypocrites conceal this. England is grabbing Germany’s colonies and Turkey; Russia is grabbing Galicia and Turkey, France wants Alsace-Lorraine and even the left bank of the Rhine; a treaty has been concluded with Italy for the division of the spoils (Albania, Asia Minor); bargaining is going on with Bulgaria and Rumania, also for the division of the spoils. In the present war waged by the present governments it is impossible to help Belgium without helping to strangle Austria or Turkey, etc.! How does “defence of the fatherland” come in here? Herein, precisely, lies the specific feature of imperialist war, war between reactionary-bourgeois, historically obsolete governments, waged for the purpose of oppressing other nations. Whoever justifies participation in the present war perpetuates imperialist oppression of nations. Whoever advocates taking advantage of the present embarrassments   of the governments to fight for the social revolution champions the real freedom of really all nations, which is possible only under Socialism.   
What is Russia Fighting For?
In Russia, capitalist imperialism of the latest type has fully revealed itself in the policy of tsarism towards Persia, Manchuria and Mongolia; but, in general, military and feudal imperialism predominates in Russia. In no country in the world is the majority of the population oppressed so much as it is in Russia; Great Russians constitute only 43 per cent of the population, i.e., less than half; all the rest are denied rights as aliens. Of the 170 million inhabitants of Russia, about 100 million are oppressed and denied rights. Tsarism is waging war to seize Galicia and finally to crush the liberties of the Ukrainians, to seize Armenia, Constantinople, etc. Tsarism regards the war as a means of diverting attention from the growth of discontent within the country and of suppressing the growing revolutionary movement. At the present time, for every two Great Russians in Russia there are from two to three rightless “aliens”: tsarism is striving by means of the war to increase the number of nations oppressed by Russia, to perpetuate this oppression and thereby undermine the struggle for freedom which the Great Russians themselves are waging. The possibility of oppressing and robbing other nations perpetuates economic stagnation, because, often, the source of income is not the development of productive forces, but the semi-feudal exploitation of “aliens.” Thus, on the part of Russia, the war is distinguished for its profoundly reactionary and anti-liberating character.   
What is Social-Chauvinism?
Social-chauvinism is advocacy of the idea of “defence of the fatherland” in the present war. Further, this idea logically leads to the abandonment of the class struggle during the  war, to voting war credits, etc. Actually, the social-chauvinists are pursuing an anti-proletarian, bourgeois policy; for actually, they are championing not “defence of the fatherland” in the sense of fighting foreign oppression, but the “right” of one or other of the “great” powers to plunder colonies and to oppress other nations. The social-chauvinists repeat the bourgeois deception of the people that the war is being waged to protect the freedom and existence of nations, and thereby they go over to the side of the bourgeoisie against the proletariat. In the category of social-chauvinists are those who justify and embellish the governments and bourgeoisie of one of the belligerent groups of powers, as well as those who, like Kautsky, argue that the Socialists of all the belligerent powers have an equal right to “defend the fatherland.” Social-chauvinism, being actually defence of the privileges, advantages, robbery and violence of one’s “own” (or every) imperialist bourgeoisie, is the utter betrayal of all socialist convictions and of the decision of the Basle International Socialist Congress.   
The Basle Manifesto[3] 
The manifesto on war that was unanimously adopted in Basle in 1911 had in view the very war between England and Germany and their present allies that broke out in 1914. The manifesto openly declares that no plea of the interests of the people can justify such a war, waged “for the sake of the profits of the capitalists” and “the ambitions of dynasties” on the basis of the imperialist, predatory policy of the great powers. The manifesto openly declares that war is dangerous “for the governments” (all without exception), notes their fear of “a proletarian revolution,” and very definitely points to the example of the Commune of 1871, and of October-December 1905, i.e., to the examples of revolution and civil war. Thus, the Basle Manifesto lays down, precisely for the present war, the tactics of revolutionary struggle by the workers on an international scale against their governments, the tactics of proletarian revolution. The Basle Manifesto repeats the statement in the Stuttgart resolution that, in the event of war breaking out, Socialists must take advantage of the “economic and political crisis” it will cause, to “hasten   the downfall of capitalism,” i.e., to take advantage of the governments’ embarrassments and the anger of the masses, caused by the war, for the socialist revolution.
The policy of the social-chauvinists, their justification of the war from the bourgeois-liberation standpoint, their sanctioning of “defence of the fatherland,” voting credits, entering cabinets, and so on and so forth, is downright treachery to Socialism, which can be explained only, as we wilt see lower down, by the victory of opportunism and of the national-liberal labour policy in the majority of European parties.   
False References to Marx and Engels
The Russian social-chauvinists (headed by Plekhanov), refer to Marx’s tactics in the war of 1870; the German (of the type of Lensch, David and Co.) to Engels’ statement in 1891 that in the event of war against Russia and France together, it would be the duty of the German Socialists to defend their fatherland; and lastly, the social-chauvinists of the Kautsky type, who want to reconcile and legitimatise international chauvinism, refer to the fact that Marx and Engels, while condemning war, nevertheless, constantly, from to 1870-1871 and 1876-1877, took the side of one or another belligerent state once war had broken out.
All these references are outrageous distortions of the views of Marx and Engels in the interest of the bourgeoisie and the opportunists, in just the same way as the writings of the Anarchists Guillaume and Co. distort the views of Marx and Engels in justification of anarchism. The war of 1870-1871 was a historically progressive war on the part of Germany until Napoleon III was defeated; for the latter, together with the tsar, had oppressed Germany for many years, keeping her in a state of feudal disintegration. But as soon as the war developed into the plunder of France (the annexation of Alsace and Lorraine), Marx and Engels emphatically condemned the Germans. And even at the beginning of that war Marx and Engels approved of the refusal of Bebel and Liebknecht to vote for credits and advised the Social-Democrats not to merge with the bourgeoisie, but to uphold the independent class interests of the proletariat. To apply the appraisal of this bourgeois-progressive and national-liberating war to the present   imperialist war means mocking at truth. The same applies with still greater force to the war of 1854-1855, and to all the wars of the nineteenth century, when there was no modern imperialism, no ripe objective conditions for Socialism, and no mass Socialist parties in any of the belligerent countries, i.e., none of the conditions from which the Basle Manifesto deduced the tactics of “proletarian revolution” in connection with a war between the great powers.
Whoever refers today to Marx’s attitude towards the wars of the epoch of the progressive bourgeoisie and forgets Man’s statement that “the workers have no fatherland,” a statement that applies precisely to the epoch of the reactionary, obsolete bourgeoisie, to the epoch of the socialist revolution, shamelessly distorts Marx and substitutes the bourgeois for the socialist point of view.   
The Collapse of the Second International
The Socialists of all the world solemnly declared in Basle, in 1912, that they regarded the impending war in Europe as the “criminal” and most reactionary affair of all the governments, which must hasten the downfall of capitalism by inevitably calling forth a revolution against it. The war came, the crisis came. Instead of revolutionary tactics, the majority of the Social-Democratic parties conducted reactionary tactics, went over to the side of their respective governments and bourgeoisie. This betrayal of Socialism signifies the collapse of the Second (1889-1914) International, and we must understand what caused this collapse, what brought social-chauvinism into being, what gave it strength.   
Social-Chauvinism is Consummated Opportunism
During the whole epoch of the Second International, a struggle raged everywhere in the Social-Democratic parties between the revolutionary and the opportunist wings. In a number of countries a split has taken place along this line (England, Italy, Holland, Bulgaria). Not a single Marxist has any doubt that opportunism expresses bourgeois policy   within the working-class movement, expresses the interests of the petty bourgeoisie and the alliance of a tiny section of bourgeoisified workers with “their” bourgeoisie against the interests of the proletarian masses, the oppressed masses.
The objective conditions of the end of the nineteenth century exceptionally intensified opportunism, converted the utilization of bourgeois legality into subservience to it, created a tiny stratum of bureaucrats and aristocrats within the working class, and drew into the ranks of the Social-Democratic parties numerous petty-bourgeois “fellow travellers.”
The war accelerated this development and transformed opportunism into social-chauvinism, transformed the secret alliance between the opportunists and the bourgeoisie into an open one. Simultaneously, the military authorities everywhere have introduced martial law and have muzzled the mass of the workers, whose old leaders have nearly all gone over to the bourgeoisie.
Opportunism and social-chauvinism have the same economic basis: the interests of a tiny stratum of privileged workers and of the petty bourgeoisie who are defending their privileged position, their “right” to crumbs of the profits “their” national bourgeoisie obtain from robbing other nations, from the advantages of their position as the ruling nation, etc.
Opportunism and social-chauvinism have the same ideological-political content: collaboration of classes instead of class struggle, renunciation of revolutionary methods of struggle, helping one’s “own” government in its embarrassed situation instead of taking advantage of these embarrassments for revolution. If we take all the European countries as a whole, if we pay attention not to individuals (even the most authoritative), we will find that it is the opportunist trend that has become the chief bulwark of social-chauvinism, whereas from the camp of the revolutionaries, more or less consistent protests against it are heard nearly everywhere. And if we take, for example, the grouping of trends at the Stuttgart International Socialist Congress in 1907,[4] we will find that international Marxism was opposed to imperialism, while international opportunism was in favour of it already at that time.   
  Unity with the Opportunists Means Alliance Between the Workers and “Their” National Bourgeoisie and Splitting the International Revolutionary Working Class
In the past epoch, before the war, although opportunism was often regarded as a “deviationist,” “extremist” part of the Social-Democratic Party, it was nevertheless regarded as a legitimate part. The war has shown that this cannot be so in future. Opportunism has “matured,” is now playing to the full its role as emissary of the bourgeois in the working-class movement. Unity with the opportunists has become sheer hypocrisy, an example of which we see in the German Social-Democratic Party. On all important occasions (for example, the voting on August 4),[5] the opportunists come forward with an ultimatum, which they carry out with the aid of their numerous connections with the bourgeoisie, of their majority on the executives of the trade unions, etc. Unity with the opportunists actually means today, subordinating the working class to “its” national bourgeoisie, alliance with it for the purpose of oppressing other nations and of fighting for great-power privileges, it means splitting the revolutionary proletariat in all countries.
Hard as the struggle may be, in individual cases, against the opportunists who predominate in many organisations, peculiar as the process of purging the workers’ parties of opportunists may be in individual countries, this process is inevitable and fruitful. Reformist Socialism is dying; regenerated Socialism “will be revolutionary, uncompromising and insurrectionary,” to use the apt expression of the French Socialist Paul Golay.   
“Kautskyism”
Kautsky, the biggest authority in the Second International, gives us a highly typical and glaring example of how the verbal recognition of Marxism has led actually to its conversion into “Struveism”,[6] or into “Brentanoism.”[7] We see this also from the example of Plekhanov. By means of obvious sophistry they rob Marxism of its revolutionary living spirit; they recognise everything in Marxism except revolutionary   methods of struggle, the preaching of and preparation for such methods, and the training of the masses precisely in this direction. Kautsky, in an unprincipled fashion, “reconciles” the fundamental idea of social-chauvinism, recognition of defence of the fatherland in the present war, with a diplomatic, sham concession to the Leftists, the shape of abstaining from voting credits, the verbal claim of being in the opposition, etc. Kautsky, who in 1909 wrote a whole book on the approaching epoch of revolutions and on the connection between war and revolutions, Kautsky, who in 1912 signed the Basle Manifesto on taking revolutionary advantage of the impending war, is now, in every way, justifying and embellishing social-chauvinism and, like Plekhanov, joins the bourgeoisie in ridiculing all thought of revolution, all steps towards direct revolutionary struggle.
The working class cannot play its world-revolutionary role unless it wages a ruthless struggle against this renegacy, spinelessness, subservience to opportunism and unexampled vulgarization of the theories of Marxism. Kautskyism is not fortuity, but a social product of the contradictions within the Second International, a combination of loyalty to Marxism in words and subordination to opportunism in deeds.
This fundamental falseness of “Kautskyism” manifests itself in different ways in different countries. In Holland, Roland-HoIst while rejecting the idea of defending the fatherland, defends unity with the opportunists’ party. In Russia Trotsky, while also rejecting this idea, also defends unity with the opportunist and chauvinist Nasha Zarya group. In Rumania, Rakovsky, while declaring war on opportunism as being responsible for the collapse of the International, is at the same time ready to recognise the legitimacy of the idea of defending the fatherland. All this is a manifestation of the evil which the Dutch Marxists (Gorter and Pannekoek) have called “passive radicalism”, and which amounts to substituting for Marxism eclecticism in theory and servility to, or impotence in the face of, opportunism in practice.   
  The Marxists’ Slogan is the Slogan of Revolutionary Social-Democracy
The war has undoubtedly created a most acute crisis and has increased the distress of the masses to an incredible degree. The reactionary character of this war, and the shameless lies told by the bourgeoisie of all countries in covering up their predatory aims with “national” ideology, are inevitably creating, on the basis of an objectively revolutionary situation, revolutionary moods among the masses. It is our duty to help the masses to become conscious of these moods, to deepen and formulate them. This task is correctly expressed only by the slogan: convert the imperialist war into civil war; and all consistently waged class struggles during the war, all seriously conducted “mass action” tactics inevitably lead to this. It is impossible to foretell whether a powerful revolutionary movement will flare up during the first or the second war of the great powers, whether during or after it; in any case, our bounden duty is systematically and undeviatingly to work precisely in this direction.
The Basle Manifesto refers directly to the example set by the Paris Commune, i.e., to the conversion of a war between governments into civil war. Half a century ago, the proletariat was too weak; the objective conditions for Socialism had not yet ripened; there could be no coordination and cooperation between the revolutionary movements in all the belligerent countries; the “national ideology” (the traditions of 1792), with which a section of the Parisian workers were imbued, was their petty-bourgeois weakness, which Marx noted at the time, and was one of the causes of the fall of the Commune. Half a century after it, the conditions that weakened the revolution at that time have passed away, and it is unpardonable for a Socialist at the present time to resign himself to the abandonment of activities precisely in the spirit of the Paris Communards.   
The Example Shown by the Fraternisation in the Trenches
The bourgeois newspapers of all the belligerent countries have reported cases of fraternisation between the soldiers of the belligerent nations even in the trenches.   And the issue by the military authorities (of Germany, England) of draconic orders against such fraternisation proved that the governments and the bourgeoisie attached grave importance to it. The fact that such cases of fraternisation have been possible even when opportunism reigns supreme in the top ranks of the Social-Democratic parties of Western Europe, and when social-chauvinism is supported by the entire Social-Democratic press and by all the authorities of the Second International, shows us how possible it would be to shorten the present criminal, reactionary and slave-owners’ war and to organise a revolutionary international movement if systematic work were conducted in this direction, if only by the Left-wing Socialists in all the belligerent countries.   
The Importance of an Underground Organisation
The most prominent Anarchists all over the world, no less than the opportunists, have disgraced themselves with social-chauvinism (in the spirit of Plekhanov and Kautsky) in this war. One of the useful results of this war will undoubtedly be that it will kill both anarchism and opportunism.
While under no circumstances or conditions refraining from utilizing all legal possibilities, however small, for the purpose of organizing the masses and of preaching Socialism, the Social-Democratic parties must break with subservience to legality. “You shoot first, Messieurs the Bourgeoisie,”[8] wrote Engels, hinting precisely at civil war and at the necessity of our violating legality after the bourgeoisie had violated it. The crisis has shown that the bourgeoisie violate it in all countries, even the freest, and that it is impossible to lead the masses to revolution unless an underground organisation is set up for the purpose of advocating, discussing, appraising and preparing revolutionary methods of struggle. In Germany, for example, all the honest things that Socialists are doing, are being done in spite of despicable opportunism and hypocritical “Kautskyism”, and are being done secretly. In England, people are sent to penal servitude for printing appeals against joining the army.
  To regard the repudiation of underground methods of propaganda, and ridiculing the latter in the legally published press, as being compatible with membership of the Social-Democratic Patty is treachery to Socialism.   
Concerning Defeat of “One’s Own” Government in the Imperialist War
Both the advocates of victory for their governments in the present war and the advocates of the slogan “neither victory not defeat”, equally take the standpoint of social-chauvinism. A revolutionary class cannot but wish for the defeat of its government in a reactionary war, cannot fail to see that its military reverses facilitate its overthrow. Only a bourgeois who believes that a war started by the governments must necessarily end as a war between governments and wants it to end as such, can regard as “ridiculous” and “absurd” the idea that the Socialists of all the belligerent countries should wish for the defeat of all “their” governments and express this wish. On the contrary, it is precisely a statement of this kind that would conform to the cherished thoughts of every class-conscious worker, and would be in line with our activities towards converting the imperialist war into civil war.
Undoubtedly, the serious anti-war agitation that is being conducted by a section of the British, German and Russian Socialists has “weakened the military power” of the respective governments, but such agitation stands to the credit of the Socialists. Socialists must explain to the masses that they have no other road of salvation except the revolutionary overthrow of “their” governments, and that advantage must be taken of these governments’ embarrassments in the present war precisely for this purpose.   
Pacifism and the Peace Slogan
The sentiments of the masses in favour of peace often express incipient protest, anger and consciousness of the reactionary character of the war. It is the duty of all Social-Democrats to utilise these sentiments. They will take a most ardent pan in every movement and in every demonstration on this ground; but they will not deceive the   people by conceding the idea that peace without annexations, without the oppression of nations, without plunder, without the germs of new wars among the present governments and ruling classes is possible in the absence of a revolutionary movement. Such a deception of the people would merely play into the hands of the secret diplomacy of the belligerent governments and facilitate their counter-revolutionary plans. Whoever wants a lasting and democratic peace must be in favour of civil war against the governments and the bourgeoisie.   
The Right of Nations to Self-Determination
The most widespread deception of the people perpetrated by the bourgeoisie in the present war is the concealment of its predatory aims with “national-liberation” ideology. The English promise the liberation of Belgium, the Germans of Poland, etc. Actually, as we have seen, this is a war waged by the oppressors of the majority of the nations of the world for the purpose of fortifying and expanding such oppression.
Socialists cannot achieve their great aim without fighting against all oppression of nations. Therefore, they must without fail demand that the Social-Democratic parties of oppressing countries (especially of the so-called “great” powers) should recognise and champion the right of oppressed nations to self-determination, precisely in the political sense of the term, i.e., the right to political secession. The Socialist of a ruling or colony-owning nation who fails to champion this right is a chauvinist.
The championing of this right, far from encouraging the formation of small states, leads, on the contrary, to the freer, fearless and therefore wider and more widespread formation of very big states and federations of states, which are more beneficial for the masses and more fully in keeping with economic development.
The Socialists of oppressed nations must, in their turn, unfailingly fight for the complete (including organisational) unity of the workers of the oppressed and oppressing nationalities. The idea of the juridical separation of one nation from another (so-called “cultural-national autonomy”   advocated by Bauer and Renner) is reactionary.
Imperialism is the epoch of the constantly increasing oppression of the nations of the world by a handful of “great” powers and, therefore, it is impossible to fight for the socialist international revolution against imperialism unless the right of nations to self-determination is recognized. “No nation can be free if it oppresses other nations” (Marx and Engels). A proletariat that tolerates the slightest violence by “its” nation against other nations cannot be a socialist proletariat.   
   Notes       [1]  See Karl von Clausewitz, Vom Kriege, Berlin 1957, Vol.I, p.4. 
  [2] An imperialist alliance of Britain, France, Russia and Italy. The latter joined after breaking away from the Triple Alliance.
  [3]  The Basle Manifesto on the war issue was unanimously adopted at the special congress of the Second International held on November 4-25, 1912, at Basle, Switzerland. The manifesto revealed the predatory aims of the war the imperialists were preparing and urged workers everywhere resolutely to combat the war danger. The manifesto proposed that in the event of an imperialist war breaking out, Socialists should take advantage of the economic and political crisis to precipitate the socialist revolution. (On the Basic Manifesto, see also V.I. Lenin, The Collapse of the Second International, Collected Works, Eng. ed., International Publishers, New York 1930, Vol. XVIII, pp.273-82.) 
 At the Basic Congress Kautsky, Vandervelde and the other leaders of the Second International voted for the Manifesto, but as soon as the world war broke out in 1914, they went back on it, and sided with their imperialist governments. 
  [4]  The Stuttgart international Socialist Congress, held on August 18-24, 1907. At this congress the R.S.D.L.P. was represented by 37 delegates. Lenin, Lunacharsky, Litvinov and others represented the Bolsheviks.
Most of the work of the congress was conducted in commissions, which drafted resolutions for submission to the plenary sessions. Lenin was a member of the commission that drafted the resolution on Militarism and International Conflicts. Jointly with Rosa Luxemburg, Lenin moved his historic amendment to Bebel’s resolution, declaring that it was the duty of Socialists to take advantage of the crisis brought about by war to rouse the masses for the overthrow of capitalism. The congress accepted this amendment. (On the congress see V.I. Lenin, The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart, Selected Works, Eng. ed., Lawrence and Wishart, London 1943, Vol.IV, pp.314-23, and Collected Works, 4th Russ. ed., Vol.XIII, pp.59-65.)
  [5]  The voting on August 4 – On August 4, 1914, the Social-Democratic group in the German Reichstag voted in favour of granting the government of Wilhelm II war credits and for supporting the imperialist war. The leaders of German Social-Democracy betrayed the working class and took up the position of social-chauvinism and of defence of their imperialist bourgeoisie.
  [6]  Struveism – see pp. 48-49 of this book.
  [7]  Brentanoism – a bourgeois reformist theory which “recognised the ‘school of capitalism’, but rejected the school of the revolutionary class struggle” (Lenin). Lujo Brentano, a German bourgeois economist, advocate of so-called “State Socialism,” tried to prove that it was possible to achieve social equality within the capitalist system by means of reforms and the conciliation of the interests of the capitalists and the workers. Under the cloak of Marxist phraseology, Brentano and his followers tried to subordinate the working-dan movement to the interests of the bourgeoisie.


[8]

Karl Marx and
 Frederick Engels, Der Sozialismus in Deutschland,
 Collected Works, Ger. ed., Berlin 1963, Vol.XXII,
 p. 251.

 
 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

|

Classes and Parties in Russia

 
   






<
 backward
     
Contents
     
forward >




Works
 Index | 

 Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

 | L.I.A. Index





Updated:   March 30, 2005







==========

## Classes
  and Parties









Lenin: 1915/s+w: Classes and Parties in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Socialism and War
The Attitude of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Towards the War



 
Chapter II
Classes and Parties in Russia

The bourgeoisie and the war
To one respect, the Russian government has not lagged behind
its European confrères; like them, it has succeeded in deceiving
“its” people on a grand scale. A huge, monstrous machine of
falsehood sod cunning was set going in Russia too for the purpose of
infecting the masses with chauvinism, of creating the impression that the
tsarist government is waging a “just” war, that it is
disinterestedly defending its “brother Slavs,” etc.
The landlord class and the upper stratum of the commercial and
industrial bourgeoisie ardently supported the tsarist government’s
bellicose policy. They are rightly expecting enormous material gains and
privileges for themselves out of the partition of the Turkish and the
Austrian legacy. A whole series of their congresses already have a
foretaste of the profits that would flow into their pockets if the tsarist
army were victorious. Moreover, the reactionaries are very well aware that
if anything can postpone the downfall of the Romanov monarchy and delay the
new revolution in Russia, it can only be a foreign war that ends in victory
for the tsar.
Broad strata of the urban “middle” bourgeoisie, of the
bourgeois intelligentsia, professional people, etc., were also infected
with chauvinism—at all events at the beginning of the war. The
Cadets—the party of the Russian

    

liberal bourgeoisie—wholly
and unreservedly supported the tsarist government. In the sphere of foreign
policy the Cadets have long been a government party. Pan-Slavism –
with the aid of which tsarist diplomacy has more than once carried out its
grand political swindles—has become the official ideology of the
Cadets. Russian liberalism has degenerated into national
liberalism. It is vying in “patriotism” with the Black
Hundreds; it always willingly votes for militarism, on land and sea, etc. In the
camp of Russia liberalism, approximately the same thing is observed as was
seen in the 70s in Germany when “free-thinking” liberalism
decayed and from it arose a national-liberal party. The Russian liberal
bourgeoisie has definitely taken the path of counter-revolution. The point
of view of the R.S.D.L.P. on this question has been fully confirmed. Life
has shattered the view held by our opportunists that Russian liberalism is
still a motive force of the revolution in Russia.
Among the peasantry, the ruling clique, with the aid of the bourgeois
press, the clergy, etc., also succeeded in rousing chauvinist sentiments.
But, as the soldiers return from the field of slaughter, sentiment in the
rural districts will undoubtedly turn against the tsarist monarchy. The
bourgeois-democratic parties that come in contact with the peasantry failed
to withstand the chauvinist wave. The Trudovik party in the State Duma
refused to vote for war credits; but through the mouth of its leader
Kerensky it made a “patriotic” declaration which played
extremely well into the hands of the monarchy. The entire legally published
press of the “Narodniks” in general, trailed behind the
liberals. Even the Left-wing of bourgeois democracy—the so-called
Socialist-Revolutionary Party, which is affiliated to the International
Socialist Bureau—floated in the same stream. Mr. Rubanovich. that
party’s representative on the I.S.B., comes out as an open
social-chauvinist. Half of this party’s delegates at the London
Conference of “Entente” Socialists voted for a chauvinist
resolution (while the other half abstained from voting). In the illegally
published press of the Socialist-Revolutionaries (the newspaper

Novosti[1]

and
others) chauvinists predominate. The revolutionaries “from bourgeois
circles,” i.e., the

    

bourgeois revolutionaries not connected with the
working class, have suffered utter bankruptcy in this war. The sad fate of
Kropotkin, Burtsev and Rubanovich is extremely significant.

 

The working class and the war
The only class in Russia that they did not succeed in
infecting with chauvinism is the proletariat. Only the most ignorant strata
of the workers were involved in the few excesses that occurred at the
beginning of the war. The part played by workers in the Moscow anti-German
riots was greatly exaggerated. In general, and on the whole, the working
class of Russia proved to be immune to chauvinism.
This is to be explained by the revolutionary situation in the country
and by the general conditions of life of the Russian proletariat.
The years 1912–1914 marked the beginning of a new, grand revolutionary
upswing in Russia. We again witnessed a great strike movement such as the
world has not known. The number involved in the mass revolutionary strike
in 1913 was, at the very lowest estimation, one and a half million, and in
1914 it rose above two million and drew near to the level of 1905. On the
eve of the war, in St. Petersburg, things had already developed to the
first barricade battles.
The underground Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party performed its
duty to the International to the full. The banner of internationalism did
not falter in its hands. Our Party had broken organisationally with the
opportunist groups and elements long ago; its feet were not weighted with
the fetters of opportunism and of “legalism at any price,” and
this circumstance helped it to perform its revolutionary duty—just
as the break-away from Bissolati’s opportunist party helped the
Italian comrades too.
The general situation in our country is inimical to the efflorescence of
“socialist” opportunism among the masses of the workers. In
Russia we see a whole series of shades of opportunism and reformism among
the intelligentsia, the petty bourgeoisie, etc.; but it constitutes an
insignificant minority among the politically active strata of the workers.
The privileged stratum of workers and office employees

    

in our country is
very weak. The fetishism of legality could not be created here. The
Liquidators (the party of the opportunists led by Axelrod, Potressov,
Cherevanin, Maslov, and others) found no serious support among the masses
of the workers before the war. The elections to the Fourth State Duma
resulted in the return of all the six anti-liquidator worker
deputies. The circulation of and collection of funds for the legally
published workers’ press in Petrograd and Moscow have proved
irrefutably that four-fifths of the class-conscious workers are opposed to
opportunism and liquidationism.
Since the beginning of the war the tsarist government has arrested and
exiled thousands and thousands of advanced workers, members of our
underground R.S.D.L.P. This circumstance, together with the introduction of
martial law in the country, the suppression of our newspapers, and so
forth, has retarded the movement. But for all that, our Party is continuing
its underground revolutionary activities. In Petrograd, the committee of
our Party is publishing the underground newspaper Proletarsky

Golos.[2]

Articles from the Central Organ Sotsial-Demokrat, published
abroad, are reprinted in Petrograd and sent out to the provinces.
Manifestoes are secretly printed and circulated even in soldiers’
barracks. In various secluded places outside the city, secret
workers’ meetings are held. Lately big strikes of metal workers have
begun in Petrograd. In connection with these strikes our Petrograd
Committee has issued several appeals to the workers.

 

The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Group in the State Duma and the
war
In 1913 a split occurred among the Social-Democratic
deputies in the State Duma. On one side were the seven supporters of
opportunism led by Chkheidze. They were elected for the seven
non-proletarian
gubernias[3]

where the
workers numbered 214,000. On the other side were six deputies, all
from workers’ curiae, elected for the most industrialised centres in
Russia, in which the workers numbered 1,008,000.
The chief issue in the split was: the tactics of revolutionary Marxism
or the tactics of

    

opportunist reformism? In practice, the
disagreement manifested itself mainly in the sphere of work
outside of parliament among the masses. In Russia this work had to
be conducted secretly if those conducting it wanted to remain on
revolutionary ground. The Chkheidze group remained a faithful ally of the
Liquidators who repudiated underground work, and defended them in all talks
with the workers, at all meetings. Hence the split. The six deputies formed
the R.S.D.L. group. The year’s work has shown irrefutably that this
is the group that the overwhelming majority of the Russian workers
supports.
On the outbreak of the war the disagreement stood out in glaring relief. The Chkheidze group confined itself to parliamentary action. It did not
vote for credits, for had it done so it would have roused against itself a
storm of indignation among the workers. (We have seen that in Russia even
the petty-bourgeois Trudoviki did not vote for credits); but it did not
utter a protest against social-chauvinism either.
The R.S.D.L. group, expressing the political line of our Party, acted
differently. It carried into the very depths of the working class a protest
against the war; it conducted anti-imperialist propaganda among the broad
masses of the Russian proletarians.
And it met with a very sympathetic response among the workers –
which frightened the government and compelled it, in flagrant violation of
its own laws, to arrest our comrades, the deputies, and to sentence them to
lifelong exile in Siberia. In its very first official announcement of the
arrest of our comrades the tsarist government wrote:

An entirely exceptional position in this respect was taken by some
members of Social-Democratic societies, the object of whose activities
was to shake the military might of Russia by agitating against the war by
means of underground appeals and verbal propaganda.

In response to Vandervelde’s well-known appeal
“temporarily” to stop the struggle against tsarism—it
has now become known from the evidence of Prince Kudashev, the tsar’s
envoy in Belgium, that Vandervelde did not draw up this appeal alone, but
in collaboration with the above-mentioned tsar’s envoy –
only our Party, through its Central Committee, replied in the
negative. The guiding centre

    

of the Liquidators agreed with Vandervelde and
officially stated in the press that “in its activities it will
not counteract the war.”
The tsarist government’s primary charge against our comrades, the
deputies, was that they propagated this negative answer to Vandervelde
among the workers.
At the trial, the tsarist Prosecutor, Mr. Nenarokomov, set up the German
and French Socialists as examples for our comrades. “The German
Social-Democrats,” he said, “voted for the war credits and
proved to be the friends of the government. That is how the German
Social-Democrats acted, but the dismal knights of Russian Social-Democracy
did not act in this way ... The Socialists of Belgium and France
unanimously forgot their quarrels with other classes, forgot party strife
and unhesitatingly rallied round the flag.” But the members of the
R.S.D.L. group, obeying the instructions of the Central Committee of the
Party, did not act in this way, he said ...
The trial unfolded an imposing picture of the extensive, underground
and-war agitation our Party was conducting among the masses of the
proletariat. It goes without saying that the tsarist court did not by a
very long way reveal all the activities our comrades were conducting in
this sphere; but even what was revealed showed how much, had been done
within the short space of a few months.
At the trial the secret manifestoes issued by our groups and committees
against the war and for international tactics were read. Threads stretched
from the class-conscious workers all over Russia to the members of the
R.S.D.L. group, and the latter did all in its power to help the workers to
appraise the war from the standpoint of Marxism.
Comrade Muranov, the deputy of the workers of the Kharkov Gubernia, said
at the trial:
“Understanding that the people did not send me into the State Duma
for the purpose of wearing out the seat of a Duma armchair, I travelled
about the country to ascertain the mood of the working class.” He
admitted at the trial that he took upon himself the function of a secret
agitator of our Party, that in the Urals he organised a workers’
committee at the Verkhneisetsky Works, and in other places. The trial
showed that after the war broke out members of the R.S.D.L. group travelled

    

through almost the whole of Russia for propaganda purposes, that Muranov,
Petrovsky, Badayev and others arranged numerous workers’ meetings, at
which anti-war resolutions were passed, and so forth.
The tsarist government threatened the accused with capital punishment.
Owing to this, not all of them behaved at the actual trial as bravely as
Comrade Muranov. They tried to make it difficult for the tsarist
prosecutors to secure their conviction. The Russian social-chauvinists are
now meanly utilising this to obscure the essence of the question: what kind
of parliamentarism does the working class need?
Parliamentarism is recognized by Südekum and Heine, Sembat and
Valiant, Bissolati and Mussolini, Chkheidze and Plekhanov, and
parliamentarism is recognised by our comrades in the R.S.D.L. Duma group;
it is recognised by the Bulgarian and Italian comrades who have broken with
the chauvinists. There are different kinds of parliamentarism. Some utilise
the parliamentary arena in order to win the favour of their governments,
or, at best, to wash their hands of everything, like the Chkheidze group.
Others utilise parliamentarism in order to remain revolutionary to the end,
to perform their duty as Socialists and internationalists even under the
most difficult circumstances. The parliamentary activities of some bring
them into ministerial seats; the parliamentary activities of others bring
them to prison, to exile, to penal servitude. Some serve the
bourgeoisie, others—the proletariat. Some are social-imperialists.
Others are revolutionary Marxists.

 

 

Notes
 

[1]


Novosti (News)—a daily
Socialist-Revolutionary Party newspaper published in Paris from August 1914
to May 1915.—Ed.


[2]


Proletarsky Golos (Proletarian Voice)—a
newspaper, organ of the St. Petersburg Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.,
published underground from February 1915 to December 1916. Four numbers
appeared. Its first issue published the manifesto of the Central Committee
of the R.S.D.L.P. entitled: The War and Russian
Social-Democracy.—Ed.


[3]
  

Provinces.—Ed.

 

 
 

The Principles of Socialism and the War of 1914–1915

|

The Restoration of the International

 
   






<
  backward
     
Contents
     
forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





Updated:   March 30, 2005







==========

## The
  Restoration









Lenin: 1915/s+w: The Restoration of the International







V. I.  

      Lenin
Socialism and War
The Attitude of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Towards the War



 
Chapter III
The Restoration of the International

How should the International be restored? But first, a few words about how
the International should not be restored.

The method of the social-chauvinists and of the
“centre”
Oh, the social-chauvinists of all countries are big
“internationalists”! Since the very beginning of the war they
have been burdened with care for the International. On the one hand, they
assure us that the

    

talk about the collapse of the International is
“exaggerated.” Actually, nothing exceptional has occurred.
Listen to Kautsky: simply, the International is a “peacetime
instrument”; naturally, this instrument was found to be somewhat not
up to the mark in wartime. On the other hand, the social-chauvinists of all
countries have found a very simple—and chiefly, an international
– way out of the situation that has arisen. A simple way out: it is
only necessary to wait until the war ends; but until the war ends the
Socialists of each country must defend their fatherland and support
“their” government; when the war ends—mutual
“amnesty,” admission that everybody was right, that in
peacetime we live like brothers, but in wartime we—on the basis of
such and such resolutions—call upon the German workers to
exterminate their French brothers, and vice versa.
On this Kautsky and Plekhanov and Victor Adler and Heine are equally
agreed. Victor Adler writes that “when we have passed through this
hard time, our first duty will be to refrain from pointing to the mote in
each other’s eye.” Kautsky asserts that “up till now no
voices of serious Socialists have been heard from any side that rouse
apprehensions” concerning the fate of the International. Plekhanov
says that “it is unpleasant to grasp the hands” (of the German
Social-Democrats) “that reek of the blood of the innocently
killed.” But he at once goes on to propose an “amnesty”:
“here it will be quite appropriate,” he writes, “to
subordinate the heart to the mind. For the sake of the great
cause, the International will have to take into consideration even belated
remorse.” Heine in Sozialistische Monatshefte
describes Vandervelde’s behaviour as “courageous and
proud,” and sets him up—an example for the German Lefts.
In short, when the war ends, appoint a commission consisting of Kautsky
and Plekhanov, Vandervelde and Adler and a “unanimous”
resolution in the spirit of mutual amnesty will be drawn up in a trice. The
dispute will be safely covered up. Instead of helping the workers to
understand what has occurred, they will deceive them with sham, paper
“unity.” The amalgamation of the social-chauvinists and
hypocrites of all countries will be described as the restoration of the
International.
 
We must not conceal from ourselves the fact that the danger of such a
“restoration is very great. The social-chauvinists of all countries
are equally interested in it.” All of them are equally unwilling that the
masses of the workers themselves should try to grasp the issue: Socialism
or nationalism? All of them are equally interested in coveting up
each other’s sins. None of them is able to propose anything except
what is proposed by that virtuoso in “international” hypocrisy,
Kautsky.
And yet, this danger is scarcely realised. During the year of war we
have witnessed a number of attempts to restore international connections.
We will not speak of the conferences in London and Vienna, at which
downright chauvinists assembled to help the General Staffs and the
bourgeoisie of their “fatherlands.” We have in mind the
conferences in
Lugano[1]

and
Copenhagen,[2]

the International Women’s Conference[3]

and the International Youth
Conference.[4]

These
assemblies were inspired by the best wishes. But they totally failed to see
the above-mentioned danger. They did not lay down a fighting line for
internationalists. They did not point out to the proletariat the danger
that threatens it from the social-chauvinists’ method of
“restoring” the International. At best, they confined
themselves to repeating the old resolutions without indicating to the
workers that unless a struggle is waged against the social-chauvinists, the
cause of Socialism is hopeless. At best they marked time.

 

The state of affairs among the opposition
There can be no doubt whatever that what interests all
internationalists most is the state of affairs among the German
Social-Democratic opposition. Official German Social-Democracy, which was
the strongest and the leading party in the Second International, struck the
heaviest blow at the international workers’ organisation. But at the
same time, it was in German Social-Democracy that the strongest opposition
was found. Of all the big European parties, it was in the German party that
the loud voice of protest of the comrades who have remained loyal to the
banner of Socialism was first raised. It was with joy that we read

    

the magazines Lichtstrahlen and Die
Internationale. With still greater joy we learned of the
distribution in Germany of secretly printed manifestoes, as for example the
manifesto entitled: The Chief Enemy Is at Home. This showed that
the spirit of Socialism is alive among the German workers, That there are
still people in Germany capable of upholding revolutionary Marxism.
The split in the present-day socialist movement has been most strikingly
revealed within German Social-Democracy. Here we very distinctly see three
trends: the opportunist-chauvinists, who have nowhere sunk to such a degree
of renegacy as they have in Germany; the Kautskyan “Centre,”
which has here proved to be incapable of playing any other role than that
of servitors of the opportunists; and the Left—who are the only
Social-Democrats in Germany.
Naturally, what interests us most of all is the state of affairs among
the German Left. In it we see our comrades, the hope of all the
internationalist elements.
What is the state of affairs in it?
The magazine Die Internationale was quite right when
it wrote that the German Left was still in a state of ferment, that
considerable regroupings still lie ahead in it, that there are more
resolute and less resolute elements within it.
We Russian internationalists do not in the least, of course, claim the
right to interfere in the internal affairs of our comrades the German
Lefts. We are aware that they alone are fully competent to determine their
methods of fighting the opportunists in conformity with the conditions of
time and place. Only, we deem it our right and duty frankly to express our
opinion on the state of affairs.
We are convinced that the author of the leading article in the magazine
Die Internationale was profoundly right when he asserted
that the Kautskyan “Centre” is doing more harm to Marxism than
avowed social-chauvinism. Whoever now obscures disagreements, whoever now,
in the guise of Marxism, preaches to the workers what Kautskyism is
preaching, is lulling the workers, is more harmful than the Südekums
and Heines, who put the question

    

bluntly and compel the workers to try to
grasp the issue.
The fact that Kautsky and Haase are permitting themselves lately to
demur against the “official bodies” should mislead nobody. The
disagreements between them and the Scheidemanns are not on fundamentals.
The former believe that Hindenburg and Mackensen are already
victorious and that they can already permit themselves the luxury of
protesting against annexations. The latter believe that Hindenburg and
Mackensen are not yet victorious and that, therefore, it is
necessary “to bold out to the end.”
Kautskyism is waging only a sham fight against the “official
bodies” precisely in order to be able, after the war, to obscure the
fundamental dispute for the workers and to gloss the matter over with the
1,001st puffy resolution couched in a vaguely “Leftist” spirit,
in the drafting of which the diplomats of the Second International are such
masters.
It is quite understandable that in their arduous struggle against the
“official bodies” the German opposition should also make use of
this unprincipled opposition raised by Kautskyism. But what must remain the
touchstone for every interntionalist is hostility towards
neo-Kautskyism. Only he is a genuine internationalist who fights
Kautskyism, who understands that, fundamentally, the “Centre,”
even after the sham turn taken by its leaders, remains an ally
of the chauvinists and opportunists.
Of enormous importance is our attitude towards the wavering elements in
the International in general. These elements—mainly Socialists of
the pacifist shade—are to be found both in the neutral
countries and in some of the belligerent countries (in England, for
example, the Independent Labour
Party).[5]

These elements can be our fellow
travellers. Rapprochement with them in opposition to the social-chauvinists
is necessary. But it must be borne in mind that they are only
fellow travellers, that on the chief and fundamental issues, with the
restoration of the International, these elements will go not with us, but
against us, they will go with Kautsky, Scheidemann, Vandervelde and Sembat.
At international conferences we must not limit our programme to what is
acceptable to these elements. If we do, we will become the captives of the

    

wavering pacifists. This is what happened, for example, at the
International Women’s Conference in Berne. The German delegation,
which supported Comrade Clara Zetkin’s point of view, actually played
the part of the “Centre” at this conference. The Women’s
Conference said only what was acceptable to the delegates from the
opportunist Dutch party led by Troelstra, and to the delegates of the
Independent Labour Party, which—we will not forget this—at
the London conference of “Entente” chauvinists voted for
Vandervelde’s resolution. We express our greatest respect for the
I.L.P. for the brave struggle it has been waging against the British
government during the war. But we know that this party has not adopted the
Marxist stand. We, however, are of the opinion that the chief task of the
Social-Democratic opposition at the present moment is to raise the banner
of revolutionary Marxism, to tell the workers firmly and definitely how we
regard imperialist wars, to issue the watchword of mass revolutionary
action, i.e., transform the epoch of imperialist wars into the beginning of
the epoch of civil wars.
In spite of everything, there are revolutionary Social-Democratic
elements in many countries. They are to be found in Germany, and in Russia,
and in Scandinavia (the influential trend of which Comrade Höglund is
the representative), and in the Balkans (the party of the Bulgarian “Tesnyaki,”[6])


and in Italy, and in England (a section of the
British Socialist
Party),[7]

and in France (Vaillant himself has admitted in
L’Humanité that he has received letters of
protest from internationalists, but he has not published one of them in
full), and in Holland (the
Tribunists),[8]

etc. To
rally these Marxist elements—however small their numbers may be at
the beginning—to recall in their name the now forgotten words of
genuine Socialism, to call upon the workers of all countries to break with
the chauvinists and to come under the old banner of Marxism—such is
the task of the day.
Conferences with so-called programmes of “action” have
amounted up till now only to the proclamation, more or less fully, of the
programme of simple pacifism. Marxism is not pacifism. It is necessary, of
course, to fight for the speediest termination of the war. But only if a
revolutionary
    

struggle is called for does the demand for
“peace acquire proletarian meaning. Without a series of revolutions,
so-called democratic peace is a philistine utopia. The purpose of a real
programme of action would be served only by a Marxian programme,
which gave the masses a full and clear explanation of what has occurred,
which explained what imperialism is and how to combat it, which openly
stated that it was opportunism that led to the collapse of the Second
International, which openly called for the building of a Marxist
International without and against the opportunists. Only such a
programme as would show that we have confidence in ourselves, confidence in
Marxism, that we proclaim a life-and-death struggle against opportunism
would sooner or later ensure for us the sympathy of the genuine proletarian
masses.

 

The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and the Third
International
The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party split away from
its opportunists long ago. The Russian opportunists have now, in addition,
become chauvinists. This only strengthens our opinion that a split from
them in the interests of Socialism is essential. We are convinced that the
Social-Democrats’ present disagreements with the social-chauvinists
are in no way less wide than the Socialists’ disagreements with the
Anarchists when the Social-Democrats split away from the latter. The
opportunist Monitor rightly said in Preussische
Jahrbücher that the present unity was to the advantage of the
opportunists and the bourgeoisie because it compelled the Lefts to submit
to the chauvinists and prevents the workers from grasping the issue and
from forming their own genuinely workers’, genuinely socialist party.
We are most firmly convinced that in the present state of affairs, a split
from the opportunists and chauvinists is the primary duty of the
revolutionary—just as a split from the yellows, the anti-Semites,
the liberal workers’ unions, etc., was essential precisely in the
interests of the speediest enlightenment of the backward workers and of
drawing them into the ranks of the Social-Democratic Party.
In our opinion, the Third International should be built on precisely
such a revolutionary basis. For our Party, the

    

question as to whether it is
expedient to break with the social-chauvinists does not exist. Pot it, this
question has been irrevocably settled. The only question that exists for
our Party is whether this can be achieved in the nearest future on an
international scale.
It is quite understandable that to bring about an international
Marxist organisation, there must be a readiness to form independent Marxist
parties in different countries. Germany, being the country with
the oldest and strongest working-class movement, is of decisive importance.
The immediate future will show whether conditions have already ripened for
the formation of a new, Marxist International. If they have, our Party will
gladly join such a Third International that will be purged of opportunism
and chauvinism. If they have not, it will show that a more or less
prolonged evolution is needed for this purging. In that case, our Party
will be the extreme opposition within the old International—until a
base is formed in different countries for an international working
men’s association that stands on the basis of revolutionary
Marxism.
We do not, nor can we, know, what developments will take place in the
international arena within the next few years. But there is one thing we
know for certain, and of which we are unshakably convinced, namely, that
our Party, in our country, among our
proletariat, will work tirelessly in the above-mentioned direction, and by
all its daily activities will build up the Russian section of the
Marxist International.
In Russia too we have no lack of avowed social-chauvinists and
“Centre” groups. These people will fight against the formation
of a Marxist International. We know that Plekhanov, in principle, stands on
the same ground as Südekum and is already stretching out a hand to
him. We know that the so-called “Organisation Committee” led by
Axelrod is preaching Kautskyism on Russian soil. In the guise of
working-class unity, these people are preaching unity with the opportunists
and, through them, with the bourgeoisie. But everything we know about the
present working-class movement in Russia fully convinces us that the
class-conscious proletariat in Russia will, as hitherto, remain with
our Party.

 
 

Notes
 

[1]


This refers to
a conference of Italian and Swiss Socialists held in Lugano, Switzerland,
on September 27, 1914.—Ed.


[2]


The
Copenhagen Conference of Socialists in neutral countries (Sweden,
Norway, Denmark and Holland) was held on January 17–18, 1915 for the
purpose of restoring the Second International. The conference resolved to
appeal, through the parliamentary representatives of the Socialist Parties
in the neutral countries, to their governments to act as intermediaries
between the belligerent powers and secure the cessation of the war.—Ed.


[3]


The
International Socialist Women’s Conference on the attitude to be
taken towards the war was held in Berne, Switzerland, on March 26–28, 1915.
The conference was convened on the initiative of the women’s
organisations connected with the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. in
conjunction with Clara Zetkin, the leader of the international
women’s movement. Twenty-five delegates were present at the
conference, representing England, Germany, France, Holland, Switzerland,
Italy, Russia and Poland. Among the delegates from Russia were N.K.
Krupskaya and Inessa Armand.
A report of the proceedings of the International
Socialist Women’s Conference was published as a supplement to the
newspaper Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 42, of June 1, 1915.—Ed.


[4]


The
International Socialist Youth Conference on the attitude to be taken
towards the war was held in Berne, Switzerland, on April 4-6, 1915.
Representatives were present from youth organisations of ten countries:
Russia, Norway, Holland, Switzerland, Bulgaria, Germany, Poland, Italy,
Denmark and Sweden. The conference decided to celebrate International Youth
Day every year and elected an international Bureau of Socialist Youth
which, in conformity with the conference’s decision, began to publish
the magazine Jugend-lnternationale (Youth International),
to which Lenin and Karl Liebknecht contributed.—Ed.


[5]


The
Independent Labour Party was formed in 1893 under such leaders as
James Keir Hardie and Ramsay MacDonald. It claimed to be politically
independent of the bourgeois parties; actually it was “independent of
Socialism, but dependent upon liberalism” (Lenin). At the beginning
of the imperialist world war (1914–18) the Independent Labour Party issued
a manifesto against the war on August 13, 1914, but later, at the London
Conference of Entente Socialists in February 1915, its representatives
supported the social-chauvinist resolution adopted by that conference. From
that time onward, the I.L.P. leaders, under cover of pacifist phrases,
adopted a social-chauvinist position. With the formation of the Communist
International in 1919, the I.L.P. leaders, yielding to the pressure of the
rank and file, which had swung to the left, resolved to withdraw from the
Second International. In 1921, the I.L.P. joined the so-called
Two-and-a-Half International, and after its collapse re-affiliated to the
Second International.—Ed.


[6]


Tesnyaki—the revolutionary Social-Democratic Labour Party
of Bulgaria, was formed in 1903 after a breakaway from the
Social-Democratic Party. Dimitr Blagoyev, founder and leader of the
Tesnyaki, was succeeded by his followers Georgi Dimitrov and Vasil Kolarov.
During 1914–18, the Tesnyaki opposed the imperialist war. In 1919 it
affiliated to the Communist International and formed the Communist Party of
Bulgaria.—Ed.


[7]


The
British Socialist Party was formed in 1911. It conducted Marxist
propaganda and agitation and was described by Lenin as “not
opportunist,” and as “really independent of the
Liberals.” Its small membership and isolation from the masses lent
the party a somewhat sectarian character.
During the imperialist world war (1914–18), two trends
were revealed in the party: one openly social-chauvinist, headed by Henry
Hyndman, and the other internationalist, headed by Albert Inkpin and
others. In April 1916 a split took place. Hyndman and his supporters found
themselves in the minority and withdrew from the party. From that moment
the internationalists assumed the leadership of the British Socialist
Party, which later initiated the formation of the Communist Party of Great
Britain in 1920.—Ed.


[8]


The Tribunists—a Left group in the Social-Democratic Labour Party
of Holland which in 1907 published the newspaper De
Tribune. In 1909, the Tribunists were expelled from the
Social-Democratic Labour Party of Holland and organised an independent
party (the Social-Democratic Party of Holland). The Tribunists were not a
consistently revolutionary party, but they represented the Left wing of the
working-class movement of Holland.
In 1918 the Tribunists formed the Communist Party of
Holland. From 1909, De Tribune was the organ of the
Social-Democratic Party of Holland, and from 1918 it was the organ of the
Communist Party. From the beginning of the 30s to 1940 it came out under
the title of Folksdagblad (The People’s Daily).—Ed.
 

 
 

Classes and Parties in Russia

|

The History of the Split and the Present State of Social-Democracy in Russia

 
   






<
  backward
     
Contents
     
forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





Updated:   March 30, 2005







==========

## The
  History of the Split









Lenin: 1915/s+w: The History of the Split and the Present State of Social-Democracy in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Socialism and War
The Attitude of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Towards the War



 
Chapter IV
The History of the Split and the Present State of
Social-Democracy in Russia
The above-described tactics of the R.S.D.L.P. in relation to
the war are the inevitable result of the thirty years’ development of
Social-Democracy in Russia. These tactics, and the present state of
Social-Democracy in our country, cannot be properly understood unless one
ponders over the history of our Party. That is why we must here too remind
the reader about the major facts in this history.
As an ideological trend, Social-Democracy arose in 1883, when
Social-Democratic views applied to Russia were for the first time
systematically expounded abroad by the Emancipation of Labour Group. Until
the beginning of the nineties, Social-Democracy remained an ideological
trend with no connection with the mass working-class movement in Russia. At
the beginning of the nineties, the upswing of the social movement, the
unrest and strike movement among the workers, transformed Social-Democracy
into an active political force inseparably connected with the struggle (both
economic and political) of the working class. And from that very moment
Social-Democracy began to split into “Economists” and
“Iskra-ists.”

 


The “Economists” and the old Iskra (1894–1903)

“Economism” was an opportunist trend in Russian
Social-Democracy. Its political essence was summed up in the programme:
“for the workers – the economic struggle; for the liberals
– the political struggle.” Its chief theoretical prop was
so-called “legal Marxism” or “Struveism” which
“recognised” a “Marxism“ that was completely purged
of every scrap of revolutionary spirit and was adapted to the requirements
of the liberal bourgeoisie. On the plea that the masses of the workers in
Russia were immature, and wishing to “march with the masses,”
the “Economists“ restricted the tasks and scope of the
working-class movement to the economic struggle and political support for
liberalism, and did not set themselves independent political or any
revolutionary tasks.
 
The old
Iskra[1]

(1900–1903) waged a victorious struggle
against “Economism” for the principles of revolutionary
Social-Democracy. The entire flower of the class-conscious proletariat
took the side of Iskra. For a number of years before the
revolution Social-Democracy advocated the most consistent and
uncompromising programme. Both the class struggle and the action of the
masses during the 1905 revolution confirmed the correctness of this
programme. The “Economists” adapted themselves to the
backwardness of the masses. Iskra trained the vanguard of
the workers that was capable of leading the masses forward. The arguments
at present advanced by the social-chauvinists (that it is necessary to
reckon with the masses, that imperialism is progressive, about the
“illusions” harboured by revolutionaries, etc.), had all been
advanced by the Economists. The opportunist alteration of Marxism to the
“Struveist” style became known to Social-Democracy in Russia
twenty years ago.

 

Menshevism and Bolshevism (1903–1908)
The epoch of bourgeois-democratic revolution gave rise to a
new struggle between trends in Social-Democracy that was the direct
continuation of the preceding struggle. “Economism” changed into
“Menshevism.” The championing of the revolutionary tactics of
the old Iskra gave rise to “Bolshevism.”
In the turbulent years of 1905–1907, Menshevism was an opportunist trend
backed by the bourgeois liberals, and carded liberal-bourgeois trends into
the working-class movement. Adaptation of the working-class struggle to
liberalism – such was its substance. Bolshevism, on the contrary, set
the Social-Democratic workers the task of rousing the democratic peasantry
for the revolutionary struggle despite the vacillation and treachery of
liberalism. And the masses of the workers, as the Mensheviks themselves
admitted more than once, marched with the Bolsheviks during the revolution
in all the biggest actions.
The 1905 revolution tested, strengthened, deepened and steeled the
uncompromisingly revolutionary Social-Democratic tactics in Russia. The open
actions of classes and parties repeatedly disclosed the connection between
Social-Democratic opportunism (“Menshevism”) and liberalism.

 

 
Marxism and Liquidationism (1908–1914)
The counter-revolutionary epoch again, in an entirely new
form, placed the question of the opportunist and revolutionary tactics of
Social-Democracy on the order of the day. The chief current of Menshevism,
in spite of the protests of many of its best representatives, gave rise to
the trend of liquidationism, renunciation of the struggle for a new
revolution in Russia, renunciation of secret organisation and activity,
contempt for and ridicule of the “underground,” of the slogan of
a republic, etc. The group of legal writers for the magazine Nasha
Zarya (Messrs. Potresov, Cherevanin, and others) constituted a
nucleus, independent of the old Social-Democratic Party, which in a thousand
ways was supported, boosted and nursed by the liberal bourgeoisie of Russia
which wanted to wean the workers from the revolutionary struggle.
This group of opportunists was expelled from the Party by the January
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.,
1912,[2]

which restored the Party in spite of the furious
resistance of a number of groups and coteries abroad. For more than two
years (beginning of 1912 to the middle of 1914) a stubborn struggle raged
between the two Social-Democratic parties: the Central Committee that was
elected in January 1912 and the “Organisation Committee” which
refused to recognise the January Conference and wanted to restore the Party
in a different way, by maintaining unity with the Nasha
Zarya group. A stubborn struggle raged between the two daily
workers’ newspapers (Pravda and
Luch[3]

and their
successors), and between the two Social-Democratic groups in the Fourth
State Duma (the R.S.D.L. group of Pravdists, or Marxists, and the
“Social-Democratic group” of the Liquidators headed by
Chkheidze).
Championing loyalty to the Party’s revolutionary principles,
fostering the incipient revival of the working-class movement (especially
after the spring of 1911), combining underground with open organisation,
press and agitation, the Pravdists raffled around themselves the
overwhelming majority of the class-conscious working class, whereas the
Liquidators – who as a political force operated

    

exclusively though the
Nasha Zarya group – leaned on the all-round support
of the liberal-bourgeois elements.
The open financial contributions of workers’ groups to the
newspapers of the two parties, which was at that time a form of
Social-Democratic membership dues adapted to Russian conditions
(and the only one legally possible and freely verifiable by all), strikingly
confirmed the proletarian source of the strength and influence of the
Pravdists (Marxists) and the bourgeois-liberal source of that of the
Liquidators (and their “O.C.”). Here are brief figures of these
contributions, which are given in full in the book Marxism and

Liquidationism[4]

and in an abbreviated form in the German
Social-Democratic newspaper The Leipzig People’s

Paper[5]

of July 21, 1914.
Number and amounts of contributions to the daily St. Petersburg
newspapers, Marxist (Pravdist) and liquidationist, from January 1 to May 13,
1914:




Pravdist

Liquidationist


Number ofcontributions

Amountin rbls.

Number ofcontributions

Amountin rbls.


From workers’ groups

2,873

18,934

671

5,296


From non-workers’ groups

   713

  2,650

453

6,760


Thus, by 1914, our Party had united four-fifths of the
class-conscious workers of Russia around revolutionary Social-Democratic
tactics. For the whole of 1913 the Pravdists received contributions from
2,181 workers’ groups and the Liquidators from 661. The figures from
January 1, 1913 to May 13, 1914 will be: 5,054 contributions from
workers’ groups for the Pravdists (that is, for our Party), and
,1,332, i.e., 20.8 per cent, for the liquidators.

 

Marxism and Social-Chauvinism (1914–1915)
The great European war of 1914–1915 gave all the European and
also the Russian Social-Democrats the opportunity to test their tactics on a
crisis of world-wide dimensions. The reactionary, predatory and slave-owner
character of the war stands out in immeasurably more striking relief in the
case of tsarism than it does in the

    

case of the other
governments. Nevertheless, the major group of Liquidators (the only group
besides ours which has serious influence in Russia thanks to its liberal
connections) turned towards social-chauvinism! Enjoying a monopoly of
legality for a fairly long period, this Nasha Zarya group
conducted propaganda among the masses in favour of “non-resistance to
the war,” of wishing for the victory of the triple (now quadruple)
entente, accusing German imperialism of “super-diabolical sins,”
etc. Plekhanov, who, since 1903, has repeatedly given examples of his
extreme political spinelessness and desertion to opportunism, took up still
more pronouncedly the very position that is so highly praised by the whole
of the bourgeois press of Russia. Plekhanov has sunk so low as to declare
that tsarism is waging a just war, and to publish an interview in the
government newspapers in Italy urging her to enter the war!!
The correctness of our appraisal of liquidationism and of the expulsion
of the major group of liquidators from our Party is thus fully
confirmed. The real programme of the Liquidators and the real significance
of their trend now constitute not only opportunism in general, but defence
of the imperialist privileges and advantages of the Great-Russian landlords
and bourgeoisie. It is a national-liberal labour policy trend. It
is an alliance of a section of the radical petty bourgeoisie and a tiny
handful of privileged workers with “their” national bourgeoisie
against the mass of the proletariat.

 

The Present State of Affairs in Russian Social-Democracy
As we have already said, neither the Liquidators, nor a
number of groups abroad (those of Plekhanov, Alexinsky. Trotsky and others),
nor the so-called “national” (i.e., non-Great Russian)
Social-Democrats have recognised our Conference of January 1911. Among the
innumerable epithets hurled against us, those most often repeated were
“usurpers” and “splitters.” We answered by quoting
exact and objectively verifiable figures showing that our Party united
four-fifths of the class-conscious workers in Russia. This is no small
figure considering the

    

difficulties of underground activities in a counter-revolutionary epoch.
If “unity” were possible in Russia on the basis of
Social-Democratic tactics without expelling the Nasha Zarya
group, why have not our numerous opponents brought it about even among
themselves? No less than three and a half years have passed since
January 1912, and during the whole of this time our opponents, much as they
have desired to do so, have failed to form a Social-Democratic party in
opposition to us. This fact is our Party’s best defence.
The entire history of the Social-Democratic groups that are fighting our
Party is a history of collapse and disintegration. In March 1912, all of
them without exception “united” in abusing us. But already in
August 1912, when the so-called “August bloc” was formed against
it, disintegration began among them. Some of the groups fell away from
them. They could not form a party and a Central Committee. They set up only
an Organisation Committee “for the purpose of restoring
unity.” Actually, this O.C. turned out to be a feeble cover for the
liquidationist group in Russia. During the whole period of the tremendous
upswing of the working-class movement in Russia and of the mass strikes of
1912–1914, the only group in the entire August bloc that conducted
activities among the masses was the Nasha Zarya group,
whose strength lay in its liberal connections. And at the beginning of 1914,
the Lettish Social-Democrats officially withdrew from the “August
bloc” (the Polish Social-Democrats did not join it), while Trotsky,
one of the leaders of the bloc, left it unofficially, having again formed
his own separate group. In July 1914, at the conference in Brussels, with
the participation of the Executive Committee of the I.S.B., Kautsky and
Vandervelde, the so-called “Brussels bloc” was formed against
us, which the Letts did not join, and from which the Polish opposition
Social-Democrats forthwith withdrew. When the War broke out this bloc
collapsed. Nasha Zarya, Plekhanov, Alexinsky and
An,[6]

the leader of the
Caucasian Social-Democrats, became open social-chauvinists, preaching the
desirability of Germany’s defeat. The

    

O.C. and the Bund defended the
social-chauvinists and the principles of social-chauvinism. The Chkheidze
Duma group, although it voted against the war credits (in Russia, even the
bourgeois democrats, the Trudoviki, voted against them), remained
Nasha Zarya’s faithful ally. Our extreme
social-chauvinists, Plekhanov, Alexinsky and Co., were quite pleased with
the Chkheidze group. In Paris, the newspaper Nashe Slovo
(formerly Golos) was started, with the participation mainly
of Martov and Trotsky, who wanted to combine platonic defence of
internationalism with the absolute demand for unity with Nasha
Zarya, the O.C. or the Chkheidze group. After 150 issues of this
newspaper, it was itself forced to admit its disintegration: one section of
the editorial board gravitated towards out Party, Martov remained faithful
to the O.C. which publicly censured Nashe Slovo for its
“anarchism” (just as the opportunists in Germany, David and Co.,
Internationale
Konespondenz,[7]

Legien and Co. charge Comrade Liebknecht with
anarchism); Trotsky announced his rupture with the O.C., but wanted to go
with the Chkheidze group. Here are the programme and tactics of the
Chkheidze group, enunciated by one of its leaders. In No.5, 1915 of
Sovremenny
Mir[8]

,

magazine of the Plekhanov and Alexinsky trend,
Chkhenkeli writes: “To say that German Social-Democracy was in a
position to prevent its country from going to war but failed to do so would
mean either secretly wishing that it should not only have breathed its last
breath on the barricades but also have had its fatherland breathe it, last,
or looking at nearby things through an anarchist
telescope.”[9]

These few lines express the sum and substance of social-chauvinism: both
the justification on principle of the “defence of the
fatherland” idea and mockery – with the permission of the
military censors – at the preaching and preparation of revolution. It
is not at all a question as to whether German Social-Democracy

    

was or was
not in a position to prevent war, nor whether, in general, revolutionaries
can guarantee the success of a revolution. The question is: should we behave
like Socialists or really “breathe our last” in the embrace of
the imperialist bourgeoisie?

 

Our Party’s Tasks
Social-Democracy in Russia arose before the
bourgeois-democratic revolution (1905) in our country and gained strength
during the revolution and counter-revolution. The backwardness of Russia
explained the extraordinary multiplicity of trends and shades of
petty-bourgeois opportunism in our country; and the influence of Marxism in
Europe and the stability of the legally existing Social-Democratic parties
before the war converted our exemplary liberals into near-admirers of the
“reasonable, “European” (non-revolutionary),
“legal” “Marxist” theory and Social-Democracy. The
working class of Russia could not build up its party otherwise than in a
resolute, thirty-year struggle against all the varieties of opportunism. The
experience of the world war, which has brought about the shameful collapse
of European opportunism and has strengthened the alliance of our
national-liberals with social-chauvinist liquidationism, still further
strengthens our conviction that our Party must continue further along the
same consistently revolutionary road.

 
Notes
 

[1]


Iskra (The Spark), founded by Lenin in 1900, was
the first all-Russian, Marxist newspaper published underground. After the
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. it became the central organ of the
Party. In speaking of the old Iskra, Lenin is referring to
Iskra from No.1 to No.51. With No.52, the Mensheviks
converted the paper into their factional organ.—Ed.


[2]


The January
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P., 1912 – this refers to the Sixth
All-Russian Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. which took place in Prague on
January 5–17, 1912. By decision of the conference the Mensheviks were
expelled from the Party, and the formal unity of the Bolsheviks and the
Mensheviks within one party was ended forever. The Prague Conference
inaugurated the Bolshevik Party.—Ed.

[3]


Luch (The Ray) – the daily newspaper of the
liquidator-Mensheviks, published legally in St. Petersburg from September
1912 to July 1913. It was maintained “by funds provided by rich
friends among the bourgeoisie” (Lenin).—Ed.

[4]


Marxism and
Liquidationism – subtitled A Collection of Articles
on the Fundamental Problems of the Present-Day Working-Class Movement. Part
II, it was published by the Party Publishing House Priboy in July
1914. It contained articles by Lenin against the Liquidators. In referring
to this book, Lenin has in mind his articles: The Working Class and the
Workers’ Press and The Workers’ Response to the
Formation of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Group in the State
Duma (see V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, 4th Russ. ed.,
Vol.XX, pp.338-45, 503-09).—Ed.


[5]


The Leipzig
People’s Paper (Leipziger Volkszeitung), organ
of the Left wing of the German Social-Democratic Party. Published daily from
1894 to 1933. For a long time Franz Mehring and Rosa Luxemburg were members
of its editorial board. From 1917 to 1922 the Leipziger
Volkszeitung was the organ of the German
“independents.” In 1922 it became the organ of the Right-wing
Social-Democrats.—Ed.


[6]


An –
N.N. Jordania, leader of the Caucasian Mensheviks.—Ed.


[7]


Internationale Korrespondenz – a weekly run
by German social-chauvinists which dealt with problems of international
politics and the working-class movement. Published in Berlin from 1914 to
1917.—Ed.

[8]


Sovremenny
Mir (The Contemporary World) – a literary, scientific
and political monthly published in St. Petersburg from 1906 to 1918. The
Mensheviks, including G.V. Plekhanov, were frequent contributors. Bolsheviks
also contributed to the magazine during the period of the bloc with
Plekhanov’s group of pro-Party Mensheviks, and at the beginning of
1914.
In March 1914, the magazine published Lenin’s
article Socialism Annihilated Once Again (see V.I. Lenin,
Collected Works, 4th Russ. ed., Vol.XX, pp.167-88). During
the imperialist world war (1914–18), it became the organ of the
social-chauvinists.—Ed.


[9]


S.M. No.5,
1915. Trotsky announced recently that he deemed it his task to raise the
prestige of the Chkheidze group in the International. No doubt Chkhenkeli
will with equal energy raise Trotsky’s prestige in the International
...—Ed.

 

 
 

The Restoration of the International

|


 
   






<
  backward
     
Contents
     
forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index





Updated:   March 30, 2005







==========

## On the Slogan for a United States of Europe





Lenin: On the Slogan for a United States of Europe







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Slogan for a United States of Europe




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 44, August 23, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 339-343.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
Charles Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

In No. 40 of Sotsial-Demokrat we reported that a
    conference of our-Party’s groups abroad had decided to defer the
    question of the “United States of Europe” slogan pending a
    discussion, in the press, on the economic aspect of the
matter.[1]

At our conference the debate on this question assumed a purely political
    character. Perhaps this was partly caused by the Central Committee’s
    Manifesto having formulated this slogan as a forthright political one
    (“the immediate political slogan...”, as it says
    there); not only did it advance the slogan of a republican United States of
    Europe, but expressly emphasised that this slogan is meaningless and false
    “without the revolutionary overthrow of the German, Austrian and
    Russian monarchies”.

It would be quite wrong to object to such a presentation of the question
    within the limits of a political appraisal of this
    slogan—e.g., to argue that it obscures or weakens, etc., the slogan of
    a socialist revolution. Political changes of a truly democratic nature, and
    especially political revolutions, can under no circumstances whatsoever
    either obscure or weaken the slogan of a socialist revolution. On the
    contrary, they always bring it closer, extend its basis, and draw new
    sections of the petty bourgeoisie and the semi-proletarian masses into the
    socialist struggle. On the other hand, political revolutions are inevitable
    in the course of the socialist revolution, which should not be regarded as a
    single act, but as a period of turbulent political and

    

      economic upheavals,
    the most intense class struggle, civil war, revolutions, and
    counter-revolutions.

But while the slogan of a republican United States of Europe—if
    accompanied by the revolutionary overthrow of the three most reactionary
    monarchies in Europe, headed by the Russian—is quite invulnerable as a
    political slogan, there still remains the highly important question of its
    economic content and significance. From the standpoint of the economic
    conditions of imperialism—i.e., the export of capital and the
    division of the world by the “advanced” and
    “civilised” colonial powers—a United States of Europe,
    under capitalism, is either impossible or reactionary.

Capital has become international and monopolist. The world has been
    carved up by a handful of Great Powers, i.e., powers successful in the great
    plunder and oppression of nations. The four Great Powers of
    Europe—Britain, France, Russia and Germany, with an aggregate
    population of between 250,000,000 and 300,000,000, and an area of about
    7,000,000 square kilometres—possess colonies with a population of
    almost 500 million (494,500,000) and an area of 64,600,000 square
    kilometres, i.e., almost half the surface of the globe (133,000,000 square
    kilometres, exclusive of Arctic and Antarctic regions). Add to this the
    three Asian states—China, Turkey and Persia, now being rent piecemeal
    by thugs that are waging a war of “liberation”, namely, Japan,
    Russia, Britain and France. Those three Asian states, which may be called
    semi-colonies (in reality they are now 90 per cent colonies), have a total
    population of 360,000,000 and an area of 14,500,000 square kilometres
    (almost one and a half times the area of all Europe).

Furthermore, Britain, France and Germany have invested capital abroad to
    the value of no less than 70,000 million rubles. The business of securing
    “legitimate” profits from this tidy sum—these exceed 3,000
    million rubles annually—committees of the millionaires, known as
    governments, which are equipped with armies and navies and which provide the
    sons and brothers of the millionaires with jobs in the colonies and
    semi-colonies as viceroys, consuls, ambassadors, officials of all kinds,
    clergymen, and other leeches.

 

That is how the plunder of about a thousand million of the earth’s
    population by a handful of Great Powers is organised in the epoch of the
    highest development of capitalism. No other organisation is possible under
    capitalism. Renounce colonies, “spheres of influence”, and the
    export of capital? To think that it is possible means coming down to the
    level of some snivelling parson who every Sunday preaches to the rich on the
    lofty principles of Christianity and advises them to give the poor, well, if
    not millions, at least several hundred rubles yearly.

A United States of Europe under capitalism is tantamount to an agreement
    on the partition of colonies. Under capitalism, however, no other basis and
    no other principle of division are possible except force. A
    multi-millionaire cannot share the “national income” of a
    capitalist country with anyone otherwise than “in proportion to the
    capital invested” (with a bonus thrown in, so that the biggest capital
    may receive more than its share). Capitalism is private ownership of the
    means of production, and anarchy in production. To advocate a
    “just” division of income on such a basis is sheer Proudhonism,
    stupid philistinism. No division can be effected otherwise than in
    “proportion to strength”, and strength changes with the course
    of economic development. Following 1871, the rate of Germany’s
    accession of strength was three or four times as rapid as that of Britain
    and France, and of Japan about ten times as rapid as Russia’s. There
    is and there can be no other way of testing the real might of a capitalist
    state than by war. War does not contradict the fundamentals of private
    property—on the contrary, it is a direct and inevitable outcome of
    those fundamentals. Under capitalism the smooth economic growth of
    individual enterprises or individual states is impossible. Under capitalism,
    there are no other means of restoring the periodically disturbed equilibrium
    than crises in industry and wars in politics.

Of course, temporary agreements are possible between capitalists
    and between states. In this sense a United States of Europe is possible as
    an agreement between the European capitalists ... but to what end?
    Only for the purpose of jointly suppressing socialism in Europe, of jointly
    protecting colonial booty against Japan and America, who

    

      have been
    badly done out of their share by the present partition of colonies, and the
    increase of whose might during the last fifty years has been immeasurably
    more rapid than that of backward and monarchist Europe, now turning
    senile. Compared with the United States of America, Europe as a whole
    denotes economic stagnation. On the present economic basis, i.e., under
    capitalism, a United States of Europe would signify an organisation of
    reaction to retard America’s more rapid development. The times when
    the cause of democracy and socialism was associated only with Europe alone
    have gone for ever.

A United States of the World (not of Europe alone) is the state form of
    the unification and freedom of nations which we associate with
    socialism—about the total disappearance of the state, including the
    democratic. As a separate slogan, however, the slogan of a United States of
    the World would hardly be a correct one, first, because it merges with
    socialism; second, because it may be wrongly interpreted to mean that the
    victory of socialism in a single country is impossible, and it may also
    create misconceptions as to the relations of such a country to the
    others.

Uneven economic and political development is an absolute law of
    capitalism. Hence, the victory of socialism is possible first in several or
    even in one capitalist country alone. After expropriating the capitalists
    and organising their own socialist production, the victorious proletariat of
    that country will arise against the rest of the world—the capitalist
    world—attracting to its cause the oppressed classes of other
    countries, stirring uprisings in those countries against the capitalists,
    and in case of need using even armed force against the exploiting classes
    and their states. The political form of a society wherein the proletariat is
    victorious in overthrowing the bourgeoisie will be a democratic republic,
    which will more and more concentrate the forces of the proletariat of a
    given nation or nations, in the struggle against states that have not yet
    gone over to socialism. The abolition of classes is impossible without a
    dictatorship of the oppressed class, of the proletariat. A free union of
    nations in socialism is impossible without a more or less prolonged and
    stubborn

    

      struggle of the socialist republics against the backward
    states.

It is for these reasons and after repeated discussions at the conference
    of R,S.D.L.P. groups abroad, and following that conference, that the Central
    Organ’s editors have come to the conclusion that the slogan for a
    United States of Europe is an erroneous one.


 
Notes
 

[1]
See page 158 of this volume.—Ed.

 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## On the Slogan for a United States of Europe (Editorial Comment)









Lenin: On the Slogan for a United States of Europe (Editorial Comment)







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Slogan for a United States of Europe (Editorial Comment)
Editorial Comment by Sotsial-Demokrat on the Manifesto on War Issued by the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.




Written: Written late August 1915 

Published:

      Published in the pamphlet Socialism and War, Geneva, 1915.

      Published according to the pamphlet.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      page 344.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
Charles Farrell
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The demand for a United States of Europe, as advanced by the
    Central Committee’s Manifesto, which accompanied it with a call for
    the overthrow of the monarchies in Russia, Austria, and Germany, is distinct
    from the pacifist interpretation of this slogan by Kautsky and others.

Issue No. 44 of Sotsial-Demokrat, our Party’s Central
    Organ, carries an editorial proving the economic erroneousness of the
    United States of Europe
slogan.[1]

 Either this is a demand that cannot be
    implemented under capitalism, inasmuch as it presupposes the establishment
    of a planned world economy, with a partition of colonies, spheres of
    influence, etc., among the individual countries, or else it is a reactionary
    slogan, one that signifies a temporary union of the Great Powers of Europe
    with the aim of enhancing the oppression of colonies and of plundering the
    more rapidly developing countries-Japan and America.


 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 339–43 of this volume.—Ed.

 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## The Draft Resolution of the Left Wing at Zimmerwald









Lenin: The Draft Resolution of the Left Wing at Zimmerwald







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Draft Resolution of the Left Wing at Zimmerwald




Written: Written prior to August 20 (September 2) 1915 

Published:

      First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XIV.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 345-348.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The present war has been engendered by
    imperialism. Capitalism has already achieved that highest
    stage. Society’s productive forces and the magnitudes of capital have
    outgrown the narrow limits of the individual national states. Hence the
    striving on the part of the Great Powers to enslave other nations and to
    seize colonies as sources of raw material and spheres of investment of
    capital. The whole world is merging into a single economic organism; it has
    been carved up among a handful of Great Powers. The objective conditions for
    socialism have fully matured, and the present war is a war of the
    capitalists for privileges and monopolies that might delay the downfall of
    capitalism. 
The socialists, who seek to liberate labour from the yoke of capital and
    who defend the world-wide solidarity of the workers, are struggling against
    any kind of oppression and inequality of nations. When the bourgeoisie was a
    progressive class, and the overthrow of feudalism, absolutism and oppression
    by other nations stood on the historical order of the day, the socialists,
    as invariably the most consistent and most resolute of democrats, recognised
    “defence of the fatherland” in the meaning implied by those aims,
    and in that meaning alone. Today too, should a war of the oppressed nations
    against the oppressor Great Powers break out in the east of Europe or in the
    colonies, the socialists’ sympathy would be wholly with the
    oppressed. 
The war of today, however, has been engendered by an entirely different
    historical period, in which the bourgeoisie, from a progressive class, has
    turned reactionary. With

    

      both groups of belligerents, this war is a war of
    slaveholders, and is designed to preserve and extend slavery; it is a war
    for the repartitioning of colonies, for the “right” to oppress
    other nations, for privileges and monopolies for Great-Power capital, and
    for the perpetuation of wage slavery by splitting up the workers of the
    different countries and crushing them through reaction. That is why, on the
    part of both warring groups, all talk about “defence of the
    fatherland” is deception of the people by the bourgeoisie. Neither the
    victory of any one group nor a return to the status quo can do
    anything either to protect the freedom of most countries in the world from
    imperialist oppression by a handful of Great Powers, or to ensure that the
    working class keep even its present modest cultural gains. The period of a
    relatively peaceful capitalism has passed, never to return. Imperialism has
    brought the working class unparalleled intensification of the class
    struggle, want, and unemployment, a higher cost of living, and the
    strengthening of oppression by the trusts, of militarism, and the political
    reactionaries, who are raising their heads in all countries, even the
    freest. 
In reality, the “defence of the fatherland” slogan in the
    present war is tantamount to a defence of the “right” of
    one’s “own” national bourgeoisie to oppress other nations;
    it is in fact a national liberal-labour policy, an alliance between a
    negligible section of the workers and their “own” national
    bourgeoisie, against the mass of the proletarians and the
    exploited. Socialists who pursue such a policy are in fact chauvinists,
    social-chauvinists. The policy of voting for war credits, of joining
    governments, of
Burgfrieden,[1]

and the like, is a betrayal of
    socialism. Nurtured by the conditions of the “peaceful”, period
    which has now come to an end, opportunism has now matured to a degree that
    calls for a break with socialism; it has become an open enemy to the
    proletariat’s movement for liberation. The working class cannot
    achieve its historic aims without waging a most resolute struggle against
    both forthright opportunism and social-chauvinism (the majorities in the
    Social-Democratic

    

      parties of France, Germany and Austria; Hyndman, the
    Fabians and the trade unionists in Britain; Rubanovich, Plekhanov and
    Nasha Zarya in Russia, etc.) and the so-called Centre, which has
    surrendered the Marxist stand to the chauvinists. 
Unanimously adopted by socialists of the entire world in anticipation of
    that very kind of war among the Great Powers which has now broken out, the
    Basle Manifesto of 1912 distinctly recognised the imperialist and
    reactionary nature of that war, declared it criminal for workers of one
    country to shoot at workers of another country, and proclaimed the approach
    of the proletarian revolution in connection with that very
    war. Indeed, the war is creating a revolutionary situation, is engendering
    revolutionary sentiments and unrest in the masses, is arousing in the finer
    part of the proletariat a realisation of the perniciousness of opportunism,
    and is intensifying the struggle against it. The masses’ growing
    desire for peace expresses their disappointment, the defeat of the bourgeois
    lie regarding the defence of the fatherland, and the awakening of their
    revolutionary consciousness. In utilising that temper for their
    revolutionary agitation, and not shying away in that agitation from
    considerations of the defeat of their “own” country, the
    socialists will not deceive the people with the hope that, without the
    revolutionary overthrow of the present-day governments, a possibility exists
    of a speedy democratic peace, which will be durable in some degree and will
    preclude any oppression of nations, a possibility of disarmament, etc. Only
    the social revolution of the proletariat opens the way towards peace and
    freedom for the nations. 
The imperialist war is ushering in the era of the social revolution. All
    the objective conditions of recent times have put the proletariat’s
    revolutionary mass struggle on the order of the day. It is the duty of
    socialists, while making use of every means of the working class’s
    legal struggle, to subordinate each and every of those means to this
    immediate and most important task, develop the workers’ revolutionary
    consciousness, rally them in the international revolutionary struggle,
    promote and encourage any revolutionary action, and do everything possible
    to

    

      turn the imperialist war between the peoples into a civil war of the
    oppressed classes against their oppressors, a war for the expropriation of
    the class of capitalists, for the conquest of political power by the
    proletariat, and the realisation of socialism.


 
Notes
 

[1]
A class
    truce.—Ed.

 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## The Voice of an Honest French Socialist









Lenin: The Voice of an Honest French Socialist







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Voice of an Honest French Socialist




Published:
Kommunist No. 1–2, 1915.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the text in the journal Kommunist.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 349-356.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

In French-speaking Switzerland, where Francophile chauvinism
    is raging with only a little less intensity than in France, the voice of an
    honest socialist has been heard. In our despicable times this is quite an
    event. We must pay all the more attention to this voice because in this
    instance we have here to do with a socialist of typically French (or rather
    Romance, because the Italians, for instance, are the same) temperament and
    frame of mind.

We are referring to a little pamphlet by Paul Golay, the editor of a
    minor socialist paper published in Lausanne. It was in that city that on
    March 11, 1915, the author delivered a lecture on the subject: “The
    Socialism That Is Dying and the Socialism That Must Be Reborn”, the
    contents of which he later published
separately.[1]


“On August 1, 1914, war broke out. During the weeks preceding this now
    famous date, and after it, millions of people were waiting.” That is
    how the author begins. Millions of people were waiting, he says, to see
    whether the resolutions and the declarations of the leaders of socialism
    would not lead “to a mighty uprising, whose whirlwind would sweep away
    the criminal governments”. However, the expectations of millions were
    thwarted. “We attempted,” says Golay, “in a comradely
    fashion” to exonerate the socialists by referring to the
    “lightning suddenness of the war”, and to the lack of
    information, but these excuses did not satisfy us. “We felt ill at
    ease, as if our conscience were steeped in the filthy waters of equivocation
    and lies.” From

    

      this the reader will have concluded that Golay is
      sincere, a quality almost extraordinary in our times.

Golay recalls the “revolutionary traditions” of the
    proletariat. Perfectly aware of the fact that “for each situation
    fitting action is required”, he reminds us that “for exceptional
    situations exceptional measures are necessary. Aux grands maux les
    grands
remèdes”.[2]

He recalls “congress
    decisions” “addressed directly to the masses and urging them to
    start revolutionary and insurrectionary action”. There come excerpts
    from the Stuttgart and Basle resolutions. The author emphasises that
    “these various resolutions do not contain any argument as to a
    defensive or offensive war; consequently they do not propose any special
    nationalist tactics to supersede the generally accepted fundamental
    principles”.

After reading this, the reader sees that Golay is not only a sincere
    socialist, but also an honest, convinced socialist, a quality quite
    exceptional among leaders of the Second International!

“The proletariat was congratulated by military
      commanders, and the bourgeois press warmly praised the resurrection of what
      it called ‘the soul of the nation’. This resurrection has cost
      us three million corpses.

“And yet never has a workers’ organisation had
      such a large number of dues-paying members, never has there been such an
      abundance of parliamentarians, such a splendidly organised press. And never
      has there been a more hideous cause against which one should have risen
      up.

“In the circumstances so tragic, when the lives of
      millions are at stake, all revolutionary actions are not only permissible,
      but legitimate. They are more than legitimate—they are sacred. The
      imperative duty of the proletariat demanded an attempt to achieve the
      impossible so as to save our generation from events which are turning Europe
      into a shambles.

“There have been no energetic steps, no attempts at
      a revolt, nothing leading to an uprising. . . .


“Our opponents cry out about the collapse of socialism. They
      are too hasty. Still, who will dare assert that they are wrong in all
      respects? What is dying at this hour is not socialism in general, but a
      brand of socialism, a saccharine socialism without the spirit of idealism
      and without passion, with the manners of a governmental office-holder, and
      with the paunch of a respectable paterfamilias ; a socialism
      without audacity or frenzy, a devotee of statistics, up to its neck in
      amicable agreements with capitalism; a socialism preoccupied only with

    

      reforms, a socialism that has sold its birthright for a mess of pottage; a
      socialism that controls people’s impatience in order to aid the
      bourgeoisie—a sort of automatic brake on audacious proletarian
      action.

“This socialism, which threatens to contaminate the
      entire International, is in certain measure responsible for the impotence we
      are reproached with.” 

Elsewhere in the pamphlet Golay is outspoken about “reformist
      socialism” and “opportunism” as a distortion of
      socialism.

In referring to that distortion, recognising the “general
      responsibility” of the proletariat of all the belligerent
      countries, and emphasising that “this responsibility falls on the
      heads of the leaders whom the masses trusted and from whom they expected a
      slogan”, Golay correctly takes as an example German socialism, which
      was “the best organised, best formed, the most indoctrinated”,
      to show “its numerical strength and its revolutionary
      feebleness”.


“Inspired with revolutionary fervour, German
      Social-Democracy could have confronted militarist undertakings with a
      resistance sufficiently definite and stubborn to make the proletariat of the
      other countries of central Europe follow it on this, the only road to
      salvation. . . .

“German socialism enjoyed great influence in the
      International. It could have done more than all other parties. The greatest
      effort was expected of it. But numbers are nothing if individual energy is
      paralysed by too rigorous discipline and if the ‘leaders’
      utilise . . . their influence to achieve the least effort. [Much as the
      second part of the sentence is correct, the first is wrong: discipline is a
      splendid and necessary thing, for instance, the discipline of a party that
      expels opportunists and opponents of revolutionary action.] The German
      proletariat, owing to its responsible leaders, obeyed the call of the
      military camarilla . . . the other sections of the International took fright
      and acted likewise; in France, two socialists found it necessary to join a
      bourgeois government! Thus, several months after the solemn declaration at a
      congress that socialists considered it a crime to shoot at each other,
      millions of workers were called to the colours and began to commit that
      crime with a persistency and a zeal which won them repeated tribute from the
      capitalist bourgeoisie and governments.”
    

Golay, however, does not confine himself to mercilessly branding
      “the socialism that is dying”. He also manifests a full
      understanding of the cause of that dying, and the kind of socialism that
      should supersede the dying one. “The working masses in every
      country,” he writes, “submit

    

      in some measure to the influence of
      ideas current in bourgeois circles.” “When, under the name of
      revisionism, Bernstein formulated a kind of democratic
      reformism,” he
      writes, “Kautsky shattered him with the aid of relevant
      facts.” “But when appearances had been preserved, the party
      nevertheless continued its Realpolitik. The Social-Democratic Party
      became what it is today. An excellent organisation. A powerful body, from
      which the soul has gone.” Not only German Social-Democracy, but all
      sections of the International reveal the same tendencies. “The growing
      number of officials” leads to certain consequences; attention is
      focussed only on the regular payment of membership dues; strikes are looked
      upon as “manifestations aiming at securing better conditions of
      agreement” with the capitalists. It becomes customary to link the
      interests of the workers with those of the capitalists; “to
      subordinate the fate of the workers to that of capitalism itself”,
      “to wish an intensive development of one’s ‘own’
      ‘national’ industry to the detriment of foreign
      industry”.

In one of his articles, R. Schmiedt, a Reichstag deputy, says that
      regulation of working conditions by the trade unions is also advantageous to
      the capitalists, since it “introduces order and stability in economic
      life” and since it “makes the capitalists’ calculations
      easier, and counteracts unfair competition”.
    

In quoting these words, Golay exclaims:

“It appears that the trade union movement must
      consider it an honour to make the capitalist profits more stable! It is
      apparently the aim of socialism to demand, within the framework of
      capitalist society, the maximum of advantages compatible with the existence
      of the capitalist system itself. In that case, we have here a renunciation
      of all principles. The proletariat strives, not to consolidate the
      capitalist regime, not to obtain minimal conditions for hired labour, but to
      eliminate the system of private property and to destroy the system of hired
      labour.... 
“The secretaries of large organisations become
      important personages. In the political movement, deputies, men of letters,
      scientists, lawyers, all those who, together with their science, bring with
      themselves certain personal ambitions, wield an influence which is at times
      dangerous.

“The powerful organisation of the trade unions and
      their substantial treasuries have developed a corporative spirit among their
      members. One of the negative aspects of the trade union movement, which is
      reformist in essence, is that the condition of various categories of

    

      wage
      workers is improved by placing one above the other. This destroys their
      fundamental unity and creates among the most favoured an apprehension which
      compels them sometimes to fear a ‘movement’ that might undermine
      their condition, their treasury and their balance sheet. Thus a certain
      division between the various categories of the proletariat comes into
      existence, categories artificially created by the trade union movement
      itself.” 

This, of course, is no argument against strong organisations, says the
      author, obviously to counter arguments from a certain kind of
      “critic”. This, he says, only proves that organisations must
      have a “soul”, must have “enthusiasm”.


“What are the chief characteristics that must distinguish the
      socialism of tomorrow? It will be international, intransigent, and
      rebellious.” 
“Intransigence is a force,” Golay says with good reason,
      inviting the reader to cast a glance at the “history of
      doctrines”. “When did they exercise an influence? When they were
      tamed by the authorities, or when they remained intransigent? When did
      Christianity lose its value? Was it not on the day Constantine promised it
      revenues and offered it, not persecution and executions but the gold braided
      vestment of Court servants?...

“A French philosopher has said: ‘Dead ideas are those that
      appear in elegant garments, with no asperity or daring. They are dead
      because they are put into general circulation and become part of the
      ordinary intellectual baggage of the great army of philistines. Strong ideas
      are those that shock and scandalise, evoke indignation, anger, and animosity
      in some, and enthusiasm in others.’” The author finds it
      necessary to call this truth to the minds of present-day socialists, among
      whom he very often finds an absence of any kind of “ardent
      convictions”: “They believe in nothing,” he says, “neither
      in reforms that are belated, nor in a revolution that has not yet
      arrived.” 
Intransigence, a readiness for rebellion, the author says, “lead,
      not to dreaminess but to action. A socialist will neglect no form of
      action. He will find new ones according to the demands and the circumstances
      of the moment. . . . He demands immediate reforms; he gets them, not by
      bickering with the opponent, but he takes them by force, as a concession by
      a bourgeoisie intimidated by the enthusiasm and audacity of the
      masses.”
    
 

After the most bare-faced vulgarising of Marxism and degrading of
      socialism by Plekhanov, Kautsky, and Co., Golay’s pamphlet is really
      refreshing. However, the two following shortcomings must be noted.

First, Golay, in common with most socialists in the Romance countries,
      not excluding the present-day Guesdists, pays insufficient attention to
      “doctrine”, i.e., to the theory of socialism. He has a
      certain prejudice against Marxism, which can be explained, though not
      justified, by the present prevalence of the most vicious caricature of
      Marxism in the writings of Kautsky, in Die Neue Zeit, and among the
      Germans in general. A man like Golay, who has recognised the necessity of
      the death of reformist socialism and the revival of a
      revolutionary, “rebellious” socialism, i.e., one who understands
      the necessity of an uprising, who advocates it, and is capable of seriously
      preparing himself and others for it, is in deed a thousand times
      closer to Marxism than those gentlemen who know the
      “tests” by
      heart but are now busy (for instance, in Die Neue Zeit) justifying
      social-chauvinism of every kind, including that which says that one must at
      present “make peace” with the chauvinist Vorstand and
      “forget the past”.

Much as Golay’s disdain for Marxism is explainable and much as he
      can be cleared of the blame, which can be placed on the moribund or
      dead trend of the French Marxists (Guesdists), the blame is still
      there. The world’s greatest movement for liberation of the oppressed
      class, the most revolutionary class in history, is impossible without a
      revolutionary theory. That theory cannot be thought up. It grows
out of the sum total of the revolutionary experience and the
      revolutionary thinking of all countries in the world. Such a theory has
developed since the second half of the nineteenth century. It is known
      as Marxism. One cannot be a socialist, a revolutionary Social-Democrat,
      without participating, in the measure of one’s powers, in developing
      and applying that theory, and without waging a ruthless struggle today
      against the mutilation of this theory by Plekhanov, Kautsky, and Co.

Inattention to theory has led Golay to make a number of erroneous or
      hasty attacks against, for instance, centralism or discipline in general, or
      against “historical materialism”,

    

      which, the author alleges, is
      not sufficiently “idealistic”, etc. Hence also a remarkable lack
      of completeness in the question of slogans. For instance, the demand that
      socialism should become “rebellious” is full of profound content
      and is the sole correct thought, without which all talk about
      internationalism, the revolutionary spirit, and Marxism is sheer stupidity,
      and, as often as not, hypocrisy. However, this idea, that of civil war,
      should have been developed, and made the pivot of tactics, whereas Golay
      confines himself to stating it. This is a lot for our days, but it
      is insufficient from the standpoint of the demands of the
      proletariat’s revolutionary struggle. For instance, Golay’s
      treatment of the problem of revolution as a reply to war is, if one may put
      it so, far too narrow. He fails to consider the fact that, though a
      revolutionary reply to the war has not been given, yet, the war
      itself has begun to teach, and is teaching, the masses the lesson of
      revolution, by creating a revolutionary situation and by expanding and
      deepening it.

Golay’s second shortcoming is best illustrated by the following
      argument in his pamphlet:

“We blame nobody. To be reborn, the International
      needs a fraternal spirit to animate the various sections; but it is
      permissible to affirm that, in the sight of the great task placed before it
      by the capitalist bourgeoisie in July and August 1914, reformist,
      centralist[?] and hierarchical socialism cut a poor figure.”
    


      “We blame nobody. . . .” This is where you are mistaken,
      Comrade Golay! You yourself have admitted that “the socialism that
      is dying” is tied up to bourgeois ideas (which means that it is
      nurtured and supported by the bourgeoisie), to a certain ideological
      current in socialism (“reformism”), to the interests and the
      specific position of certain strata (parliamentarians, officials,
      intellectuals, some of the better-off sections or groups of workers),
      etc. From this follows an inevitable conclusion, which you fail
      to draw. Individuals “die” what is called a natural death;
      ideological and political trends, however, cannot die in that
way. Just as the bourgeoisie will not die until it is overthrown, a
      trend nurtured and supported by the bourgeoisie, and expressing the
      interests of a small group of intellectuals and members of the labour
      aristocracy that have joined hands

    

      with the bourgeoisie, will not die
      unless it is “killed”, i.e., overthrown, deprived of
      all influence on the socialist proletariat. This trend is strong
      in its links with the bourgeoisie. Because of the objective conditions of
      the “peaceful” period of 1871-1914, it has become a kind of
      commanding, parasitic stratum in the working-class movement.

In such conditions, it is our duty, not only to “blame”, but
      to ring the tocsin, ruthlessly unmask, overthrow, and oust this parasitic
      stratum from their posts, and destroy their
      “unity” with
      the working-class movement, because such “unity” means, in
      practice, unity of the proletariat with the national bourgeoisie and a
      split in the international proletariat, the unity of lackeys and a
      split among the revolutionaries.

“Intransigence is a force,” Golay says with justice; he demands that
      “the socialism that must be reborn” should be intransigent. But
      is it not all the same to the bourgeoisie whether the proletariat practises
      reconciliation with it directly, or indirectly through
      bourgeois adherents, defenders, and agents within the working-class
      movement, i.e., through the opportunists? The latter is even more
advantageous to the bourgeoisie, because it secures for it a stronger
      influence over the workers.

Golay is a thousand times right when he says that there is a socialism
      that is dying and a socialism that must be reborn; this death and this
      rebirth, however, comprise a ruthless struggle against the trend of
      opportunism—not merely an ideological struggle, but the removal of
      that hideous excrescence from the body of the working-class parties, the
      expulsion from those organisations of certain representatives of this
      tactic, which is alien to the proletariat, a definite break with them. They
      will die neither physically nor politically, but the workers will break with
      them, will throw them into the cesspool of the servitors of the
      bourgeoisie. The example of their corruption will educate a new generation,
      or, more correctly, new proletarian armies capable of an uprising.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]
Paul Golay,
    Le socialisme qui meurt et le socialisme qui doit renaître,
    Lausanne, 1915,  22 pages, 15 centimes. En vente à
    l’Administration du “Grutleen”, Maison du Peuple,
    Lausanne.—Ed.


[2]
Great evils
    call for strong remedies.—Ed.
    
 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## Imperialism and Socialism in Italy









Lenin: Imperialism and Socialism in Italy







V. I.  

      Lenin
Imperialism and Socialism in Italy
Note




Published:
Kommunist No.  1–2, 1915.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the text in the journal Kommunist.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 357-366.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

To clarify the problems presented to socialism as a result of the present
      imperialist war, it is useful to cast a glance at the various European
      countries, so as to learn to distinguish between national modifications
      and details of the general picture, and the fundamental and
      essential. Distance lends clarity to the view. The less the resemblance
      between Italy and Russia, the more interesting it is, in certain respects,
      to compare imperialism and socialism in the two countries. 
In the present note, we intend only to call attention to material on this
    problem, as provided by a bourgeois professor, Roberto Michels, in his book
    Italian Imperialism, and by a socialist, T. Barboni, in a book
    entitled Inter nationalism or Class Nationalism? (The Italian
    Proletariat and the European
War),[1]

both of which have been
    published since the outbreak of the war. The garrulous Michels, who is just
    as superficial as he is in his other writings, hardly touches upon the
    economic aspect of imperialism. His book, however, contains a collection of
    valuable material on the origin of Italian imperialism and on the transition
    that comprises the essence of the times and is so manifest in Italy, namely,
    the transition from a period of wars for national liberation to a period of
    imperialist and reactionary wars of plunder. Revolutionary-democratic Italy,
    i.e., revolutionary-bourgeois Italy, the Italy that

    

      cast off the yoke of Austria, the Italy of the times of Garibaldi, is
      changing before our very eyes into an Italy that is oppressing other
      peoples and plundering Turkey and Austria, an Italy of a crude,
      repulsively reactionary and rapacious bourgeoisie whose mouth waters at
      the prospect of a share in the loot. Like any respectable professor,
      Michels, of course, considers that his servility to the bourgeoisie is
      “scientific objectivism”; he calls this sharing of the loot
      “partitioning of that part of the world which still remains in the
      hands of debilitated peoples” (p. 179). Disdainfully rejecting as
      “Utopian” the viewpoint of socialists hostile towards colonial
      policies of any kind, Michels repeats the arguments of those who think
      that Italy, judging by the density of her population and the intensity of
      emigration from that country, “should have been the second colonial
      power”, second only to Britain. Michels repudiates by a reference to
      Britain the argument that forty per cent of the Italian people are
      illiterate, and that even today cholera riots, etc., take place there. Was
      not Britain, he asks, a country of unparalleled poverty, humiliation,
      famine among the working masses, and widespread drunkenness, misery, and
      squalor in the city slums, in the first half of the nineteenth century,
      when the British bourgeoisie were so successfully laying the foundations
      of their present colonial power? 
It must be admitted that, from the bourgeois standpoint, this argument is
    unassailable. Colonial policies and imperialism are not unsound but curable
    disorders of capitalism (the way philistines think, together with Kautsky);
    they are an inevitable consequence of the very foundations of
    capitalism. Competition among individual enterprises inevitably leads either
    to their becoming ruined or ruining others; competition between individual
    countries confronts each of them with the alternative of falling behind,
    ever running the risk of becoming a second Belgium, or else ruining and
    conquering other countries, thus elbowing their way to a place among the
    “Great” Powers. 
Italian imperialism has been called “poor people’s
    imperialism” (l’imperialismo della povera gente),
    because of the country’s poverty and the utter destitution of the
    masses of Italian emigrants. Arturo Labriola, the Italian chauvinist,

 

      who
      differs from his former opponent, G. Plekhanov, only in that he somewhat
      sooner revealed his social-chauvinism, which he reached via petty-bourgeois
      semi-anarchism, not petty-bourgeois opportunism, wrote in his booklet on the
      Tripolitanian war (1912): 
“It is obvious that we are fighting, not only against the Turks ...
    but also against the intrigues, the intimidations, the money, and the armies
    of plutocratic Europe, which cannot tolerate that small nations should dare
    to make a single gesture or to say a single word that will compromise its
    iron hegemony” (p. 92). Corradini, leader of the Italian nationalists,
    declared at the same time: “Just as socialism was a method of freeing
    the proletariat from the bourgeoisie, nationalism will be for us Italians a
    method of freeing ourselves from the French, the Germans, the British, the
    North and South Americans, who are our bourgeoisie. 
Any country which has more colonies, capital and armies than
    “we” have, deprives “us” of certain privileges,
    certain profits or super-profits. Just as among individual capitalists
    super-profits go to the one whose machinery is superior to the average or
    who owns certain monopolies, so among nations the one that is economically
    better off than the others gets super-profits. It is the business of the
    bourgeoisie to fight for privileges and advantages for its national capital,
    and to fool the nation or the common folk (with the aid of Labriola and
    Plekhanov) by passing off for a war of national liberation the imperialist
    struggle for the “right” to plunder others. 
Prior to the Tripolitanian war, Italy did not plunder other nations, at
    least to no large extent. Is this not an intolerable slight to the national
    pride? The Italians are oppressed and humiliated as compared with other
    nations. Italian emigration was 100,000 annually in the seventies of the
    last century; it now stands at between 500,000 and 1,000,000. All these
    people are paupers, driven from their country by starvation in the literal
    sense of the word. All of them provide labour power for the worst paid
    branches of industry; this mass inhabit the most crowded, poverty stricken,
    and squalid sections of the American and European cities. From 1,000,000 in
    1881, the number of Italians abroad rose to 5,500,000 in 1910, the vast
    majority

    

      of this mass living in the rich and “great” countries,
    for whom the Italians are the crudest, most unskilled, poor and defenceless
    labouring mass. Here are the main countries using cheap Italian labour:
    France—400,000 Italians in 1910 (240,000 in 1881);
    Switzerland—135,000 (41,000 in 1881); Austria—80,000 (40,000);
    Germany—180,000 (7,000); the United States of America—1,779,000
    (170,000); Brazil—1,500,000 (82,000); Argentina—1,000,000 (254
    000). “Glorious” France, which 125 years ago fought for freedom,
    and therefore calls its present war for her own and the British
    slave-holders’ “colonial rights” a war of liberation,
    houses hundreds of thousands of Italian workers in areas that are virtually
    ghettos. The petty-bourgeois canaille of this
    “great” nation do all they can to keep these people at a
    distance, and, insult and humiliate them in every possible way. The Italians
    are contemptuously dubbed “Macaroni” (the Great-Russian reader
    should recall how many contemptuous nicknames are current in our country for
    non-Russians whose birth does not entitle them to the noble dominant-nation
    privileges that serve the Purishkeviches as a means of oppressing
    both the Great-Russian and the other peoples of Russia). In 1896
    France, that great nation, concluded a treaty with Italy, by which the
    latter undertook not to increase the number of Italian schools in Tunisia!
    Since then the Italian population of Tunisia has increased sixfold. There
    are 105,000 Italians in Tunisia, as against 35,000 Frenchmen, but there are
    only 1,167 holders of land among the former, with an aggregate of 83,000
    hectares, whereas the latter include 2,395 landowners who have grabbed
    700,000 hectares in that colony. How can one fail to agree with Labriola and
    other Italian “Plekhanovites” that Italy is
    “entitled” to possess its colony in Tripoli, oppress Slavs in
    Dalmatia, carve up Asia Minor,
etc.?[2]
   


 

Just as Plekhanov supports the Russian war of
      “liberation” against the German striving to turn Russia into a
      colony, Bissolati, leader of the Reformist Party, has raised an outcry
      against the “invasion of Italy by foreign capital” (p. 97),
      namely, German capital in Lombardy, British in Sicily, French in
      Piacentino, Belgian in the street-car enterprises, etc., etc., etc. 
The question has been squarely put and one must acknowledge that the
    European war has done humanity enormous good by actually confronting
    hundreds of millions of people of various nationalities with an alternative:
    either defend, with rifle or pen, directly or indirectly, in any
    form whatever, the dominant-nation and national privileges in general, as
    well as the prerogative or the claims of one’s
    “own” bourgeoisie, that is to say, be its adherent or lackey;
    or else utilise any struggle, particularly the clash of arms for
    dominant-nation privileges, so as to unmask and overthrow every government,
    in the first place one’s own, by means of the revolutionary
    action of an internationally united proletariat. There is no middle road; in
    other words, the attempt to take a middle stand means, in effect, covertly
    taking the side of the imperialist bourgeoisie. 
Barboni’s booklet is, in substance, entirely devoted to covering up
    this latter act. Barboni poses as an internationalist exactly as our
    Mr. Potresov does; he argues that,

    

      from the internationalist point of view,
    it is necessary to ascertain the success of which side will be more useful
    or harmless to the proletariat, and, of course, he has decided this question
    against . . . Austria and Germany. In a perfectly Kautskyist spirit, Barboni
    proposes to the Italian Socialist Party solemnly to proclaim the solidarity
    of the workers of all countries—in the first place, of course, of the
    belligerent countries—to proclaim internationalist convictions, a
    programme of peace on the basis of disarmament and national independence of
    all nations, including the formation of a “league of all nations for a
    reciprocal guarantee of their integrity and independence” (p. 126). It
    is in the name of these principles that Barboni declares that militarism is
    a “parasitic” phenomenon in capitalism, something “not at
    all necessary”; that Germany and Austria are imbued with “militarist
    imperialism”; that their aggressive policies have been a “standing
    threat to European peace”; that Germany has “constantly rejected the
    proposals for a restriction of armaments advanced by Russia [sic!] and
    Britain”, etc., etc., and that the Socialist Party of Italy should
    declare itself in favour of Italy’s intervention on the side of the
    Triple Entente at the opportune moment. 
What remains unknown is the principles that make the bourgeois
    imperialism of Britain preferable to that of Germany. Germany’s
    economic development in the twentieth century has been more rapid than that
    of the other European countries; in the partition of colonies, she was badly
    “wronged”. Britain, on the other hand, has developed far more
    slowly; she has grabbed a host of colonies, where, far from Europe, she
    often uses methods of oppression no less brutal than the Germans. With her
    great wealth, she hires millions of soldiers of various continental powers
    to plunder Austria, Turkey, etc. In essence, Barboni’s
    internationalism, like that of Kautsky, is nothing but a verbal defence of
    socialist principles, behind which hypocritical cover his own bourgeoisie,
    the Italian, is actually defended. One cannot fail to notice that Barboni,
    who has published his book in free Switzerland (where the censor deleted
    only half a line on p. 75, evidently criticising Austria), has not deemed it
    necessary, in its 143 pages, to mention the main principles of the Basle
    Manifesto, or conscientiously to analyse them.

    

      On the other hand, our Barboni quotes with deep sympathy two former
      Russian revolutionaries who are now being publicised by the entire
      Francophile bourgeoisie: the petty-bourgeois anarchist Kropotkin, and the
      Social-Democratic philistine Plekhanov (p. 103). No wonder!
      Plekhanov’s sophisms do not differ in substance from
      Barboni’s. In Italy, however, political freedom more easily tears
      the veil from such sophisms, revealing more clearly Barboni’s actual
      stand as an agent of the bourgeoisie in the workers’ camp. 
Barboni regrets the “absence of a real and actual revolutionary
    spirit” within German Social-Democracy (exactly in Plekhanov’s
    way); he warmly greets Karl Liebknecht (just as he is greeted by the
    French social-chauvinists, who do not see the beam in their own
    eye), but he decidedly declares that “we cannot speak of the
    bankruptcy of the International” (p. 92), that the Germans “did
    not betray the spirit of the International” (p. 111), inasmuch as they
    were prompted by a “bona fide” conviction that they
    were defending the fatherland. In Kautsky’s sanctimonious vein, but
    with an admixture of Romance eloquence, Barboni declares that the
    International is prepared (after a victory over Germany) to “forgive
    the Germans as Christ forgave Peter a moment of distrust, to heal by
    oblivion the deep wounds inflicted by a militarist imperialism, and to
    extend a hand for an honourable and brotherly peace” (p. 113). 
A moving scene: Barboni and Kautsky—probably with aid from our
    Kosovsky and Axelrod—forgiving each other! 
While quite pleased with Kautsky and Guesde, with Plekhanov and
    Kropotkin, Barboni is displeased with his own Socialist Labour Party in
    Italy. He complains that in this party, which before the war was fortunate
    enough to rid itself of the reformists Bissolati and Co., an atmosphere has
    been created which “cannot be breathed” (p. 7) by those who, like
    Barboni, do not agree to the slogan of “absolute
    neutrality” (i.e., to a determined struggle against those who stand for
    Italy joining the war). Poor Barboni complains bitterly that in the Italian
    Socialist Labour Party men like him are labelled
    “intellectuals”, “individuals who have lost contact with
    the masses”, “people hailing

    

      from the bourgeoisie”, who have “strayed from the straight
      path of socialism and internationalism” (p. 7). “Our
      party,” says Barboni indignantly, “fanaticises more than it
      educates the multitude” (p. 4). 
An old song! It is the Italian variation of the well-known theme of
    Russian liquidators and opportunists, decrying the
    “demagogy” of
    the wicked Bolsheviks who “incite” the masses against the dear
    socialists of Nasha Zarya, the Organising Committee, and
    Chkheidze’s Duma group! But what an invaluable admission this is by an
    Italian social-chauvinist: in the only country where, for several months,
    the platforms of the social-chauvinists and of the revolutionary
    internationalists could be freely discussed, the working masses,
    the class-conscious proletariat, have sided with the latter,
    whereas the petty-bourgeois intellectuals and opportunists have lined up
    with the former. 
Neutrality is a narrow-minded egoism, a non-understanding of the
    international situation; it is baseness towards Belgium, and
    “absenteeism”, and “the absent are always wrong”,
    says Barboni, entirely in the spirit of Plekhanov and Axelrod. But since
    there are two legal parties in Italy, one reformist and the other a
    Social-Democratic labour party, and since in that country it is impossible
    to fool the public by covering up the nudity of the Potresovs, Cherevanins,
    Levitskys and Co. with the fig-leaf of Chkheidze’s Duma group or of
    the Organising Committee, Barboni frankly admits the following: 
“From this point of view I see more revolutionism in the activities
    of the reformist socialists, who have been quick to realise the enormous
    importance that such a change in the political situation [in consequence of
    a victory over German militarism] will have for the future anti-capitalist
    struggle, and who, with perfect consistency, have espoused the cause of the
    Triple Entente, than there is in the tactics of the official revolutionary
    socialists who, like a tortoise, have hidden under a shell of absolute
    neutrality” (p. 81). 
In connection with this valuable admission, it remains for us only to
    express the wish that some comrade familiar with the Italian movement should
    collect and systematically analyse the vast and most interesting material
    furnished by Italy’s two parties, as to which social strata
    and which

    

      elements, with whose aid, and with which arguments, have defended
    the revolutionary policy of the Italian proletariat on the one hand, and
    servility to the Italian imperialist bourgeoisie on the other. The more such
    material is gathered in various countries, the more clearly will the
    class-conscious workers see the truth as to the causes and
    significance of the Second International’s collapse. 
In conclusion, we would like to note that, confronted by a workers’
    party, Barboni attempts to use sophistry so as to play up to the
    workers’ revolutionary instincts. The internationalist
    socialists of Italy, who are opposed to a war which in fact is
    being waged for the imperialist interests of the Italian bourgeoisie, are
    depicted by him as adherents of a cowardly abstinence, a selfish desire to
    hide from the horrors of war. “A people educated in a fear of the
    horrors of war,” he says, “will probably also be afraid of the
    horrors of a revolution” (p. 83). Together with this disgusting attempt
    to assume the guise of a revolutionary, we find a crudely practical
    reference to the “clear” words of Minister Salandra, who said
    that “order will be maintained at any cost”, and that attempts
    to hold a general strike directed against mobilisation will only lead to
    “useless carnage”. “We could not prevent the Libyan
    [Tripolitanian] war; less so will we be able to prevent the war against
    Austria” (p. 82). 
Like Kautsky, Cunow and all the other opportunists, Barboni, with the
    basest intention of fooling a definite section of the masses, deliberately
    ascribes to the revolutionaries the silly plan to “frustrate the
    war” “immediately” and to allow themselves to be shot down
    at a moment most opportune for the bourgeoisie. He thus attempts to evade
    the task clearly formulated at Stuttgart and Basle, namely, to utilise the
    revolutionary crisis for systematic revolutionary propaganda and
    preparations for revolutionary mass action. Barboni sees quite clearly that
    Europe is living through a revolutionary moment. 
“There is one point on which I deem it necessary to insist, even at
    the risk of becoming irksome to the reader, because without a clear idea of
    that point one cannot correctly estimate the present political
    situation. The point is that the period we are living through is a
    catastrophic

    

      one, a period of action, when there is no longer any question
    of propounding ideas, formulating programmes, or defining a line of
    political behaviour for the future, but of applying a live and active force
    to achieve results within months, possibly within weeks. Under such
    conditions, it is no longer a question of philosophising over the future of
    the proletarian movement, but of consolidating the point of view of the
    proletariat, in face of the present situation” (pp. 87-88). 
Another sophism under the guise of revolutionism! Forty-four years after
    the Paris Commune, after half a century of the mustering and preparation of
    mass forces, the revolutionary class of Europe must, at the present moment,
    when Europe is passing through a catastrophic period, think of how to
    quickly become the lackey of its national bourgeoisie, how to help it
    plunder, violate, ruin, and conquer other peoples, and how to refrain from
    launching, on a mass scale, direct revolutionary propaganda and preparation
    for revolutionary action. 

 
Notes
 

[1]
Roberto
    Michels, L’imperialismo italiano, Milano, 1914; T. Barboni,
    Internazionalismo o nazionalismo di classes? (Il proletariato
    d’Italia e la guerra europea). Edito dall’autore a
    Campione d’Intelvi (provincia di Como), 1915.
—Lenin

[2]
It is
    highly instructive to note the connection between Italy’s
    transformation into an imperialist country and the government’s
    agreeing to electoral reform. The latter increased the number of voters from
    3,219,000 to 8,562,000, in other words, it introduced
    “almost” universal suffrage. Prior to the Tripolitanian war,
    Giolitti, who carried out the reform, was bitterly opposed to it. “The
    motivation of the change of line by the government” and the moderate

   

parties, says Michels, “was essentially patriotic. Notwithstanding
    their long-standing theoretical aversion from a colonial policy, the
    industrial workers, and more so the lower strata, fought against the Turks
    with perfect discipline and obedience, contrary to all expectations. Such
    slavish behaviour towards the government’s policy merited a reward to
    induce the proletariat to persevere along this new road. The President of
    the Council of Ministers declared in Parliament that, by his patriotic
    behaviour on the battlefield of Libya, the Italian worker had proved to the
    country that he had reached the highest stage of political maturity. He who
    is capable of sacrificing his life for a noble cause is also capable of
    defending the interests of the country as a voter, and he therefore has a
    right that the state should consider him worthy of full political
    rights” (p. 177). The Italian Ministers are good talkers! Still better
    are the German “radical” Social-Democrats who are repeating the
    following servile argument: “We have done ‘our’ duty by
    helping you to loot foreign countries, but ‘you’ do not wish to
    give ‘us’ universal suffrage in Prussia. . . .” —Lenin
 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## Appeal on the War









Lenin: Appeal on the War







V. I.  

      Lenin
Appeal on the War




Written: Written in August 1915 

Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 18, January 21, 1928.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 367-369.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Worker Comrades:

The European war has been in progress for over a year. All things
    considered, it will last for a long time, because, while Germany is best
    prepared and at present the strongest, the Quadruple Entente (Russia,
    Britain, France, end Italy) has more men and money, and besides, freely gets
    war material from the United States of America, the world’s richest
    Country.

What is this war being fought for, which is bringing mankind unparalleled
    suffering? The government and the bourgeoisie of each belligerent country
    are squandering millions of rubles on hooks and newspapers so as to lay the
    blame on the foe, arouse the people’s furious hatred of the enemy, and
    stop at no lie so as to depict themselves as the side that has been unjustly
    attacked and is now “defending” itself. In reality, this is a
    war between two groups of predatory Great Powers, and it is being fought for
    the partitioning of colonies, the enslavement of other nations, and
    advantages and privileges of the world market. This is a most reactionary
    war, a war o modern slave-holders aimed at preserving and consolidating
    capitalist. slavery. Britain and France are lying when they assert that they
    are warring for Belgium’s freedom. In reality, they have long been
    preparing the war, and are waging it with the purpose of robbing Germany and
    stripping her of her colonies; they have signed a treaty with Italy and
    Russia on the pillage and carving up of Turkey and Austria. The tsarist
    monarchy in Russia is waging a predatory war aimed at seizing Galicia,
    taking territory away from Turkey, enslaving Persia, Mongolia,
    etc. Germany is waging war with the purpose of grabbing British, Belgian,
    and French

    

      colonies. Whether Germany or Russia wins, or whether there is a
    “draw”, the war will bring humanity fresh oppression of hundreds
    and hundreds of millions of people in the colonies, in Persia, Turkey and
    China, a fresh enslavement of nations, and new chains for the working class
    of all countries.

What are the tasks of the working class with regard to this war? The
    answer to this question is provided in a resolution unanimously adopted by
    the socialists of the whole world, at the Basic International Socialist
    Congress of 1912. This resolution was adopted in anticipation of a war of
    the very kind as started in 1914. This resolution says that the war is
    reactionary, that it is being prepared in the interests of “capitalist
    profits”, that the workers consider it “a crime to shoot each
    other down”, that the war will lead to “a proletarian
    revolution”, that an example for the workers’ tactics was set by
    the Paris Commune of 1871, and by October-December 1905, in Russia, i.e., by
    a revolution.

All class-conscious workers in Russia are on the side of the Russian
    Social-Democratic Labour group in the Duma, whose members (Petrovsky,
    Badayev, Muranov, Samoilov, and Shagov) have been exiled by the tsar to
    Siberia for revolutionary propaganda against the war and against the
    government. It is only in such revolutionary propaganda, and in
    revolutionary activities leading to a revolt of the masses, that the
    salvation of humanity from the horrors of the present and the future wars
    lies. Only the revolutionary overthrow of the bourgeois governments, in the
    first place of the most reactionary, brutal, and barbarous tsarist
    government, will open the road to socialism and peace among nations.

The conscious or unwitting servants of the bourgeoisie are lying when
    they wish to persuade the people that the revolutionary overthrow of the
    tsarist monarchy can lead only to victories for and consolidation of the
    German reactionary monarchy and the German bourgeoisie. Although the leaders
    of the German socialists, like many leading socialists in Russia, have gone
    over to the side of their “own” bourgeoisie and are helping to
    deceive the people with fables of a war of “defence”, there is
    mounting among the working masses of Germany an ever stronger protest

    

      and indignation against their government. The German socialists who have
      not gone over to the side of the bourgeoisie have declared in the press
      that they consider the tactics of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      group in the Duma “heroic”. In Germany, calls against the war
      and against the government are being published illegally. Tens and
      hundreds of the finest socialists of Germany, including Clara Zetkin, the
      well-known representative of the women’s labour movement, have been
      thrown into prison by the German Government for propaganda in a
      revolutionary spirit. In all the belligerent countries without exception,
      indignation is mounting in the working masses, and the example of
      revolutionary activities set by the Social-Democrats of Russia, and even
      more so any success of the revolution in Russia, will not fail to advance
      the great cause of socialism, of the victory of the proletariat over the
      bloodstained bourgeois exploiters.

The war is filling the pockets of the capitalists, into whose pockets
    gold is pouring from the treasuries of the Great Powers. The war is
    provoking a blind bitterness against the enemy, the bourgeoisie doing its
    best to direct the indignation of the people into such channels, to divert
    their attention from the chief enemy—the government and the
    ruling classes of their own country. However, the war which brings in its
    train endless misery and suffering for the toiling masses, enlightens and
    steels the finest representatives of the working class. If perish we must,
    let its perish in the struggle for our own cause, for the cause of the
    workers, for the socialist revolution, and not for the interests of the
    capitalists, the landowners, and tsars—this is what every
    class-conscious worker sees and feels. Revolutionary Social-Democratic work
    may be difficult at present, but it is possible. It is advancing throughout
    the world, and in this alone lies salvation.

Down with the tsarist monarchy, which has drawn Russia into a criminal
    war, and which oppresses the peoples! Long live the world brotherhood of the
    workers, and the international revolution of the proletariat!

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## We Are Thankful For Such Frankness









Lenin: We Are Thankful For Such Frankness







V. I.  

      Lenin
We Are Thankful For Such Frankness




Written: Written in the summer of 1915 

Published:

      First published in 1931 in Lenin Miscellany XVII.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 370-371.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

      “The inane idea of the necessity of forming an
    Interna-tional of ‘internationalist Social-Democrats’ .., [of]
    oppo-sition elements picked at random from all the socialist parties
    .... The International can be restored only from the same elements it has
    consisted of till now .... A restored International will not be the
    ‘third’ in succession, as is desired by a handful of sectarians
    and experts in the business of arranging splits, but the selfsame Second
    International, which has not died, but has been temporarily paralysed by a
    world disaster....” 
This is what Mr. V. Kosovsky writes in issue No. 8 of the Bund’s
    Information Bulletin. We are deeply thankful for the frankness
    shown by this Bundist, who is not the brightest of the lot. This is not the
    first time he has de-fended opportunism with an outspokenness that must be
    displeasing to the Bund’s diplomatists. This time again, he will be
    helping the struggle against opportunism, by revealing to the workers how
    hopelessly far the Bund stands from proletarian socialism. Mr. V. Kosovsky
    does not see the link between opportunism and social-chauvinism. To discern
    that link, one must be able to ask oneself the follow-ing questions: what
    are the fundamental ideas in the two currents? How has opportunism developed
    in Europe during the last few decades? What is the attitude towards
    social-chauvinism revealed by the opportunist and the revolutionary wing
    in,a number of European countries, as, for instance, in Russia, Germany,
    Belgium, France, Britain, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, Holland, and
    Bulgaria?
 

Has Mr. V. Kosovsky given thought to this? If he at-tempted to reply to
    at least the first question, he would soon see his mistake.

Incidentally,, in issue No. 7 of the Information Bulletin
    Mr. V. Kosovsky has displayed a Germanophile chauvinism, for, while accusing
    the French Social-Democrats, he defends the German Social-Democrats’
    voting for war credits. A certain W. (writing in issue No. 8, pp. 11-12)
    defends Mr. V. Kosovsky against the accusation of chau-vinism, asserting
    that there can be no Gerrnanophile chau-vinism in an organisation that
    operates in Russia. Perhaps Mr. V. Kosovsky will explain to Mr. W. why it is
    that a Ukrainian or a Polish bourgeois in Russia, a Danish or an Alsatian
    bourgeois in France, or an Irish bourgeois in Britain often reveals a
    chauvinism hostile to the nations that oppress them.
    

 
Notes
 
 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## To the International Socialist Committee (I.S.C.)









Lenin: To the International Socialist Committee (I.S.C.)







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the International Socialist Committee (I.S.C.)




Written: Written not earlier than September 12 (25), 1915 

Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 203, September 6, 1925.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 372-377.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Dear Comrades:

We have received your letter of September 25, and hereby express our full
    sympathy with the plan to set up a perma-nent international “enlarged
    committee” (erweiterte Kern. mission) in Berne. In the
    confidence that the idea of such a plan is shared by the other organisations
    adhering to the I.S.C., we appoint Zinoviev member of that enlarged
    committee from the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., and, as his
    assistants or candidates (suppléant, Stellvertreter) (1)
    Comrade
Petrova[4] and (2) Comrade Lenin. The address for
    communications is: Herrn Radomislsky (bei Frau Aschwanden). Hertenstein
    (Ks. tuzern).
Schweiz.[1]

To continue. As for the other questions raised in your letter of
    September 25, we, for our part, hold the following opinion:
I. We are in complete agreement with you that the “common points of
    view” (ailgerneine Gesichtspunkte) as established by the
    Conference of September 5-8 are “insufficient” (nicht
    genügen). A further, far more detailed and specified development
    of these principles is an imperative necessity. This is necessary from the
    viewpoint of both principle and common practice, since giving effect to
    united action on an international scale calls for both clarity of
    fundamental ideological views and a precise definiteness in all practical
    methods of action. The great crisis that Europe as a whole and the European
    working-class movement are living

    

      through can indubitably lead to both
    aspects of the matter being understood by the masses only by degrees, but it
    is the task of the I.S.C. and the parties adhering to it to help bring about
    that very understanding. Without waiting for the impossible to
    happen—the speedy unification of all on a platform of commonly
    accepted and precisely formulated views—we must strive for a
    precise definition of the basic currents and
    trends in present-day internationalist socialism, and then for the
    working masses to get a knowledge of those currents., discuss them
    comprehensively, and test them in the experience of their practical
    movement. In our opinion, the I.S.C. should consider this its principal
    task.

2. The letter of September 25 defines the proletariat’s tasks
    either as the struggle for peace (should the war continue or as the
    “concrete and detailed formulation of the proletariat’s
    international viewpoint towards the various proposals and programmes for
    peace” den internationalen Standpunkt des Proleriats zu den
    venschiedenen Friedensvorschlägen and Programmen konkret and ins
    einzelne gehend zu unschreiben). Special emphasis is placed, in this
    connection, on the national question (Alsace-Lorraine, Poland, Armenia,
    etc.).

We consider that the two documents unanimously adopted by the Conference
    of September 5-8, viz., both the manifesto and the resolution of sympathy
    (Syrnpathieen/darung), give expression to the idea of the
    connection between the struggle for peace and the struggle for
    socialism (“the struggle for peace ... is a struggle for
    socialism”—“dieser Kampf ist der Kampf ... für
    den Sozialisnzus”, to quote the manifesto), and the
    “irreconcilable proletarian class struggle”
    (unver-sohnlic/zer proletanischer Klassen/campf; the text of the
    resolution voted on by the Conference reads, not the
    “irreconcilable” class struggle, but the
    “revolutionary” class struggle. If the change was made for
    considerations of legality, the meaning should net have been changed
    thereby). The resolution on sympathy speaks forthright of the
    Con-ference’s need and “solemn promise” to arouse the
    revolu-tionary spirit in the masses of the international
    proletariat”.

Unless it is linked up with the revolutionary class struggle of the
    proletariat, the struggle for peace is merely a

    

      pacifist phrase of bourgeois
      who are either sentimental or are deceiving the people.

We cannot and must not strike a pose of “statesmen” and draw
      up “concrete” programmes of peace. On the contrary, we must
      explain to the masses the delusiveness of all hopes of a democratic peace
      (without annexations, violence or plunder), without a development
      of the revolutionary class struggle. In the very beginning of the manifesto
      we told the masses firmly, clearly and resolutely that imperialism is the
      cause of war, and that imperialism means the “enslave-ment” of
      nations, of all the nations of the world, by a handful of “Great
      Powers”. Consequently, we must help the masses to overthrow
      imperialism, without the overthrow of which there can be no peace without
      annexations. Of course, the struggle for the overthrow of imperialism is an
      arduous one, but the masses must know the truth about that arduous
      but necessary struggle. The masses should not be lulled with the hope that
      peace is possible without the overthrow of imperialism.

3. Proceeding from these considerations, we propose:
that the following questions be put on the agenda of forthcoming sessions
      of the enlarged committee (to work out either a summary and publication of
      theses, or drafts of a resolution), and then on the agenda of the next
      international conference (for the final adoption of a resolution):
(a) the connection between the struggle for peace and mass revolutionary
    action or the revolutionary class struggle of the proletariat;
(b) the self-determination of nations;
(c) the connection between social-patriotism and opportunism.

We emphasise that the manifesto adopted by the con-ference specifically
    touches upon all these questions, that they are of vital
    significance both in principle and in practice, and that not a
    single practical step in the proletarian struggle is
    conceivable without socialists and syndicalists stumbling upon these
    questions.

Elaboration of these questions is necessary so as to pro-mote the mass
    struggle for peace, the self-determination of nations, and socialism, and
    against the “capitalists

    

      lies” (to quote the manifesto) about
    “defence of the father-land” in the present war.

If, as is very correctly pointed out in the letter of Sep-tember 25, the
    fault or the misfortune of the Second International lies in the vagueness
    and the incorn-plete development of important problems, it is our task to
    help the masses pose those problems with clarity and re-solve them with
    exactness.

4. Regarding the publication of the bulletin in three languages,
    experience has, in our opinion, shown that the plan is ill-advised. If
    issued monthly, such a publication will cost between two and three thousand
    francs a year, a sum that cannot easily be raised. Incidentally almost
    everything to be found in the bulletin is published by two Swiss
    newspapers-Berner Tagcac1tt and
La Sentinelle.[5]

      We propose to the I.S.C.:

    

that an attempt be made to reach an
      understanding with the editorial boards of the above newspapers and with
      some U.S. newspaper, regarding publication in these newspapers both of the
      bulletin and of all reports and materials of the I.S.C. (either textually in
      the name of the I.S.C., or in separate supplements).

This will not only he cheaper but will make it possible to keep the
    working class far better, more fully and more frequently informed of the
    I.S.C.’s activities. We are inter-ested in a greater number of
    workers reading I.S.C. reports, and in all draft resolutions being published
    for the workers’ information and to help them evolve their own
    attitude towards the var.

We hope that there will he no objections to the need to publish both the
    draft resolution (for whose acceptance as a basis 12 delegates, i.e., about
    40 per cent of the total number, cast their votes, with 19 against) and the
    letter from a prominent German
socialist[6] (with omission of his name and
    of everything that does not refer to tactics).

We hope that the I.S.C. will receive systematic infor-mation from the
    various countries regarding persecution and arrests for participation in the
    anti-war struggle, the course of the class struggle against the war,
    fraternising in the trenches, the closing down of newspapers, the banning of
    publication of calls for peace, etc. We also hope that

    

      all this information
    will periodically appear in the newspapers mentioned above, on behalf of
    the l.S.C.

An agreement with an American daily or weekly paper could probably be
    reached by Mrs. Kollontai, who works in Nashe Slovo and other
    Social-Democratic newspapers, and has just left for the U.S.A. on a lecture
    tour. We could get in touch with Kollontai, or let you know her address.

5. Regarding the mode of representation of sections of parties
    (particularly in Germany and France, and also, probably, in Britain), we
    propose:

    

that the I.S.C. suggest to the comrades in those par-ties that they
      discuss the advisability of setting up groups, under various names, whose
      appeals to the masses (in the form of leaflets, resolutions, etc.) will be
      published by the I.S.C., with the mention of the particular group in
      question.

If this method is followed, the masses, in the first place, would be kept
    informed of the internationalists’ tactics and views, this despite the
    military censorship; secondly, it would be possible to discern the
    development and the successes achieved in the propaganda of internationalist
    views, in the degree that workers’ meetings, organisations, etc.,
    adopt resolutions of sympathy with one group or another; thirdly, it would
    become possible to give expression to various shades of opinion (i.e.,
    the
    B.S.P.,[2]

    its minority, and the
I.L.P.[3]

in Britain;
    socialists like Bourderon and others, and syndicalists like Merrheim and
    others, in France; as the Conference has shown, there are shades among the
    opposition in Germany).

It goes without saying that these groups, as is pointed out in the letter
    of September 25, would not set up separate organisational units, but would
    exist within the old bodies only for contacts with the I.S.C. and
    for propaganda of the struggle for peace.

These groups would be represented in the “enlarged committee”
    and at conferences.

6. In the question of the number of members on the “enlarged
    committee”, and of voting procedure, we propose the following:
 

that the number of members should not he limited to a maximum of three,
      but, instead, fractions of votes (½, ¾ etc.) should be
      introduced for small groups.

This would he convenient, since to deprive of represen-tation groups that
      have their own shades of opinion is just impossible, and injurious to the
      development and propaganda among the masses of the principles established in
      the manifesto.

7. With reference to the danger of the “enlarged com-mittee”
      acquiring a “Russo-Polish character”, we think that (however
      unpleasant that may be to the Russians), this apprehension is
      justified, since representation is possible of groups in
      emigration, which have no serious links with Russia. In our
      opinion, only those organisations and groups should be represented which
      have proved, by no less than three years of work, their ability to
      represent the movement in Russia. We propose to the I.S.C. that it discuss
      and estab-lish that principle, and also request all groups to send in
    information and figures on their work in Russia.

8. Finally, we would take advantage of this opportunity to indicate an
      inaccuracy in No. I of the
Bulletin[7] and ask that it he
      rectified in No. 2 (or in Berner Tagwacht and La
Sentinelle). Issue No. I of the Bulletin, p. 7, the top of
      column I, speaks of the draft resolution having been signed by the Central
      Committee, the Polish Social-Democrats (Lanclesvorstand), the
      Letts, Swedes, and Norwegians. Omitted in this enumeration are:
    

one German
      delegate (whose name is not given for reasons readily understood), and one
      Swiss-Platten.


 
Notes
 

[1]
Mr. Radomislsky, c/o Mme. Ascliwanden, Hertenstein, Lucerne
      Canton. Switzerland.—Ed.


[2]
The British Socialist Party.—Ed.


[3]
The Independent Labour Party.—Ed.

 



[4]
Petrova—Inessa Armand.




[5]
La
    Sentinelle—organ of the Social-Democratic organisation of
    Neuchatel Canton, French-speaking Switzerland, published at Chaux-de-Fonds
    from 1890 onwards. Pursued an internationalist policy in the first years of
    World War I (1914-18) and its November 13, 1914 issue (No. 265) carried an
    abridged version of the R.S.D.L.P. Central Committee Manifesto,  The War and Russian
    Social-Democracy.




[6]
Lenin is
    referring to Karl Liebknecht’s letter of September 2, 1915, addressed to the
    Zimmerwald International Sotialist Conference, which was not published at
    the time. Liebknecht was unable to take part in the Conference because lie
    was called to the colours as a private, early in 1915. In his letter,
    Liebknecht called upon the delegates to strive, not for a “class truce” but
    for civil war, the international unity of socialists of all belligerent
    countries, a struggle against the imperialist war and a break with the
    socialchauvinists. The letter was welcomed by most of the delegates.




[7]
Lenin is referring to the Bulletin of the International Socialist
      Committee in Berne (“Bulletin” Inlernatienale sozialistische
      Kommission zu Bern), the Executive of the Zimmerwald organisation. The
      Bulletin was published from September 1915 to January 1917 in English,
      French arid German Six issues appeared.







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## The Defeat of Russia and the Revolutionary Crisis









Lenin: The Defeat of Russia and the Revolutionary Crisis







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Defeat of Russia and the Revolutionary Crisis




Written: Written in the second half of September, 1915 

Published:

      First published in Pravda No. 260, November 7, 1928.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 378-382.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The dissolution of the Fourth Duma in retaliation for the formation of an
      Opposition bloc consisting of liberals, Octobrists and nationalists, is
      one of the most vivid manifestations of the revolutionary crisis in
      Russia. The defeat of the armies of the tsarist monarchy; the growth of
      the strike movement and the revolutionary movement of the proletariat; the
      discontent of the masses and the formation of the liberal-Octobrist bloc
      for the purpose of reaching an understanding with the tsar on a programme
      of reforms and mobilising industry for the victory over Germanysuch is the
      sequence and texture of events at the end of the first year of war.

There is obviously a revolutionary crisis in Russia, but its significance
    and the attendant tasks of the proletariat are not correctly understood by
    all.

History seems to be repeating itself: again there is a war, as in 1905, a
    war tsarism has dragged the country into with definite, patently
    annexationist, predatory and reactionary aims. Again there is military
    defeat, and a revolutionary crisis accelerated by it. Again the liberal
    bourgeoisie—in this case even in conjunction with large sections of
    the conservative bourgeoisie and the landowners are advocating a programme
    of reform and of an understanding with the tsar. The situation is almost
    like that in the summer of 1905, prior to the Bulygin Duma, or in the summer
    of 1900, after the dissolution of the First Duma.

There is, however, actually a vast difference, viz., that this war has
    involved all Europe, all the most advanced countries with mass and powerful
    socialist movements.

    

      The imperialist war has linked up the Russian revolutionary
      crisis, which stems from a bourgeois-democratic revolution, with the growing
      crisis of the proletarian socialist revolution in the West. This link is so
      direct that no individual solution of revolutionary [problems] is possible
      in any single country—the Russian bourgeois-democratic revolution is
      now not only a prologue to, but an indivisible and integral part of, the
      socialist revolution in the West.

In 1905, it was the proletariat’s task to consummate the bourgeois
    revolution in Russia so as to kindle the proletarian revolution in the
    West. In 1915, the second part of this task has acquired an urgency that
    puts it on a level with the first part. A new political division has arisen
    in Russia on the basis of new, higher, more developed and more complex
    international relations. This new division is between the chauvinist
    revolutionaries, who desire revolution so as to defeat Germany, and the
    proletarian internationalist revolutionaries, who desire a revolution in
    Russia for the sake of the proletarian revolution in the West, and
    simultaneously with that revolution. This new division is, in essence, one
    between the urban and the rural petty bourgeoisie in Russia, and the
    socialist proletariat. The new division must be clearly understood, for the
    impending revolution makes it the prime duty of a Marxist, i.e., of any
    class-conscious socialist, to realise the position of the various
    classes, and to interpret general differences over tactics and
    principles as differences in the positions of the various classes.

There is nothing more puerile, contemptible and harmful, than the idea
    current among revolutionary philistines, namely, that differences should he
    “forgotten” “in view” of the immediate common aim in
    the approaching revolution. People whom the experience of the 1905-14 decade
    has not taught the folly of this idea are hopeless from the revolutionary
    standpoint. Those who confine themselves, at this stage, to revolutionary
    exclamations, without analysing which classes have proved their
    ability to adopt, and have indeed adopted, a definite revolutionary
    programme, do not really differ from “revolutionaries” like
    Khrustalyov, Aladyin and Alexinsky.

 

We have before us the clear-cut stand of the monarchy and the
    feudal-minded landowners—“no surrender” of Russia to the liberal
    bourgeoisie; better an understanding with the German monarchy. Equally clear
    is the liberal bourgeoisie’s stand—exploit the defeat and the
    mounting revolution in order to wrest concessions from a frightened monarchy
    and compel it to share power with the bourgeoisie. Just as clear, too, is
    the stand of the revolutionary proletariat, which is striving to consummate
    the revolution by exploiting the vacillation and embarrassment of the
    government and the bourgeoisie. The petty bourgeoisie, however, i. e,, the
    vast mass of the barely, awakening population of Russia, is groping blindly
    in the wake of the bourgeoisie, a captive to nationalist prejudices, on the
    one hand, prodded into the revolution by the unparalleled horror and misery
    of war, the high cost of living, impoverishment, ruin and starvation, but on
    the other hand, glancing backward at every step towards the idea of
    defence of the fatherland, towards the idea of Russia’s state
    integrity, or towards the idea of small-peasant prosperity, to be achieved
    through a victory over tsarism and over Germany, but without a victory over
    capitalism.

This vacillation of the petty bourgeois, of the small peasant, is no
    accident, but the inevitable outcome of his economic position. It is foolish
    to shut one’s eyes to this bitter but profound truth; it must be
    understood and traced back in the existing political currents and
    groupings, so as not to deceive ourselves and the people, and not to
    weaken and paralyse the revolutionary party of the Social-Democratic
    proletariat. The proletariat will debilitate itself if it permits its party
    to vacillate as the petty bourgeoisie does. The proletariat will accomplish
    its task only if it is able to march unfalteringly towards its great goal,
    pushing the petty bourgeoisie forward, letting the latter learn from its
    mistakes when it wavers to the right, and utilising all the petty
    bourgeoisie’s forces to the utmost when life compels it to move to the
    left.

The Trudoviks, the S.R.s, and the Organising Committee’s
    liquidationist supporters—these are the political trends in
    Russia which have taken shape during the past decade, have proved their
    links with the various groups, elements and

    

      strata in the petty bourgeoisie,
    and shown vacillation from extreme revolutionism in word, to an alliance
    with the chauvinist Popular Socialists, or with Nasha Zarya , in
    deed. On September 3, 1915, for instance, the five secretaries of the
    Organising Committee abroad issued a manifesto on the tasks of the
    proletariat, which said not a word about opportunism and social-chauvinism,
    but called for a “revolt” in the rear of the German army (this
    after a whole year of struggle against the slogan of civil war!) and
    proclaimed a slogan praised so highly in 1905 by the Cadets, viz., a
    “constituent assembly for the liquidation of the war” and for
    the abolition of the autocratic
[June 3[1]] regime”! People who have
    failed to understand the need for a cleavage between the party of the
    proletariat and these petty-bourgeois trends so that the revolution may he
    successful, have assumed the name of Social-Democrats in vain.

No, in the face of the revolutionary crisis in Russia, which is being
    accelerated by defeat—and this is what the motley opponents of
    “defeatism” are afraid to admit it will be the
    proletariat’s duty to carry on the struggle against opportunism and
    chauvinism, or otherwise it will be impossible to develop the revolutionary
    consciousness of the masses, and to assist their movement by means of
    straightforward revolutionary slogans. Not a constituent assembly, but the
    overthrow of the monarchy, a republic, the confiscation of landed estates,
    and an eight-hour day will, as hitherto, he the slogans of the
    Social-Democratic proletariat, the slogans of our Party. In direct
    connection with this, and to make it possible really to single out the
    socialist tasks and contrast them with the tasks of bourgeois chauvinism
    (including the Plekhanov and the Kautsky brands) in all its propaganda and
    agitation, and in all working-class action, our Party will preserve the
    slogan of “transform the imperialist war into a civil war”,
    i.e., the slogan of the socialist revolution in the West.

The lessons of the war are compelling even our opponents to recognise in
    practice both the stand of “defeatism” and the necessity of
    issuing—at first as a spirited phrase in a manifesto, but later more
    seriously and thoughtfully—the slogan of “a revolt in the
    rear” of the German militarists,

    

      in other words, the slogan of
    a civil war. The lessons of the war, it appears, are knocking into their
    heads that which we have been insisting on since the very outset of the
    war. The defeat of Russia has proved the lesser evil, for it has
    tremendously enhanced the revolutionary crisis and has aroused millions,
    tens and hundreds of millions. Moreover, in conditions of an imperialist
    war, a revolutionary crisis in Russia could not but lead people’s
    thoughts to the only salvation for the people-the idea of “a revolt in
    the rear” of the German army, i.e., the idea of a civil war in all the
    belligerent countries.

Life teaches. Life is advancing, through the defeat of Russia,
    towards a revolution in Russia and, through that revolution and in
    connection with it, towards a civil war in Europe. Life has taken this
    direction. And, drawing fresh strength from these lessons of life, which
    have justified its position, the party of the revolutionary proletariat of
    Russia will, with ever greater energy, follow the path it has chosen.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This refers
    to the period of the Stolypin reaction ushered in by the coup
    d’état of June 3.

On June 3 (10), 1907, the tsar issued a manifesto
    dissolving the Second Duma and modifying the electoral law. The new law
    considerably increased the Duma representation of the landowners and of the
    trade and industrial bourgeoisie, and greatly reduced the number of
    peasants’ and workers’ representatives, which was small enough as it
    was. This was a gross violation of the Manifesto of October 17, 1905, and
    the Fundamental Law of 1908 by which no laws could be passed by the
    government without approval by the Duma. The Third Duma, which was elected
    on the basis of this law and convened on November 1 (14), 1907, was a
    Black-Hundred Octobrist Duma.
    







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## The First Step









Lenin: The First Step







V. I.  

      Lenin
The First Step




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 45–46, October 11, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 383-388.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The development of the international socialist movement is slow during the
      tremendous crisis created by the war. Yet it is moving towards a break
      with opportunism and social-chauvinism, as was clearly shown by the
      International Socialist Conference held at Zimmerwald, Switzerland,
      between September 5 and 8, 1915. 
For a whole year, the socialists of the warring and the neutral countries
    vacillated and temporised. Afraid to admit to themselves the gravity of the
    crisis, they did not wish to look reality in the face, and kept deferring in
    a thousand ways the inevitable break with the opportunism and Kautskyism
    prevalent in the official parties of Western Europe. 
However, the analysis of events which we gave a year ago in the Manifesto
    of the Central Committee (Sotsial Demokrat
No. 33)[1]

has proved
    correct; the events have borne out its correctness. They took a course that
    resulted in the first International Socialist Conference being attended by
    representatives of the protesting elements of the minorities in Germany,
    France, Sweden, and Norway, who acted against the decisions of the official
    parties, i.e., in fact acted schismatically. 
The work of the Conference was summed up in a manifesto and a resolution
    expressing sympathy with the arrested and the persecuted. Both documents
    appear in this issue of Sotsial-Demokrat. By nineteen votes to
    twelve, the Conference refused to submit to a committee the draft resolution
    proposed by us and other revolutionary Marxists;

    

      our draft manifesto was
    passed on to the committee together with two others, for a joint manifesto
    to be drawn up. The reader will find elsewhere in this issue our two drafts;
    a comparison of the latter with the manifesto adopted clearly shows that a
    number of fundamental ideas of revolutionary Marxism were adopted. 
In practice, the manifesto signifies a step towards an ideological and
    practical break with opportunism and social-chauvinism. At the same time,
    the manifesto, as any analysis will show, contains inconsistencies, and does
    not say everything that should be said. 
The manifesto calls the war imperialist and emphasises two features of
    imperialism: the striving of the capitalists of every nation for
    profits and the exploitation of others, and the striving of the Great Powers
    to partition the world and “enslave” weaker nations. The
    manifesto repeats the most essential things that should be said of the
    imperialist nature of the war, and were said in our resolution. In this
    respect, the manifesto merely popularises our
    resolution. Popularisation is undoubtedly a useful thing. However, if we
    want clear thinking in the working class and attach importance to systematic
    and unflagging propaganda, we must accurately and fully define the
    principles to be popularised. If that is not done, we risk repeating the
    error, the fault of the Second International which led to its collapse,
    viz., we shall be leaving room for ambiguity and misinterpretations. Is it,
    for instance, possible to deny the signal importance of the idea, expressed
    in our resolution, that the objective conditions are mature for socialism?
    The “popular” exposition of the manifesto omitted this idea;
    failure has attended the attempt to combine, in one document, a clear and
    precise resolution based on principle, and an appeal. 
“The capitalists of all countries ... claim that the war serves to
    defend the fatherland.... They are lying...”, the manifesto
    continues. Here again, this forthright statement that the fundamental idea
    of opportunism in the present war—the
    “defence-of-the-fatherland” idea—is a lie, is a repetition
    of the kernel of the revolutionary Marxists’ resolution. Again, the
    manifesto regrettably fails to say everything that should be said; it is
    half-hearted, afraid to

    

      speak the whole truth. After a year of war, who
    today is not aware of the actual damage caused to socialism, not only by the
    capitalist press repeating and endorsing the capitalists’
    lies (it is its business as a capitalist press to repeat the
    capitalists’ lies), but also by the greater part of the socialist
    press doing so? Who does not know that European socialism’s greatest
    crisis has been brought about not by the “capitalists’
    lies”, but by the lies of Guesde, Hyndman, Vandervelde,
    Plekhanov and Kautsky ? Who does not know that the lies
    spoken by such leaders suddenly revealed all the strength of the opportunism
    that swept them away at the decisive moment? 
Let us take a look at what has come about: To make the masses see things
    in a clearer light, the manifesto says that in the present war the defence
    of the fatherland idea is a capitalist lie. The European masses, however,
    are not illiterate, and almost all who have read the manifesto have heard,
    and still hear that same lie from hundreds of socialist papers,
    journals, and pamphlets, echoing them after Plekhanov, Hyndman, Kautsky and
    Co. What will the readers of the manifesto think? What thoughts will arise
    in them after this display of timidity by the authors of the manifesto?
    Disregard the capitalists’ lie about the defence of the fatherland,
    the manifesto tells the workers. Well and good. Practically all of them will
    say or think: the capitalists’ lie has long stopped bothering
    us, but the lie of Kautsky and Co. ... 
The manifesto goes on to repeat another important idea in our resolution,
    viz., that the socialist parties and the workers’ organisations of the
    various countries “have flouted obligations stemming from the
    decisions of the Stuttgart, Copenhagen and Basle congresses”; that the
    International Socialist Bureau too has failed to do its duty ; that
    this failure to do its duty consisted in voting for war credits, joining
    governments, recognising “a class truce” (submission to which the
    manifesto calls slavish ; in other words, it accuses Guesde,
    Plekhanov, Kautsky and Co. of substituting for propaganda of socialism the
    propaganda of slavish ideas). 
Is it consistent, we shall ask, to speak, in a
    “popular” manifesto, of the failure of a number of parties to do
    their

    

      duty (it is common knowledge that the reference is to the strongest
    parties and the workers’ organisations in the most advanced countries:
    Britain, France and Germany), without giving any explanation of this
    startling and unprecedented fact? The greater part of the socialist parties
    and the International Socialist Bureau itself have failed to do their duty!
    What is this—an accident and the failure of individuals, or the
    turning-point of an entire epoch? If it is the former, and we circulate that
    idea among the masses, it is tantamount to our renouncing the fundamentals
    of socialist doctrine. If it is the latter, how can we fail to say so
    forthright? We are facing a moment of historic significance—the
    collapse of the International as a whole, a turning point of an entire
    epoch—and yet we are afraid to tell the masses that the whole
    truth must be sought for and found, and that we must do our thinking to the
    very end. It is preposterous and ridiculous to suppose that the
    International Socialist Bureau and a number of parties could have collapsed,
    without linking up this event with the long history of the origin,
    the growth, the maturing and over-maturity of the general European
    opportunist movement, with its deep economic roots—deep, not in the
    sense that it is intimately linked with the masses, but in the sense that it
    is connected with a certain stratum of society. 
Passing on to the “struggle for peace”, the manifesto states
    that: “This struggle is a struggle for freedom, the brotherhood of
    peoples, and socialism”. It goes on to explain that in wartime the
    workers make sacrifices “in the service of the ruling classes”,
    whereas they must learn to make sacrifices “for their own
    cause” (doubly underscored in the manifesto), “for the
    sacred aims of socialism”. The resolution which expresses sympathy
    with arrested and persecuted fighters says that “the Conference
    solemnly undertakes to honour the living and the dead by emulating their
    example” and that its aim will be to “arouse the
    revolutionary spirit in the international proletariat”. 
All these ideas are a reiteration of our resolution’s fundamental
    idea that a struggle for peace without a revolutionary struggle is
    a hollow and false phrase, and that a revolutionary struggle for socialism
    is the only way to put an end to the horror of war. But here too we find
    inconsistency,

    

      timidity, and a failure to say everything that ought to be
    said: it calls upon the masses to emulate the example of the
    revolutionary fighters; it declares that the five members of the Russian
    Social-Democratic Labour Duma group who have been sentenced to exile in
    Siberia have carried on “the glorious revolutionary tradition of
    Russia”; it proclaims the necessity of “arousing the revolutionary
    spirit”, but it does not specify forthright and clearly the
    revolutionary methods of struggle. 
Was our Central Committee right in signing this manifesto, with all its
    inconsistency and timidity? We think it was. Our non-agreement, the
    non-agreement, not only of our Central Committee but of the entire
    international Left-wing section of the Conference, which stands by the
    principles of revolutionary Marxism, is openly expressed both in a
    special resolution, a separate draft manifesto, and a separate declaration
    on the vote for a compromise manifesto. We did not conceal a jot of our
    views, slogans, or tactics. A German edition of our pamphlet,
Socialism and
War[2]

was
    handed out at the Conference. We have spread, are spreading, and shall
    continue to spread our views with no less energy than the manifesto will. It
    is a fact that this manifesto is a step forward towards a real
    struggle against opportunism, towards a rupture with it. It would be
    sectarianism to refuse to take this step forward together with the
    minority of German, French, Swedish, Norwegian, and Swiss socialists, when
    we retain full freedom and full opportunity to criticise inconsistency and
    to work for greater
things.[3]

It would be poor war tactics to refuse to adhere
    to the mounting international protest movement against social-chauvinism
    just because this movement is slow, because it takes “only”
    a
    single step forward and because it is ready and willing to take a step
    backward tomorrow

    

      and make peace with the old International Socialist
    Bureau. Its readiness to make peace with the opportunists is so far merely
    wishful thinking. Will the opportunists agree to a peace? Is peace
    objectively possible between trends that are dividing more
    and more deeply—social-chauvinism and Kautskyism on the one hand, and
    on the other, revolutionary internationalist Marxism? We consider it
    impossible, and we shall continue our line, encouraged as we are by its
    success at the Conference of September 5-8. 
The success of our line is beyond doubt. Compare the facts: In September
    1914, our Central Committee’s Manifesto seemed almost isolated. In
    March 1915, an international women’s conference adopted a miserable
    pacifist resolution, which was blindly followed by the Organising
    Committee. In September 1915, we rallied in a whole group of the
    international Left wing. We came out with our own tactics, voiced a number
    of our fundamental ideas in a joint manifesto, and took part in the
    formation of an I.S.C. (International Socialist Committee), i.e., a
    practically new International Socialist Bureau, against the wishes of the
    old one, and on the basis of a manifesto that openly condemns the tactics of
    the latter. 
The workers of Russia, whose overwhelming majority followed our Party and
    its Central Committee even in the years 1912-14, will now, from the
    experience of the international socialist movement, see that our tactics are
    being confirmed in a wider area, and that our fundamental ideas are shared
    by an ever growing and finer part of the proletarian International. 

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 25–34 of this
    volume.—Ed.


[2]
See pp. 295–338 of this volume.—Ed.


[3]
We are not frightened by the fact that the Organising Committee and the
      Social-Revolutionaries signed the manifesto diplomatically, retaining all
      their links with—and all their attachment to Nasha
      Zarya, Rubanovich, and the July 1915 Conference of the Popular
      Socialists and the Social-Revolutionaries in
Russia.[4] We have means
      enough to combat corrupt diplomacy and unmask it. It is more and more
      unmasking itself. Nasha Zarya and Chkheidze’s group are
      helping us unmask Axelrod and Co. —Lenin
 



[4]
The
    Conference of the Popular Socialists and the Socialist-Revolutionaries in
    Russia met in July 1915 in Petrograd. The Conference discussed the question
    of the attitude towards the war and adopted a resolution which called for
    active participation in the war on the side of tsarism.








<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## Revolutionary Marxists at the International Socialist Conference, September 5-8, 1915









Lenin: Revolutionary Marxists at the International Socialist Conference, September 5-8, 1915







V. I.  

      Lenin
Revolutionary Marxists at the International Socialist Conference, September 5-8, 1915




Published:
Sotsial-Demokat No. 45–46, October 11, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 389-393.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The ideological struggle at the Conference was waged between a compact
      group of internationalists, revolutionary Marxists, and the vacillating
      near-Kautskyites, who formed the Right wing of the Conference. The
      unitedness of the former group is one of the most important facts and
      greatest achievements of the Conference. After a year of war, the trend
      represented by our Party proved the only trend in the International to
      adopt a fully definite resolution as well as a draft manifesto based on
      the latter, and to unite the consistent Marxists of Russia, Poland, the
      Lettish territory, Germany, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland, and Holland.

What arguments did the vacillating elements advance against us? The
    Germans admitted that we were advancing towards revolutionary battles, but,
    they said, we do not have to proclaim from the house-tops such things as
    fraternisation in the trenches, political strikes, street demonstrations and
    civil war. Such things are done, they said, but not spoken of. Others added:
    this is childishness, verbal pyro-technics.

The German semi-Kautskyites castigated themselves for these ridiculously,
      indecently contradictory and evasive speeches by passing a resolution of
      sympathy and a declaration on the need to “follow the example”
      of the members of the R.S.D.L. Duma group, who distributed
      Sotsial-Dernokrat, our Central Organ, which proclaimed civil war
      from the housetops.
    
 

You are following the bad example set by Kautsky, we replied to the
      Germans; in word, you recognise the impending revolution; in deed, you
      refuse to tell the masses about it openly, to call for it, and indicate the
      most concrete means of struggle which the masses are to test and legitimise
      in the course of the revolution. In 1847, Marx and Engels, who were living
      abroad-the German philistines were horrified at revolutionary
      methods of struggle being spoken of from abroad!-called for revolution, in
      their celebrated Manifesto of the Communist Party; they spoke
      forthright of the use of force, and branded as contemptible any attempt to
      conceal the revolutionary aims, tasks and methods of the struggle. The
      Revolution of 1848 proved that Marx and Engeis alone had applied
      the correct tactics to the events. Several years prior to the 1905
      Revolution in Russia, Plekhanov, who was then still a Marxist, wrote an
      unsigned article in the old Iskra of 1901, expressing the editorial
      board’s views on the coming insurrection, on ways of preparing it,
      such as street demonstrations, and even on technical devices, such as using
      wire in combating cavalry. The Russian revolution proved that the old
      iskrists alone had approached the events with the correct tactics. We are
      now faced with the following alternative: either we are really and truly
      con-vinced that the war is creating a revolutionary situation in Europe, and
      that all the economic and socio-political cir-cumstances of the imperialist
      period are leading up to a revolution of the proletariat-in which case we
      are in duty bound to explain to the masses the need for revolution, call for
      it, create the necessary organisations, and speak fear-lessly and most
      concretely of the various methods of the forcible struggle and its
      “technique”. This duty of ours does not depend upon whether the
      revolution will be strong enough, or whether it will arrive with a first or
      a second imperialist war, etc. Or else we are not convinced that the
      situation is revolutionary, in which case there is no sense in our just
      talking about a war against war. In that ease, we are, in fact, national
      liberal-labour politicians of the S|dekum-Plekhanov or Kautsky variety.

The French delegates also declared that the present situation in Europe,
      as they saw it, would lead to revolu-tion. But, they said, first, “we
      have not come here to pro-vide

    

      a formula for a Third international”; secondly, the French worker
      “believes nobody and nothing”; he is demoral-ised and satiated
      with anarchist and Hervéist phrases. The former argument is
      unreasonable, because the joint compromise manifesto does
      “provide a formula” for a Third International, though it is
      inconsistent, incomplete and not given sufficient thought. The latter
      argument is very impor-tant as a very serious factual argument, which
      takes the specific situation in France into account, nut. in the meaning
      of defence of the fatherland, or the enemy invasion, but in taking note of
      the “sore points” in the French labour move-ment. The only
      thing that logically follows from this, however, is that .the French
      socialists would perhaps join general European revolutionary action by the
      proletariat more slowly than others, and not that such action is
      un-necessary. The question as to how rapidly, in which way and in which
      particular forms the proletariat of the various countries ai+e capable of
      taking revolutionary action was riot raised at the Conference and could
      not have been. The con-ditions for this are not yet ripe. For the present
      it is our task to jointly propagandise the correct tactics and
      leave it to events to indicate the tempo of the movement, and the
      modifications in the mainstream (according to nation, locality and
      trade). If the French proletariat has been demor-alised by anarchist
      phrases, it has been demoralised by Mfllerandism too, and it is not our
      business to increase this demoralisation by leaving things
      unsaid in the mani-festo.

It was none other than Merrheim who uttered the characteristic and
    profoundly correct phrase: “The [Socialist] Party, Jouhaux [secretary
    of the General Confederation of
Labour][1] and the government are three heads
    under one bonnet.” This is the truth, a fact proved by the experience
    of the year of struggle waged by the French international-ists against the
    Party and Messrs. 3 ouhaux, There is, however, only one conclusion to be
    drawn: the government cannot be fought unless the opportunist parties and
    the leaders of anarchosyndicalism are fought against. Unlike our resolution,
    the joint manifesto merely indicated the tasks in the struggle but did not
    say everything that should have been said about them.

 

Arguing against our tactics, one of the Italians said: “Your
    tactics come either too late [since the war has already begun] or too soon
    [because the war has not yet created the conditions for revolution];
    besides, you propose to ‘change the programme’ of the
    International, since all our propaganda has always been conducted
    ‘against violence’.” It was very easy for us to reply to
    this by quoting Jules Guesde in En garde! to the effect that not a
    single influential leader of the Second International ever rejected the use
    of violence and direct revolutionary methods of the struggle in general. It
    has always been argued that the legal struggle, parliamentarism and
    insurrection are inter-linked, and must inevitably pass into each
    other according to the changes in the conditions of the movement. From the
    same book, En garde!, we quoted a passage in a speech delivered by
    Guesde in 1899, in which he spoke of the possibility of a war for markets,
    colonies, etc., and went on to say that if there were any French, German and
    British Millerands in such a war, then “what would become of
    international working-class solidarity?” In this speech Guesde
    condemned himself in advance. As for declaring propaganda of revolution
    “inopportune”, this objection rests on a confusion of concepts
    usual among socialists in the Romance countries: they confuse the beginning
    of a revolution with open and direct propaganda for revolution. In Russia,
    nobody places the beginning of the 1905 Revolution before January
1905,[2]
    whereas revolutionary propaganda, in the very narrow sense of the word, the
    propaganda and the preparation of mass action, demonstrations, strikes,
    barricades, had been conducted for years prior to that. The old
    Iskra, for instance, began to propagandise the matter at the end of 1900, as
    Marx did in 1847, when nobody thought as yet of the beginning of a
    revolution in Europe.

After a revolution has begun, it is “recognised” even by the
    liberals and its other enemies; they often recognise it so as to deceive and
    betray it. Before the revolution, revolutionaries foresee it,
    realise its inevitability, make the masses understand its necessity, and
    explain its course and methods to the masses.

By the irony of history, Kautsky and his friends, who tried to take out
    of Grimm’s hands the initiative of

    

      convening the Conference, and attempted to disrupt the Conference of the
      Left wing (Kautsky’s closest friends even went on a tour
      for this purpose, as Grimm disclosed at the Conference), were the very
      ones who pushed the Conference to the left. By their deeds,
      the opportunists and the Kautskyites have proved the correctness of the
      stand taken by our Party.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

[PLACEHOLDER.]




[2]

[PLACEHOLDER.]








<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## Kautsky, Axelrod and Martov—True Internationalists









Lenin: Kautsky, Axelrod and Martov—True Internationalists







V. I.  

      Lenin
Kautsky, Axelrod and Martov—True Internationalists




Written: Written not earlier than September 28 (October 11), 1915 

Published:

      First published in 1924, in the journal Protstarkaya Revolutsia No. 3 (26).

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 394-400.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Shortly before the Zimmerwald Conference, a pamphlet by P. Axeirod, came
      out in Zurich in the German language, under the title of The Crisis
      and the Tasks of International
Social-Democracy.[1]

The Zurich
      Volksrecht subsequently pub-lished two articles by L. Martov in
      praise of the pamphlet. We do not know whether the two authors will bring
      out these works in Russian. It would be hard to find a better illustration
      of the way the leaders of the Organising Committee are defending
      opportunism and social-chauvinism.

The struggle against “dangers threatening party unity” runs
    through the whole pamphlet. “A rupture and
    dissension”—this is what Axeirod is afraid of, and endlessly
    repeats ad nausearn. Do not imagine, however, that it is the
    present state of affairs in Social-Democracy, the present alliance between
    its leaders and their respective national bourgeoisie, that Axelrod
    considers dissension and a rup-ture. Oh, no! In Axelrod’s opinion,
    dissension means drawing a clear line of distinction between true socialists
    and social-chauvinists. Kautsky is numbered by Axeirod among the comrades
    “whose internationalist sentiments and con-sciousness are beyond any
    doubt”. Yet, in all the forty-six pages of the pamphlet there is not
    the slightest attempt to bring Kautsky’s views together, quote them
    correctly, and ascertain whether recognition of the defence of the
    father-land idea in the present war does not imply chauvinism.

    

    Not a word on the issue, or about our arguments. What we find is a
    “report to the authorities”. In the course of a lecture
    delivered in Zurich, Lenin, he writes, called Kautsky chauvinist,
    philistine, traitor (p. 21). Dear Martov and Axelrod, this is no longer
    literature, but a desk-sergeant’s report.

“In the West,” the pamphlet says, “we do not find that
    variety of supermen who utilise each party crisis, any difficult situation,
    to step forth in the role of the Party’s sole saviours from
    destruction, and light-heartedly conduct an inner-party policy of chaos and
    disorganisation” (p. 22). Is this literature?
But if there are no such super-monsters “in the West” who
    dare consider Kautsky and Axeirod chauvinists and. opportunists, and at the
    very thought of whom dear Axol-rod trembles With rage and emits a spate of
    such elegant and choice language, how could Axelrod have written two pages
    earlier:
“If one considers the indignation that is mounting in ever broader
    party circles, especially in Germany and France, against the policy of
    ‘seeing it through’ that is followed by our responsible party
    organs, it is by no means impossible that the practical tendencies of the
    Leninist propaganda may, through various channels, penetrate into the ranks
    of Western Social-Democracy.” 
That being the case, the fault does not seem to lie with the genuinely
    Russian super-monsters who are flaying dear Axelrod! It would appear that
    the international chauvinism of the official parties—both in
    Germany and France, as Axeirod himself admits (note this!)—is evoking
    indignation in and resistance from international revolutionary
    Social-Democrats. Consequently, we have two trends, both
    international. The angry Axelrod is abusive because he does not realise the
    inevitability of both trends, of a decisive struggle between them; another
    reason is that it pains his conscience and sensibilities, and that it is not
    to his advantage openly to show his own stand, which consists in a desire to
    appear internationalist while being chauvinist.

“The problem of internationalising the working-class movement is
    not identical with the question of revolutionising our forms and methods of
    struggle,” he says; it is, as

    

      you see, “an ideological
    explanation” when one reduces everything to opportunism and ignores
    the “tremendous force” of “patriotic ideas” which
    are “the product of thousand-year-old historical
    processes”. “One must therefore strive”, he continues,
    “to create within the framework of this bourgeois society an actual
    reality [italics by Axelrod], objective conditions of existence, at
    least for the struggling masses of workers’, which can weaken the
    above-mentioned dependence”, namely, “the dependence of the
    masses upon the historically evolved national and territorial social
    formations”. “For instance,” Axeirod goes on to illustrate
    his profound idea, “labour protection and insurance legislation, as
    well as various other important political demands, and, finally, the
    cultural and educational needs and strivings of the workers, must become the
    object of their international [italics by Axelrod] action and
    organisations.” Everything, he says, reduces itself to
    “internationalising the day-by-day struggle for the demands of the
    moment”.

This is certainly enticing and so unlike the struggle against opportunism
    invented by some super-monsters! True internationalism in italics and a true
    “Marxism” that is not satisfied with “ideological”
    explanations consist in concern over the internationalisation of insurance
    legislation! Wonderful! The idea of a genius. Without any “struggle,
    rupture or dissension”, all international opportunists or
    international liberals, from Lloyd George to Friedrich Naumann and from
    Leroy Beaulieu to Milyukov, Struve and Guchkov, will eagerly subscribe to
    the scientific, profound and objective “internationalism” of
    Axeirod, Martov, and Kautsky.

Here are some real gems of “internationalism”! Kautsky says:
    If I defend my fatherland in an imperialist war, i.e., a war to plunder and
    enslave other countries, and recognise that the workers of the other
    belligerent countries are entitled to defend their fatherland, this is true
    inter-nationalism. Axelrod says: One must not be carried away by
    “ideological” attacks on opportunism but must carry on a
    practical struggle against thousand-year-old nationalism by means of (also a
    thousand-year-old) internationalisation of day-by-day work in the field of
    insurance laws. Martov agrees with Axelrod.

 

Axeirod’s phrases about the thousand-year-old roots of nationalism,
    etc., have about as much political sense as the declarations of the Russian
    serf-owners prior to
1861,[2]

about the thousand-year-old roots of
    serfdom. Such phrases are grist to the mill of the reactionaries and the
    bourgeoisie, since Axelrod fails to mention—modestly fails to
    mention—that decades of capitalist development, particularly after
    1871, have created those objective international links between the
    proletarians of all countries which today, at the present juncture, must
    find expression in international revolutionary action. Axeirod is opposed to
    such action. He is in favour of referring to the thousand-year-old roots of
    the knout, but he is opposed to action aimed at destroying the knout!
But what about the proletarian revolution? The 1912 Baste Manifesto spoke
    of it in connection with the impending war, which actually broke out two
    years later. Perhaps Axeirod considers that this manifesto is also frivolous
    “ideology”—an expression quite in the spirit of
    Struve’s and Cunow’s “Marxism”!—for he
    does not say a word about it. As for the revolution, he dismisses
    it as follows:
“The tendency to view stormy and revolutionary mass action or
    uprisings as the sole way of overcoming nationalism would have some
    justification if we were on the eve of a social revolution, in the very same
    way, for instance, as was the casein Russia beginning with the
    students’ demonstrations of 1901, which were the precursors of the
    approaching decisive battles against absolutism. But even those comrades who
    place all their hopes on the speedy beginning of a stormy revolutionary
    period will not risk stating definitely that the decisive conflict between
    the proletariat and the bourgeoisie is imminent. On the contrary, they too
    count on a period lasting decades” (p. 41). This, of course, is
    followed by fulmination against the “Utopia” and the
    “Bakuninists” among Russian \’emigr\’es.

This example, chosen by Axelrod, exposes our opportunist in peerless
    fashion. Could anybody in his right mind

    

      have “definitely
    stated” in 1901 that the decisive struggle against absolutism in
    Russia was “imminent”? Nobody could have done so and nobody did
    say so. Nobody could have known at the time that four years later
    one of the decisive clashes (December 1905) was to come, and that the
    next “decisive” battle against absolutism would take place
    perhaps in 1915-16, or even later.

If nobody asserted in 1901, either definitely or in any other way, that a
    decisive battle was “imminent”; if we declared at the time that
    the “hysterical” outcries of Krichevsky, Martynov and Co. about
    an “imminent” battle were lacking in seriousness, then we
    revolutionary Social-Democrats were at that time positively affirming
    something else: we affirmed that only hopeless opportunists could fail to
    understand in 1901 the task of actively supporting the
    revolutionary demonstrations of 1901, encouraging and developing them, and
    providing them with the most determined revolutionary slogans. History has
    proved that we, and only we, were right; history has condemned the
    opportunists, and has thrown them out of the working-class movement,
    although no decisive battle was “imminent” at the time, and the
    first decisive battle took place only four years later and yet did not prove
    to be the last battle, i.e., the final and decisive battle.

Today Europe is going through quite the same experience, literally the
    same experience. There cannot be the slightest doubt that a revolutionary
    situation exists in the Europe of 1915, as in the Russia of 1901. We cannot
    tell whether the proletariat’s first “decisive” battle
    against the bourgeoisie will take place in four years or two, within a
    decade or more; we cannot tell whether the second “decisive”
    battle will take place a decade after that, but we do know firmly and we
    declare “positively” that at present it is our immediate and
    bounden duty to support the growing unrest and the demonstrations which have
    already begun. It is a fact that in Germany a crowd has booed
    Scheidemann, and that in many countries crowds have demonstrated against the
    high cost of living. Axelrod is evading this immediate and imperative duty
    of Social-Democrats; Axelrod would dissuade the workers from performing that
    duty. If one weighs the political sum and substance of Axelrod’s
    arguments, one

    

      will see that he is with the leaders of social-patriotism and
    social-chauvinism, and against the immediate propaganda of and preparations
    for revolutionary action. This is the gist of the matter. All the rest is
    just words.

We are undoubtedly on the eve of a socialist revolution. This
    was recognised by ultra-cautious theorists, like Kautsky, as early as 1909
    (Der weg zur Machi); it was recognised in the unanimously adopted
    Basic Manifesto of 1912. Just as in 1901 we did not know whether the
    “eve” of the first Russian revolution would last four years, we
    do not know that today. The revolution may and probably will consist of many
    years of fighting, of several periods of onslaught with intervals of
    counter-revolutionary convulsions of the bourgeois system. The main issue of
    the present political situation boils down to the question of whether the
    already existing revolutionary situation should be exploited by supporting
    and developing revolutionary movements. Yes or no? That is the
    question that at present politically divides social-chauvinists and
    revolutionary internationalists. Despite the revolutionary phrases of all
    three, as well as of the five secretaries of the Organising Committee
    abroad, Kautsky, Axelrod, and Martov are, on this issue, on the side of the
    social-chauvinists.

Axelrod makes use of a profusion of phrases to cover up his defence of
      social-chauvinism. His pamphlet may serve as an example of how
      opinions can be concealed and how language and print can be used to
      disguise ideas. Axelrod harps on the word internationalism. He censures both
      the social-patriots and their friends for not wanting to shift to the left,
      hints that he stands left of Kautsky , and speaks of the need for a Third
      International, which, he says, should be strong enough to reply to attempts
      by the bourgeoisie to kindle a world war conflagration “not with
      threats but by unleashing a revolutionary storm” (p. 14), and so on
      and so forth ad infinitum. In word, Axelrod is prepared to
      recognise anything, including a revolutionary storm; in deed, he wants unity
      with Kautsky and consequently with Scheidemann in Germany, with the
      chauvinist and counter-revolutionary Nashe Dyelo, and with
      Chkheidze’s group in Russia; in deed, he is against supporting and
      furthering at present the incipient revolutionary movement. In
      word,

    

      everything; in deed, nothing. In word, he vehemently avows that he is an
      “internationalist” and a revolutionary; in deed, he supports
      the social-chauvinists and opportunists of the whole world in their
      struggle against the revolutionary internationalists.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]
Die
    Krise und die Aufgaben dee Inlernationalen Sozial-demokratie
—Lenin

[2]
The year of
    the abolition of serfdom in Russia.—Ed.

 







<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## Several Theses









Lenin: Several Theses







V. I.  

      Lenin
Several Theses
Proposed by the Editors




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 47, October 13, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 401-406.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The material published in this issue shows the tremendous
    scope of the work being done by the St. Petersburg Committee of our
    Party. To Russia, and indeed to the entire International, this is indeed a
    model of Social-Democratic work during a reactionary war and in most
    difficult conditions. The workers of St. Petersburg and Russia will bend
    every effort to give support to that work and will continue it along the
    same road ever more energetically and extensively.

Complying with advice from comrades in Russia, we have drawn up several
    theses on current problems of Social-Democratic work:



      (1)The slogan of a “constituent assembly” is wrong as an
    independent slogan, because the question now is: who will convene it? The
    liberals accepted that slogan in 1905 because it could have been interpreted
    as meaning that a “constituent assembly” would be convened by the
    tsar and would be in agreement with him. The most correct slogans are the
    “three pillars” (a democratic republic, confiscation of the
    landed estates and an eight-hour working day), with the addition (cf. No. 9)
    of a call for the workers’ international solidarity in the struggle
    for socialism and the revolutionary overthrow of the belligerent
    governments, and against the war.




      (2)We are opposed to participation in the war industries
committees,[1] which
    help prosecute the imperialist and reactionary war. We are in favour of
    utilising the election campaign; for instance, we are for participation

    

      in
    the first stage of the elections for the sole purpose of agitation
    and organisation. There can be no talk of boycotting the Duma. Participation
    in the second ballot is essential. While we have no Duma deputies
    from our Party, we must utilise everything that happens in the Duma so as to
    advance the aims of revolutionary Social-Democracy.




      (3)We consider that the consolidation and extension of Social-Democratic
    work among the proletariat and its extension to the rural proletariat, the
    rural poor and the army are the immediate and pressing tasks. It is
    revolutionary Social-Democracy’s most pressing task to develop the
    incipient strike movement, and to conduct it under the slogan of the
    “three pillars”. The demand for the immediate cessation of the
    war should be given due attention. Among other demands, the workers must not
    lose sight of the demand for the immediate reinstatement of the
    workers’ deputies, members of the R.S.D.L. Duma group.




      (4)Soviets of Workers’ Deputies and similar institutions must be
    regarded as organs of insurrection, of revolutionary rule. It is only in
    connection with the development of a mass political strike and with an
    insurrection, and in the measure of the latter’s preparedness,
    development and success that such institutions can be of lasting value.




      (5)Only a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and
    the peasantry can form the social content of the impending revolution in
    Russia. The revolution cannot be victorious in Russia unless it overthrows
    the monarchy and the feudal-minded landowners, and these cannot be
    overthrown unless the proletariat is supported by the peasantry. The step
    forward made in the differentiation of the rural population into wealthy
    “homestead farmers” and rural proletarians has not done away with
    the oppression of the rural areas by the Markovs and
Co.[2] We have urged and
    still urge the absolute need, in all and any circumstances, for a
    separate organisation for rural proletarians.



      (6)The task confronting the proletariat of Russia is the consummation of
    the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russia in order to kindle
    the socialist revolution in Europe. The latter task now stands very close to
    the former, yet it remains a special and second task, for it is a question

    

    of the different classes which are collaborating with the
    proletariat of Russia. In the former task, it is the petty-bourgeois
    peasantry of Russia who are collaborating; in the latter, it is the
    proletariat of other countries.




      (7)As hitherto, we consider it admissible for Social-Democrats to join a
    provisional revolutionary government together with the democratic petty
    bourgeoisie, but not with the revolutionary chauvinists.




      (8)By revolutionary chauvinists we mean those who want a victory over
    tsarism so as to achieve victory over Germany, plunder other countries,
    consolidate Great-Russian rule over the other peoples of Russia,
    etc. Revolutionary chauvinism is based on the class position of the petty
    bourgeoisie. The latter always vacillates between the bourgeoisie and the
    proletariat. At present it is vacillating between chauvinism (which prevents
    it from being consistently revolutionary, even in the meaning of a
    democratic revolution), and proletarian internationalism. At the moment the
    Trudoviks, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, Nasha Zarya,
    Chkheidze’s Duma group, the Organising Committee, Mr. Plekhanov and
    the like are political spokesmen for this petty bourgeoisie in Russia.




      (9)If the revolutionary chauvinists won in Russia, we would be
      opposed to a defence of their
      “fatherland” in the present war. Our slogan is:
      against the chauvinists, even if they are revolutionary and
      republicanagainst them, and for an alliance of the
      international proletariat for the socialist
      revolution.

(10)To the question of whether it is possible for the proletariat to
    assume the leadership in the bourgeois Russian revolution, our answer is:
    yes, it is possible, if the petty bourgeoisie swings to the left at
    the decisive moment; it is being pushed to the left, not only by our
    propaganda, but by a number of objective factors, economic, financial (the
    burden of war), military, political, and others.




      (11)To the question of what the party of the proletariat would do if the
    revolution placed power in its hands in the present war, our answer is as
    follows: we would propose peace to all the belligerents on the
    condition that freedom is given to the colonies and all peoples
    that are dependent,

    

      oppressed and deprived of rights. Under the present
    governments, neither Germany, nor Britain and France would accept this
    condition. In that case, we would have to prepare for and wage a
    revolutionary war, i.e., not only resolutely carry out the whole of our
    minimum
programme,[3] but work systematically to bring about an
    uprising among all peoples now oppressed by the Great Russians, all colonies
    and dependent countries in Asia (India, China, Persia, etc.), and also, and
    first and foremost, we would raise up the socialist proletariat of Europe
    for an insurrection against their governments and despite the
    social-chauvinists. There is no doubt that a victory of the proletariat in
    Russia would create extraordinarily favourable conditions for the
    development of the revolution in both Asia and Europe. Even 1905
    proved that. The international solidarity of the revolutionary proletariat
    is a fact, despite the scum of opportunism and
    social-chauvinism.

We now present these theses for discussion among the comrades, and shall
    develop our views in the next issues of the Central Organ.


    


 

Notes
 
 



[1]
War
    industries committees were established in Russia in 1915 by the
    imperialist bourgeoisie. In an attempt to bring the workers under their
    influence and inculcate defencist sentiments, the bourgeoisie decided to
    organise “workers’ groups”in these committees. It was to
    the bourgeoisie’s advantage to have workers’ representatives in
    these groups, who would call upon the workers to raise labour productivity
    in the war industries. The Mensheviks took an active part in this
    pseudo-patriotic measure initiated by the bourgeoisie. The Bolsheviks’
    boycott of the committees was supported by the majority of workers. At a
    worker delegates’ meeting in Petrograd on September 27 (October 10),
    1915, the Bolshevik resolution calling for a boycott and for a revolutionary
    way out of the war obtained 95 votes to the Mensheviks’ 81. Only at a
    second meeting, held without the pro-Bolshevik delegates, were the
    Mensheviks, led by Gvozdev and an agent provocateur Abrosimov, able
    to elect a “workers’ group”of ten.

As a result of Bolshevik propaganda, elections to the
    “workers’ groups”were held in only 70 areas out of a total
    of 239, and workers representatives were actually elected only in 36
    areas.




[2]
Markov, N. E.—a reactionary politician of tsarist
    Russia, big landowner and Deputy from Kursk Gubernia to the Third and Fourth
    Dumas.




[3]
The
    programme of the R.S.D.L.P. adopted at the Second Congress of the Party in
    1903 consisted of two parts: a minimum programme calling for the overthrow
    of tsarism, for a democratic republic, the eight-hour day and other demands
    attainable under capitalism and a maximum programme, formulating the
    ultimate goal of the working class, viz., socialist revolution, dictatorship
    of the proletariat, the building of a socialist society.








<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## The Revolutionary Proletariat and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination









Lenin: The Revolutionary Proletariat and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Revolutionary Proletariat and the Right of Nations to Self-Determination




Written: Written in German not earlier than October 16 (29), 1915 

Published:

      First published in 1927 in Lenin Miscellany VI.

      Published according to the translation from the German made by N. K. Krupskaya, with corrections by V. I. Lenin.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 407-414.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Like most programmes or tactical resolutions of the Social-Democratic
      parties, the Zimmerwald Manifesto proclaims the “right of nations to
      self-determination”. In Nos. 252 and 253 of Berner
      Tagwacht,
Parabellum[5] has called “illusory” “the
      struggle for the non-existent right to self-determination”, and
      has contraposed to it “the proletariat’s
      revolutionary mass struggle against capitalism”, while at the same
      time assuring us that “we are against annexations” (an
      assurance is repeated five times in Parabellum’s article), and
      against all violence against nations.

The arguments advanced by Parabellum in support of his position boil down
    to an assertion that today all national problems, like those of
    Alsace-Lorraine, Armenia, etc., are problems of imperialism; that capital
    has outgrown the framework of national states; that it is impossible to turn
    the clock of history back to the obsolete ideal of national states, etc.

Let us see whether Parabellum’s reasoning is correct.

First of all, it is Parabellum who is looking backward, not forward,
    when, in opposing working-class acceptance “of the ideal of the
    national state”, he looks towards Britain, France, Italy, Germany,
    i. e., countries where the movement for nalional liberation is a thing of
    the past, and not towards the East, towards Asia, Africa, and the colonies,
    where this movement is a thing of the present and the future. Mention of
    India, China, Persia, and Egypt will be sufficient.
    
 

Furthermore, imperialism means that capital has outgrown the framework of
    national states; it means that national oppression has been extended and
    heightened on a new historical foundation. Hence, it follows that, despite
    Parabellum, we must link the revolutionary struggle for socialism
    with a revolutionary programme on the national question.

From what Parabellum says, it appears that, in the name of the
    socialist revolution, he scornfully rejects a consistently revolutionary
    programme in the sphere of democracy. He is wrong to do so. The proletariat
    cannot be victorious except through democracy, i.e., by giving full effect
    to democracy and by linking with each step of its struggle democratic
    demands formulated in the most resolute terms. It is absurd to
    contrapose the socialist revolutlon and the revolutionary struggle
    against capitalism to a single problem of democracy, in this case,
    the national question. We must combine the revolutionary struggle
    against capitalism with a revolutionary programme and tactics on all
    democratic demands: a republic, a militia, the popular election of
    officials, equal rights for women, the self-determillation of nations,
    etc. While capitalism exists, these demands—all of them—can only
    be accomplished as an exception, and even then in an incomplete and
    distorted form. Basing ourselves on the democracy already achieved, and
    exposing its incompleteness under capitalism, we demand the overthrow of
    capitalism, the expropriation of the bourgeoisie, as a necessary basis both
    for the abolition of the poverty of the masses and for the complete
    and all-round institution of all democratic reforms. Some
    of these reforms will be started before the overthrow of the bourgeoisie,
    others in the course of that overthrow, and still others after
    it. The social revolution is not a single battle, but a period covering a
    series of battles over all sorts of problems of economic and democratic
    reform, which are consummated only by the expropriation of the
    bourgeoisie. It is for the sake of this final aim that we must formulate
    every one of our democratic demands in a consistently revolutionary
    way. It is quite conceivable that the workers of some particular country
    will overthrow the bourgeoisie before even a single fundamental
    democratic reform has been fully achieved. It is, however, quite

    

    inconceivable that the proletariat, as a historical class, will be able to
    defeat the bourgeoisie, unless it is prepared for that by being educated in
    the spirit of the most consistent and resolutely revolutionary
    democracy.

Imperialism means the progressively mounting oppression of the nations of
    the world by a handful of Great Powers; it means a period of wars between
    the latter to extend and consolidate the oppression of nations; it means a
    period in which the masses of the people are deceived by hypocritical
    social-patriots, i.e., individuals who, under the pretext of the
    “freedom of nations”, “the right of nations to
    self-determination”, and “defence of the fatherland”,
    justify and defend the oppression of the majority of the world’s
    nations by the Great Powers.

That is why the focal point in the Social-Democratic programme must be
    that division of nations into oppressor and oppressed which forms the
    essence of imperialism, and is deceitfully evaded by the
    social-chauvinists and Kautsky. This division is not significant from the
    angle of bourgeois pacifism or the philistine Utopia of peaceful competition
    among independent nations under capitalism, but it is most significant from
    the angle of the revolutionary struggle against imperialism. It is from this
    division that our definition of the “right of nations to
    self-determination” must follow, a definition that is consistently
    democratic, revolutionary, and in accord with the general task of
    the immediate struggle for socialism. It is for that right, and in a
    struggle to achieve sincere recognition for it, that the Social-Democrats of
    the oppressor nations must demand that the oppressed nations should have the
    right of secession, for otherwise recognition of equal rights for nations
    and of international working-class solidarity would in fact be merely empty
    phrase-mongering, sheer hypocrisy. On the other hand, the Social-Democrats
    of the oppressed nations must attach prime significance to the unity and the
    merging of the workers of the oppressed nations with those of the oppressor
    nations; otherwise these Social-Democrats will involuntarily become the
    allies of their own national bourgeoisie, which always betrays the
    interests of the people and of democracy, and is always ready, in
    its turn, to annex territory and oppress other nations.

 

The way in which the national question was posed at the end of the
    sixties of the past century may serve as an instructive example. The
    petty-bourgeois democrats, to whom any thought of the class struggle and of
    the socialist revolution was wholly alien, pictured to themselves a Utopia
    of peaceful competition among free and equal nations, under capitalism. In
    examining the immediate tasks of the social revolution, the Proudhonists
    totally “negated” the national question and the right of nations
    to self-determination. Marx ridiculed French Proudhonism and showed the
    affinity between it and French chauvinism.  (“All Europe must and will
    sit quietly on their hindquarters until the gentlemen in France abolish
    ‘poverty’. . . . By the negation of nationalities they appeared,
    quite unconsciously, to understand their absorption by the model French
    nation.”) Marx demanded the separation of Ireland from
    Britain “although after the separation there may come
    federation”, demanding it, not from the standpoint of the
    petty-bourgeois Utopia of a peaceful capitalism, or from considerations of
    “justice for
Ireland”,[6] but from the standpoint of the
    interests of the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat of the
    oppressor, i.e., British, nation against
    capitalism. The freedom of that nation has been cramped and mutilated by the
    fact that it has oppressed another nation. The British proletariat’s
    internationalism would remain a hypocritical phrase if they did not
    demand the separation of Ireland. Never in favour of petty states, or the
    splitting up of states in general, or the principle of federation, Marx
    considered the separation of an oppressed nation to be a step towards
    federation, and consequently, not towards a split, but towards
    concentration, both political and economic, but concentration on the basis
    of democracy. As Parabellum sees it, Marx was probably waging an
    “illusory struggle” in demanding separation for
    Ireland. Actually, however, this demand alone presented a consistently
    revolutionary programme; it alone was in accord with internationalism; it
    alone advocated concentration along non-imperialist lines.

The imperialism of our days has led to a situation in which the
    Great-Power oppression of nations hss become gengral. The view that a
    struggle must be conducted against the social-chauvinism of the dominant
    nations, who are

    

      now engaged in an imperialist war to enhance the oppression
    of nations, and are oppressing most of the world’s nations and most of
    the earth’s population—this view must be decisive, cardinal and
    basic in the national programme of Social-Democracy.

Take a glance at the present trends in Social-Democratic thinking on this
    subject. The petty-bourgeois Utopians, who dreamt of equality and peace
    among nations under capitalism, have been succeeded by the
    social-imperialists. In combating the former, Parabellum is tilting at
    windmills, thereby unwittingly playing in the hands of the
    social-imperialists. What is the social-chauvinists’ programme on the
    national question?
They either entirely deny the right to self-determination, using
    arguments like those advanced by Parabellum (Cunow, Parvus, the Russian
    opportunists Semkovsky, Liebman, and others), or they recognise that right
    in a patently hypocritical fashion, namely, without applying it to those
    very nations that are oppressed by their own nation or by her military
    allies (Plekhanov, Hyndman, all the pro-French patriots, then Scheidemann,
    etc., etc.). The most plausible formulation of the social-chauvinist lie,
    one that is therefore most dangerous to the proletariat, is provided by
    Kautsky. In word, he is in favour of the self-determination of nations; in
    word, he is for the Social-Democratic Party “die Selbstandigkeit
    der Nationen allseitig [!] und rückhaltlos [?] achtet
    und
fordert”[1]

(Die Neue Zeit No. 33, II, S. 241, May
    21, 1915). In deed, however, he has adapted the national programme to the
    prevailing social-chauvinism, distorted and docked it; he gives no precise
    definition of the duties of the socialists in the oppressor nations, and
    patently falsifies the democratic principle itself when he says that to
    demand “state independence” (staatliche Selb standigkeit)
    for every nation would mean demanding “too much” (“zu
    viel”, Die Neue Zeit No. 33, II, S. 77, April 16,
    1915). “National autonomy”, if you please, is enough! The
    principal question, the one the imperialist bourgeoisie will not permit
    discussion of, namely, the question of the

    

      boundaries of a state
    that is built upon the oppression of nations, is evaded by Kautsky, who, to
    please that bourgeoisie, has thrown out of the programme what is most
    essential. The bourgeoisie are ready to promise all the “national
    equality” and “national autonomy” you please, so long as the
    proletariat remain within the framework of legality and
    “peacefully” submit to them on the question of the state
    boundaries! Kautsky has formulated the national programme of
    Social-Democracy in a reformist, not a revolutionary manner.

Parabellum’s national programme, or, to be more precise, his
    assurances that “we are against annexations”, has the
    wholehearted backing of the
Parteivorstand,[2]

Kautsky, Plekhanov
    and Co., for the very reason that the programme does not expose the dominant
    social-patriots. Bourgeois pacifists would also endorse that
    programme. Parabellum’s splendid general programme (“a
    revolutionary mass struggle against capitalism”) serves him—as
    it did the Proudhonists of the sixties—not for the drawing up, in
    conformity with it and in its spirit, of a programme on the national
    question that is uncompromising and equally revolutionary, but in order to
    leave the way open to the social-patriots. In our imperialist times most
    socialists throughout the world are memhers of nations that oppress other
    nations and strive to extend that oppression. That is why our
    “struggle against annexations” will be meaningless and will not
    scare the social-patriots in the least, unless we declare that a socialist
    of an oppressor nation who does not conduct both peacetinue and wartime
    propaganda in favour of freedom of secession for oppressed nations, is no
    socialist and no internationalist, but a chauvinist! The socialist of an
    oppressor nation who fails to conduct such propaganda in defiance of
    government bans, i.e., in the free, i.e., in the illegal press, is a
    hypocritical advocate of equal rights for nations!
    

Parabellum has only a
      single sentence on Russia, which has not yet completed its
      bourgeois-democratic revolution:
“Selbst das wirtschaftlich sehr zuruckgebliebene Russland hat
in der Haltung der Polnischen, Lettischen, Armenischen

    

Bourgeoisie
gezeigt, dass nicht nur die militärische Bewachung es ist, die
die Völker in diesem ‘Zuchthaus der Völker’
zusammenhält, sondern Bedürfnisse der kapitalistischen Expansion,
für die das ungeheure Territorium ein glänzender Boden der
Entwicklung
ist.”[3]

That is not a “Social-Democratic standpoint” but a
      liberal-bourgeois one, not an internationalist, but a Great-Russian
      chauvinist standpoint. Parabellum, who is such a fine fighter against the
      German social-patriots, seems to have little knowledge of Russian
      chauvinism. For Parabellum’s wording to be converted into a
      Social-Democratic postulate and for Social-Democratic conclusions to be
      drawn from it, it should be modified and supplemented as follows:
Russia is a prison of peoples, not only because of the military-feudal
      character of tsarism and not only because the Great-Russian bourgeoisie
      support tsarism, but also because the Polish, etc., bourgeoisie have
      sacrificed the freedom of nations and democracy in general for the
      interests of capitalist expansion. The Russian proletariat cannot march at
      the head of the people towards a victorious democratic revolution (which
      is its immediate task), or fight alongside its brothers, the proletarians
      of Europe, for a socialist revolution, without immediately demanding,
      fully and
“rückhaltlos”,[4]

for all nations
      oppressed by tsarism, the freedom to secede from Russia. This we demand,
      not independently of our revolutionary struggle for socialism, but because
      this struggle will remain a hollow phrase if it is not linked up with a
      revolutionary approach to all questions of democracy, including the
      national question. We demand freedom of self-determination, i.e.,
      independence, i.e., freedom of secession for the oppressed
      nations, not because we have dreamt of splitting up the country
      economically, or of the ideal of small states, but, on the contrary,
      because we want large states and the closer unity and even fusion of

    

      nations, only on a truly democratic, truly internationalist basis, which
      is inconceivable without the freedom to secede. Just as Marx, in 1869,
      demanded the separation of Ireland, not for a split between Ireland and
      Britain, but for a subsequent free union between them, not so as to secure
      “justice for Ireland”, but in the interests of the
      revolutionary struggle of the British proletariat, we in the same way
      consider the refusal of Russian socialists to demand freedom of
      self-determination for nations, in the sense we have indicated above, to
      be a direct betrayal of democracy, internationalism and socialism.


 
Notes
 

[1]

      “comprehensively[!] and unreservedly [?] respecting and demanding
      the independence of nations”.—Ed.


[2]
The
    Executive of the German Social-Democratic Party.—Ed.


[3]

“Even
    economically very backward Russia has proved, in the stand taken by the
    Polish, Lettish and Armenian bourgeoisie that it is not only the military
    guard that keeps together the peoples in that ‘prison of
    peoples’, but also the need for capitalist expansion, for which the
    vast territory is a splendid ground for
    development.”—Ed.


[4]

    “unreservedly”.—Ed.

 



[5]
Parabellum—K. Radek.




[6]
See
    Marx’s letters to Engels of June 7 and 20, 1866 and of November 2,
    1867.








<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## On the Two Lines in the Revolution









Lenin: On the Two Lines in the Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Two Lines in the Revolution




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 48, November 20, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 415-420.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
Zodiac, B. Baggins, D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

In
Prizyv[1] (No. 3), Mr. Plekhanov attempts to present the
    fundamental theoretical prohlem of the impending revolution in Russia. He
    quotes a passage from Marx to the effect that the 1789 Revolution in France
    followed an ascending line, whereas the 1848 Revolution followed a
    descending line. In the first instance, power passed gradually from the
    moderate party to the more radical—the Constitutionalists, the
    Girondists, the Jacobins. In the second instance, the reverse took
    place—the proletariat, the petty-bourgeois democrats, the bourgeois
    republicans, Napoleon III. “It is desirable,” our author infers,
    “that the Russian revolution should be directed along an ascending
    line”, i.e., that power should first pass to the Cadets and
    Octobrists, then to the Trudoviks, and then to the socialists. The
    conclusion to be drawn from this reasoning is, of course, that the Left wing
    in Russia is unwise in not wishing to support the Cadets and in prematurely
    discrediting them.

Mr. Plekhanov’s “theoretical” reasoning is another
    example of the substitution of liberalism for Marxism. Mr. Plekhanov reduces
    the matter to the question of whether the “strategic
    conceptions” of the advanced elements were “right” or
    wrong. Marx’s reasoning was different. He noted a fact: in each case
    the revolution proceeded in a different fashion; he did not however
    seek the explanation of this difference in “strategic
    conceptions”. From the Marxist point of view it is ridiculous to seek
    it in conceptions. It should be sought in the difference in the
    alignment of classes. Marx himself wrote that in 1789 the French
    bourgeoisie united with the peasantry and that in 1848 petty-bourgeois
    democracy

    

      betrayed the proletariat. Mr. Plekhanov knows Marx’s opinion
    on the matter, but he does not mention it, because he wants to depict Marx
    as looking like Struve. In the France of 1789, it was a question of
    overthrowing absolutism and the nobility. At the then prevalent level of
    economic and political development, the bourgeoisie believed in a harmony of
    interests; it had no fears about the stability of its rule and was prepared
    to enter into an alliance with the peasantry. That alliance secured the
    complete victory of the revolution. In 1848 it was a question of the
    proletariat overthrowing the bourgeoisie. The proletariat was unable to win
    over the petty bourgeoisie, whose treachery led to the defeat of the
    revolution. The ascending line of 1789 was a form of revolution in which the
    mass of the people defeated absolutism. The descending line of 1848 was a
    form of revolution in which the betrayal of the proletariat by the mass of
    the petty bourgeoisie led to the defeat of the revolution.

Mr. Plekhanov is substituting vulgar idealism for Marxism when he reduces
    the question to one of “strategic conceptions”, not of the
    alignment of classes.

The experience of the 1905 Revolution and of the subsequent
    counter-revolutionary period in Russia teaches us that in our country
    two lines of revolution could be observed, in the sense that there
    was a struggle between two classes—the proletariat and the liberal
    bourgeoisie—for leadership of the masses. The proletariat advanced in
    a revolutionary fashion, and was leading the democratic peasantry towards
    the overthrow of the monarchy and the landowners. That the peasantry
    revealed revolutionary tendencies in the democratic sense was proved on a
    mass scale by all the great political events: the peasant
    insurrections of 1905-06, the unrest in the army in the same years, the
    “Peasants’ Union” of 1905, and the first two Dumas, in
    which the peasant Trudoviks stood not only “to the left of
    the Cadets”, but were also more revolutionary than the
    intellectual Social-Revolutionaries and Trudoviks. Unfortunately,
    this is often forgotten, but still it is a fact. Both in the Third and in
    the Fourth Dumas the peasant Trudoviks, despite their weakness, showed that
    the peasant masses were opposed to the landed proprietors.

 

The first line of the Russian bourgeois-democratic revolution, as deduced
    from the facts and not from “strategic” prattle, was marked by a
    reso]ute struggle of the proletariat, which was irresolutely followed by the
    peasantry. Both these classes fought against the monarchy and the
    landowners. The lack of strength and resolution in these classes led to
    their defeat (although a partial breach was made in the edifice of the
    autocracy).

The behaviour of the liberal bourgeoisie was the second line. We
    Bolsheviks have always affirmed, especially since the spring of 1906, that
    this line was represented by the Cadets and Octobrists as a single
    force. The 1905-15 decade has proved the correctness of our view. At the
    decisive moments of the struggle, the Cadets, together with the Octobrists,
    betrayed democracy and went to the aid of the tsar and the landowners. The
    “liberal” line of the Russian revolution was marked by the
    “pacification” and the fragmentary character of the
    masses’ struggle so as to enable the bourgeoisie to make peace with
    the monarchy. The international background to the Russian revolution and the
    strength of the Russian proletariat rendered this behaviour of the liberals
    inevitable.

The Bolsheviks helped the proletariat consciously to follow the first
    line, to fight with supreme courage and to lead the peasants. The Mensheviks
    were constantly slipping into the second line; they demoralised the
    proletariat by adapting its movement to the liberals—from the
    invitation to enter the Bulygin Duma (August 1905), to the Cadet Cabinet in
    1906 and the bloc with the Cadets against democracy in 1907. (From
    Mr. Plekhanov’s point of view, we will observe parenthetically, the
    “correct strategic conceptions” of the Cadets and the Mensheviks
    suffered A defeat at the time. Why was that? Why did the masses not pay heed
    to the wise counsels of Mr. Plekhanov and the Cadets, which were publicised
    a hundred times more extensively than the advice from the Bolsheviks?)
Only these trends—the Bolshevik and the Menshevik—manifested
    themselves in the politics of the masses in 1904-08, and later, in
    1908-14. Why was that? It was because only these trends had firm class
    roots—the former in the proletariat, the latter in the liberal
    bourgeoisie.

 

Today we are again advancing towards a revolution. Everybody sees
    that. Khvostov himself says that the mood of the peasants is
    reminiscent of 1905–06. And again we see the same two lines in the
    revolution, the same alignment of classes, only modified by a changed
    international situation. In 1905, the entire European bourgeoisie supported
    tsarism and helped it either with their thousands of millions (the French),
    or by training a counter-revolutionary army (the Germans). In 1914 the
    European war flared up. Everywhere the bourgeoisie vanquished the
    proletariat for a time, and swept them into the turbid spate of nationalism
    and chauvinism. In Russia, as hitherto, the petty-bourgeois masses of the
    people, primarily the peasantry, form the majority of the population. They
    are oppressed first and foremost by the landowners. Politically, part of the
    peasantry are dormant, and part vacillate between chauvinism (“the
    defeat of Germany”, “defence of the fatherland”) and
    revolutionary spirit. The political spokesmen of these masses—and of
    their vacillation—are, on the one hand, the Narodniks (the Trudoviks
    and Social-Revolutionaries), and on the other hand, the opportunist
    Social-Democrats (Nashe Dyelo, Plekhanov, the Chkheidze group, the
    Organising Committee), who since 1910, have been determinedly following the
    road of liberal-labour politics, and in 1915 have achieved the
    social-chauvinism of Potresov, Cherevanin, Levitsky, and Maslov, or have
    demanded “unity” with them.

This state of affairs patently indicates the task of the
    proletariat. That task is the waging of a supremely courageous revolutionary
    struggle against the monarchy (utilising the slogans of the January
    Conference of 1912, the “three pillars”), a struggle that will
    sweep along in its wake all the democratic masses, i.e., mainly the
    peasantry. At the same time. the proletariat must wage a ruthless struggle
    against chauvinism, a struggle in alliance with the European
    proletariat for the socialist revolution in Europe. The vacillation of the
    petty bourgeoisie is no accident; it is inevitable, for it logically follows
    from their class stand. The war crisis has strengthened the
    economic and political factors that are impelling the petty hourgeoisie,
    including the peasantry, to the left. Herein lies the objective foundation
    of the full possibility of victory for the democratic

    

      revolution in
    Russia. There is no need here for us to prove that the objective conditions
    in Western Europe are ripe for a socialist revolution; this was admitted
    before the war by all influential socialists in all advanced countries.

To bring clarity into the alignment of classes in the impending
    revolution is the main task of a revolutionary party. This task is being
    shirked by the Organising Committee, which within Russia remains a faithful
    ally to Nashe Dyelo, and abroad utters meaningless
    “Left” phrases. This task is being wrongly tackled in Nashe
    Slovo by Trotsky, who is repeating his “original” 1905
    theory and refuses to give some thought to the reason why, in the course of
    ten years, life has been bypassing this splendid theory.

From the Bolsheviks Trotsky’s original theory has borrowed their
    call for a decisive proletarian revolutionary struggle and for the conquest
    of political power by the proletariat, while from the Mensheviks it has
    borrowed “repudiation” of the peasantry’s role. The
    peasantry, he asserts, are divided into strata, have become differentiated;
    their potential revolutionary role has dwindled more and more; in Russia a
    “national” revolution is impossible; “we are living in the
    era of imperialisnu,” says Trotsky, and “imperialism does not
    contrapose the bourgeois nation to the old regime, but the proletariat to
    the bourgeois nation.” 
Here we have an amusing example of playing with the word
    “imperialism”. If, in Russia, the proletariat already
    stands contraposed to the “bourgeois nation”, then Russia is
    facing a socialist revolution (!), and the slogan “Confiscate
    the landed estates” (repeated by Trotsky in 1915, following
    the January Conference of 1912), is incorrect; in that case we must speak,
    not of a “revolutionary workers’” government, but of a
    “workers’ socialist” government! The length
    Trotsky’s muddled thinking goes to is evident from his phrase that by
    their resoluteness the proletariat will attract the “non-proletarian
    [!] popular masses” as well (No. 217)! Trotsky has not realised that
    if the proletariat induce the non-proletarian masses to confiscate the
    landed estates and overthrow the monarchy, then that will be the
    consummation of the “national bourgeois revolution” in Russia;
    it will be a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and
    the peasantry!
 

A whole decade—the great decade of 1905-15—has shown the
    existence of two and only two class lines in the Russian revolution. The
    differentiation of the peasantry has enhanced the class struggle within
    them; it has aroused very many hitherto politically dormant elements. It has
    drawn the rural proletariat closer to the urban proletariat (the Bolsheviks
    have insisted ever since 1906 that the former should be separately
    organised, and they included this demand in the resolution of the Menshevik
    congress in Stockholm). However, the antagonism between the peasantry, on
    the one hand, and the Markovs, Romanovs and Khvostovs, on the other, has
    become stronger and more acute. This is such an obvious truth that not
    even the thousands of phrases in scores of Trotsky’s Paris
    articles will “refute” it. Trotsky is in fact helping the
    liberal-labour politicians in Russia, who by “repudiation” of
    the role of the peasantry understand a refusal to raise up the
    peasants for the revolution!
That is the crux of the matter today. The proletariat are fighting, and
    will fight valiantly, to win power, for a republic, for the confiscation of
    the land, i.e. to win over the peasantry, make full use of
    their revolutionary powers, and get the “non-proletarian
    masses of the people” to take part in liberating bourgeois
    Russia from military-feudal “imperialism”
    (tsarism). The proletariat will at once utilise this ridding of bourgeois
    Russia of tsarism and the rule of the landowners, not to aid the rich
    peasants in their struggle against the rural workers, but to bring about the
    socialist revolution in alliance with the proletarians of Europe.
.

  
 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Prizyv (The Call )—a weekly published in Paris by
    the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, from October 1915 to March
    1917. The reference is to Plekhanov’s article “Two Lines in the
    Revolution”, published in this newspaper on October 17, 1915.








<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## At the Uttermost Limit









Lenin: At the Uttermost Limit







V. I.  

      Lenin
At the Uttermost Limit




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 48, November 20, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 421-422.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The transformation of individuals from radical
    Social-Democrats and revolutionary Marxists into social-chauvinists is a
    phenomenon common to all the belligerents. The spate of chauvinism is so
    overwhelming that on all sides it has carried along with it a number of
    Left-wing Social-Democrats who are spineless or have outlived
    themselves.
Parvus, who showed himself to be an
    adventurer as far back as the Russian revolution, has now really reached the
    uttermost limit, this in his little magazine,
Die Glocke[1]. With an
    incredibly brazen air of self-satisfaction, he has taken the German
    opportunists under his wing. He flouts the beliefs he once cherished, and
    has forgotten the struggle between the revolutionary and the opportunist
    trends, and their history in the international Social-Democratic
    movement. With the bounce of a columnist confident of the
    bourgeoisie’s approval, he pats Marx on the shoulder,
    “correcting” him, without a vestige of conscientious or
    attentive criticism. He treats a certain Engels with undisguised contempt,
    and defends Britain’s pacifists and internationalists and
    Germany’s nationalists and jingoists. Rebuking the British
    social-patriots, whom he calls chauvinists and toadies to the bourgeoisie,
    he at the same time lauds the German social-patriots as revolutionary
    Social-Democrats and exchanges embraces with Lensch, Haenisch, Grunwald. He
    fawns upon Hindenburg, assuring his readers that “the German General
    Staff has taken a stand for a revolution in Russia”, and publishing
    servile paeans to this “embodiment of the German people’s
    soul”, its “mighty revolutionary sentiment”. He promises
    Germany a painless transition to socialism through an alliance between the

    

    conservatives and part of the socialists, and through “bread ration
    cards”. Like the petty coward he is, he condescendingly semi-approves
    of the Zimmerwald Conference, pretending not to have noticed in its
    manifesto the expressions directed against all shades of social-chauvinism,
    from the Parvus and Plekhanov variety, to that of Kolb and Kautsky.

In all six issues of his little journal there is not a single honest
    thought or earnest argument or sincere article. It is nothing but a cesspool
    of German chauvinism covered over with a coarsely painted signboard, which
    alleges it represents the interests of the Russian revolution! It is
    perfectly natural for this cesspool to come in for praise from such
    opportunists as Kolb and the editors of the Chemnitz
Volksstimme.[2]

Mr. Parvus has the effrontery to publicly declare it his
    “mission” “to serve as an ideological link between the
    armed German proletariat and the revolutionary Russian
    proletariat”. lt is enough to expose this clownish phrase to the
    ridicule of the Russian workers. If Prizyv of Messrs. Plekhanov,
    Bunakov and Co; has won full approval from the chauvinists and the Khvostovs
    in Russia, then Mr. Parvus’s Die Glocke is the organ of
    apostacy and grovelling flunkeyism in Germany.

In this connection another useful aspect of the present war should be
    noted. Not only are its quick-firing guns killing opportunism and anarchism,
    but the war itself is stripping the mask off the adventurers and renegades
    of socialism. It is to the proletariat’s advantage that history has
    started this preliminary purge of its movement on the eve of the socialist
    revolution, not during its course.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Die
    Glocke(The Bell )—a fortnightly journal published in
    Munich und later in Berlin 1915-25 by Parvus (Alexander Gelfand).



, a social-chauvinist

   

member of the German Social-Democratic Party and an agent of German
imperialism.





[2]
Volksstimme(The People’s Voice )—an organ of
    the German Social-Democratic Party, published in Chemnitz from 1891
    onwards.








<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## Letter to the Secretary of the Socialist Propaganda League









Lenin: Letter to the Secretary of the Socialist Propaganda League







V. I.  

      Lenin
Letter to the Secretary of the Socialist Propaganda League[2]




Published:

      First published in 1924 in Lenin Miscellany II.

      Written in English before November 9 (23), 1915.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 423-428.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Dear
Comrades![1]

We are extremely glad to get your leaflet. Your appeal to the members of
    the Socialist Party to struggle for a new International, for clear-cut
    revolutionary socialism as taught by Marx and Engels, and against the
    opportunism, especially against those who are in favor of working class
    participation in a war of defence, corresponds fully with the position our
    party (Social-Democratic Labor Party of Russia, Central Committee)
    has taken from the beginning of this war and has always taken during more
    than ten years. 
We send you our sincerest greetings & best wishes of success in our fight
    for true internationalism. 
In our press & in our propaganda we differ from your programme in several
    points & we think it is quite necessary that we expose you briefly these
    points in order to make immediate & serious steps for the coordination of
    the international strife of the incompromisingly revolutionary Socialists
    especially Marxists in all countries. 
We criticise in the most severe manner the old, Second (1889-1914)
    International, we declare it dead & not worth to be restored on old
    basis. But we never say in our press that too great emphasis has been
    heretofore placed upon so-called “Immediate Demands”, and that
    thereby the socialism can be diluted  we say & we prove that all bourgeois
    parties, all parties except the working-class revolutionary Party, are liars
    & hypocrites when they speak about reforms. We try to help the working class
    to get the smallest possible but

    

      real improvement (economic & political) in
    their situation & we add always that no reform can be durable, sincere,
    serious if not seconded by revolutionary methods of struggle of the
    masses. We preach always that a socialist party not uniting this struggle
    for reforms with the revolutionary methods of working-class movement can
    become a sect, can be severed from the masses, & that that is the most
    pernicious menace to the success of the clear-cut revolutionary
    socialism. 
We defend always in our press the democracy in the party. But we never
    speak against the centralization of the party. We are for the democratic
    centralism. We say that the centralization of the German Labor movement is
    not a feeble but a strong and good feature of it. The vice of the present
    Social-Democratic Party of Germany consists not in the centralization but in
    the preponderance of the opportunists, which should be excluded from the
    party especially now after their treacherous conduct in the war. If in any
    given crisis the small group (for instance our Central Committee is a small
    group) can act for directing the mighty mass in a revolutionary
    direction, it would be very good. And in all crises the masses
    can not act immediately, the masses want to be helped by the small groups of
    the central institutions of the parties. Our Central Committee quite at the
    beginning of this war, in September 1914, has directed the masses not to
    accept the lie about “the war of defence” & to break off with the
    opportunists & the “would-be-socialists jingoes” (we call so the
    “Socialists” who are now in favor of the war of
    defence). We think that this centralistic measure of our Central Committee
    was useful & necessary. 
We agree with you that we must be against craft Unionism & in favor of
    industrial Unionism, i.e. of big, centralized Trade Unions & in favor of the
    most active participation of all members of party in all economic
    struggles & in all trade union & cooperative organizations of the
    working class. But we consider that such people as Mr. Legien in Germany &
    Mr. Gompers in the U. S. are bourgeois and that their policy is not a
    socialist but a nationalistic, middle class policy. Mr. Legien, Mr. Gompers
    & similar persons are not the representatives of working class, they
    represent the aristocracy & bureaucracy of the working class.

    


 

We entirely sympathize with you when in political action you claim the
    “mass action” of the workers. The German revolutionary &
    internationalist Socialists claim it also. In our press we try to define
    with more details what must be understood by political mass action, as
    f. i. political strikes (very usual in Russia), street demonstrations and
    civil war prepared by the present imperialist war between nations. 
We do not preach unity in the present (prevailing in the Second
    International) socialist parties. On the contrary we preach
    secession with the opportunists. The war is the best
    object-lesson. In all countries the opportunists, their leaders,
    their most influential dailies & reviews are for the war, in other
    words, they have in reality united with “their” national
    bourgeoisie (middle class, capitalists) against the proletarian masses. You
    say, that in America there are also Socialists who have expressed themselves
    in favor of the participation in a war of defence. We are convinced, that
    unity with such men is an evil. Such unity is unity with the
    national middle class & capitalists, and a division with the international
    revolutionary working class. And we are for secession with nationalistic
    opportunists and unity with international revolutionary Marxists &
    working-class parties.
    
We never object in our press to the unity of S. P. & S.L.P. in
America.[3] We
    always quote letters from Marx & Engels (especially to Sorge, active member
    of American socialist movement), where both condemn the sectarian character
    of the S.L.P.

We fully agree with you in your criticism of the old International. We
    have participated in the conference of Zimmerwald (Switzerland)
    5-8.IX. 1915. We have formed there a left wing, and have proposed
    our resolution & our draught of a manifesto. We have just published
    these documents in German & I send them to you (with the German translation
    of our small book about “Socialism & War”), hoping that in your
    League there are probably comrades, that know German. If you could help us
    to publish these things in English (it is possible only in America and later
    on we should send it to England), we would gladly accept your help.

 

In our struggle for true internationalism & against
    “jingo-socialism” we always quote in our press the example of the
    opportunist leaders of the S.P. in America, who are in favor of restrictions
    of the immigration of Chinese and Japanese workers (especially after the
    Congress of Stuttgart, 1907, & against the decisions of
    Stuttgart). We think that one can not be internationalist & be at the same
    time in favor of such restrictions. And we assert that Socialists in
    America, especially English Socialists, belonging to the ruling, and
    oppressing nation, who are not against any restrictions of
    immigration, against the possession of colonies (Hawaii) and for the entire
    freedom of colonies, that such Socialists are in reality jingoes.

For conclusion I repeat once more best greetings & wishes for your
    League. We should be very glad to have a further information from you & to
    unite our struggle against opportunism & for the true internationalism.

Yours  N. Lenin

N. B. There are two Soc.-Dem. parties in Russia. Our party
    (“Central Committee”) is against opportunism. The other
    party (“Organization Committee”) is opportunist. We are
    against the unity with them. 
You can write to our official address (Bibliothèque russe. For the
    C. K. 7 rue Hugo de Senger. 7. Genève. Switzerland). But better write
    to my personal address: Wl. Ulianow. Seidenweg 4a, III Berne.
    Switzerland.


 
Notes
 

[1]
This letter
    was written by Lenin in English.—Ed.

 



[2]
The letter
    is a reply to the league’s leaflet received by Lenin in November
    1915. The letter is published in full for the first time.




[3]
The
    Socialist Party of America was formed in July 1901 at the congress in
    Indianapolis as a result of a merger of groups that had broken away from the
    Socialist Labour Party and the Social-Democratic Party in the U.S.A., among
    whose founders was Eugene Debs, the popular American labour leader. He was
    one of the founders of the new party. The social composition of the party
    was motley: native-born and immigrant workers, small farmers, and people
    with a petty-bourgeois background. The Centrist and Right-opportunist
    leaders of the party (V.-L. Berger, Morris Hillquit and others) denied the
    necessity of the dictatorship of the proletariat, refrained from
    revolutionary methods of struggle and confined the Party’s activities
    to participation in elections. During World War I three trends formed within
    the Socialist Party: the social-chauvinists, who supported the
    government’s imperialist policy, the Centrists, who opposed the
    imperialist war only in word, and the revolutionary minority, who held an
    internationalist stand and fought against the war. Led by Charles
    Ruthenberg, William Foster, Bill Haywood and others and with the support of
    proletarian elements, the Left wing of the Socialist Party waged a struggle
    against the opportunist leadership of the party, for the workers’
    independent political activity, and for the formation of industrial trade
    unions based on the principles of the class struggle. In 1919 the Left-wing
    split away from the S.P., initiated the formation of the American Communist
    Party, and became its core.

At present the Socialist Party is a small sectarian
    organisation.

 The Socialist Labour Party of America was
    formed in 1876 at a congress in Philadelphia, as a result of a merger of the
    American Sections of the First International and other socialist
    organisations. The work of the congress was guided by F. A. Sorge, an
    associate of Marx and Engels. Most of the Party’s members were
    immigrants who had weak links with the American workers. During the first
    years its leadership was dominated by Lassalleans, who made mistakes of a
    sectarian and dogmatic nature. Some of the party’s leaders considered
    parliamentary activity the main party task, and underestimated the
    significance of party guidance of the economic struggle of the masses, while
    others fell into trade-unionism and anarchism. The ideological and tactical
    vacillations of its leader ship resulted in a number of groups splitting
    away from the party. Marx and Engels severely criticised the sectarian
    tactics of American socialists.


In the nineties the leadership of the S.L.P. was taken
    over by its Left wing under D. De Leon who committed anarcho-syndicalist
    errors. The S.L.P. refused to fight for working-class partial demands,
    refused to work in the reformist trade unions, and continued losing its ties
    with the mass working-class movement, weak as they were. During World War I
    the Socialist Labour Party inclined towards internationalism. Under the
    influence of the Great October Socialist Revolution its more revolutionary
    section actively participated in forming the Communist Party of the
    U.S.A. At present the S.L.P. is a small organisation without any influence
    on the U.S. labour movement in the U.S.A.




From: 
Date: Thu, 7 Jul 2005 16:40:51 EDT
Subject: Re: [MIA] LENIN & SOCIALIST PROPAGANDA LEAGUE
To: 
Reply-To: MIA Steering Committee 
`
This is a Lenin scholarship question dealing with the MIA document:
`
http://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1915/nov/09.htm
`
Transcription was by David Walters and Robert Cymbala and I would be 
particularly interested in hearing their views.
`
This document, a letter to C.W. Fitzgerald of the (American) Socialist 
Propaganda League reprinted from the MECW (v. 21, pp. 423-428) states that it was 
written "before Nov. 9 (22), 1915." I am curious what, if any, contextual 
reasons would lead to this particular date attribution by the Marx-Engels-Lenin 
Institute.
`
I've just come across (and transcribed much of) a first issue of the organ of 
the SPLA, which indicates the manifesto was adopted in Boston at a meeting 
held "Nov. 26, 1916." The issue, dated Jan. 6, 1917, contains an organizational 
constitution and provisional list of officers of what is clearly a new group. 
I find it a touch hard to believe that an organization by the same name with 
the same provisional National Secretary was in existence and issuing leaflets 
for a full year prior to that date.
`
I suspect an error in dating of the Lenin document by MEL Institute, which 
was probably arrived at based upon the mailing address which Lenin provided, or 
some such.
`
Any alternate theories -- or support of the date listed in MECW -- would also 
be appreciated.
`
`
Tim Davenport
Corvallis, OR
`
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
`
`
From: 
Date: Thu, 7 Jul 2005 18:17:11 EDT
Subject: Re: [MIA] LENIN & SOCIALIST PROPAGANDA LEAGUE
To: 
Reply-To: MIA Steering Committee
`
{{ It could also be that the MELI, which assembled these documents well 
after Lenin's death, got a smudged copy, retranscribed incorrectly, 
etc. It would also make sense that the copy recieved by Lenin in Zurich 
(I think he as there then) took months and months to get there, and the 
letter/magazine was marked *by Lenin* from the date he received it, 
thus providing the MELI, 10 years or more later, with a false 
indication of the date. }}
`
It's something of a puzzle. Lenin speaks of the Sept. 1915 Zimmerwald 
congress as an event in the recent past, which lends some weight to the Nov. 1915 
attribution for the letter. I pulled the Russian Lenin PSS (v. 27, pp. 69-75 and 
footnotes on pp. 496-498) which indicates Lenin is replying to a letter of 
Nov. 13, 1915, and lists a range of dates for the Lenin letter of "Nov. 13-22, 
1915." (NS).  The footnotes speak of the emergence of the Socialist Propaganda 
League as a membership organization within the Socialist Party as an event 
which took place in 1915. My belief is that this actually happened in the waning 
days of 1916, not 1915.
`
This MEL date still strikes me as wrong by a year, but it's really hard to 
put my gut feeling against the microscopic Lenin study which took place in the 
USSR from the first publication of the letter in 1924... On the other hand, at 
no point in either the 4th English or the 5th Russian edition is C.W. 
Fitzgerald mentioned as Lenin's correspondent in question, even though the published 
facsimile of the first page of the letter makes this abundantly clear. So the 
scholarship isn't flawless here; sloppy even.
`
I think a close reading of International Socialist Review (Kerr) for the 
second half of 1915 and all of 1916 might hold the answer. I think I have many but 
not all of those issues around, I will dig a little. (If anyone has 1916 
complete, please let me know.)
`
This isn't merely an academic exercise, the Socialist Propaganda League of 
America was the direct, lineal forerunner of the Left Wing Section of the 
Socialist Party, which emerged as the two Communist Parties in 1919. At issue is at 
exactly what historical moment the American communist movement gained 
organizational consciousness. In the ideological realm revolutionary socialism
always existed as an opposition movement within the SPA, but at a certain moment -- 
either HERE or THERE -- it began formally organizing itself and collecting 
dues. That's what I'm trying to suss out, it's a fairly gigantic question of 
history...
`
tim

      








<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## Social-Chauvinist Policy Behind a Cover of Internationalist Phrases









Lenin: Social-Chauvinist Policy Behind a Cover of Internationalist Phrases







V. I.  

      Lenin
Social-Chauvinist Policy Behind a Cover of Internationalist Phrases




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 49, December 21, 1915.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 429-437.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

How are political facts related to political literature,
    political events to political slogans, and political reality to political
    ideology? This question is now of fundamental significance for an
    understanding of the entire crisis of the International, since any crisis,
    even any turning point, in a development inevitably leads to a discrepancy
    between the old form and the new content. We say nothing of the fact that
    bourgeois society is continually producing politicians who love to assert
    they belong to no class, and opportunists who love to call themselves
    socialists, both of whom deliberately and systematically deceive the masses
    with the most florid and “radical” words. In times of crisis,
    however even well-meaning participants therein very often reveal a
    discrepancy between word and deed. The great and progressive significance of
    all crises, even the gravest, most arduous and painful, lies in the
    tremendous speed, force and clarity with which they expose and sweep aside
    rotten phrases, even if well meaning, and rotten institutions even if they
    are built on the best of intentions.

The outstanding fact in the life of Russian Social-Democracy today is the
    elections of St. Petersburg workers to the war industries committees. For
    the first time during the war, these elections have drawn masses of
    the proletarians into a discussion and solution of basic problems of
    present-day politics; they have revealed the real picture of the state
    of affairs within Social-Democracy as a mass party. What has been
    revealed is that there are two currents and only two: one is revolutionary
    and internationalist,

    

      genuinely proletarian, organised by our Party, and
    against defence of the fatherland; the other is the
    “defence” or social-chauvinist current, a bloc of the
    Nashe Dyelo people (i.e., the backbone of the liquidators), the
    Plekhanovites, Narodniks and non-partisans, this bloc being backed by the
    entire bourgeois press and all the Black Hundreds in Russia, which proves
    the bourgeois and non-proletarian essence of the bloc’s policy.

Such are the facts, the reality. But what about slogans and ideology? The
    St. Petersburg Rabocheye Utro No. 2
(October 22),[3] the collection of
    articles issued by the Organising Committee crowd (The International and
    War No. 1, November 30, 1915), and the latest issues of Nashe
    Slovo provide an answer which should give food for hard thinking by
    anyone interested in politics in a way different from the interest
    Gogol’s
Petrushka[4] took in reading.

Let us examine the content and significance of this
    ideology.

The St. Petersburg Rabocheye Utro is the most important
    document. It is here that the leaders of liquidationism and
    social-chauvinism get together with Mr. Gvozdev, the informer. Those people
    know well what preceded the September 27 elections, and what took place at
    the elections. They were able to throw a veil over their bloc with the
    Plekhanovites, the Narodniks and non-partisans, and they did so. They said
    not a word about the bloc’s significance, or about the relative
    numerical strength of its various elements. It was to their
    advantage to conceal such a “trifle” (Mr. Gvozdev and his
    Rabocheye Utro friends undoubtedly possessed the relevant
    information), and they concealed it. But even they were unable to invent a
    third group apart from the Ninety and the Eighty-one. It is
    impossible to lie on the spot, in St. Petersburg, in face of the workers, by
    trumping up a “third” group, fiction about which comes from an
    “anonymous contributor in
Copenhagen”[5] writing in the German press and
    Nashe Slovo. This is impossible, because sane people will never lie
    if they know that they cannot escape summary exposure. That is why
    Rabocheye Utro has published the article by
K. Oransky[6] (an old
    acquaintance!) entitled “Two Stands”, in which he gives a
    detailed analysis of the stands taken by the Ninety and the Eighty-one

    

    groups, without saying a word about the third stand. We shall note, in
    passing, that the censor mutilated issue No. 2 of Rabocheye Utro
    almost throughout; there are almost more blank columns than printed ones,
    but of the articles only two were spared: “Two Stands”, and
    another which distorts in the spirit of liberalism the history of 1905; in
    both the Bolsheviks were abused for “anarchism” and
    “boycottism”. It is to the tsarist government’s
    advantage that such things should be written and published! It is
    not fortuitous that this kind of writing enjoys the monopoly of legality
    everywhere, from despotic Russia to republican France!
What, then, are the arguments used by Rabocheye Utro to defend
    its stand of “defence of the country” or
    “social-chauvinism”? These are, without exception, examples of
    evasion and of internationalist phrases! Our stand, they assert, is not at
    all “national”, not at all in favour of “defence”;
    we are merely expressing “what is not at all expressed in the attitude
    of the first group” (the Ninety group), viz., a “not indifferent
    attitude to the state of the country”, to its
    “salvation” “from defeat and ruin”. Our stand, they
    claim, has been “genuinely internationalist”, while showing the
    methods and means of “liberating” the country, we were “in
    agreement [with the first stand !] in appraising the origin of the war and
    its socio-political substance”, we were “in agreement [with the
    first stand!] in posing the general problem of the international
    organisation and international work of the proletariat [all this is in dead
    earnest!] and of democracy in wartime, during literally all periods of the
    development of the world conflict”. We declared in our instructions,
    they say, that, “in the present socio-political circumstances, the
    working class cannot assume any responsibility for the defence of the
    fatherland”; we, “firmly identified ourselves, in the first
    place, with the international tasks of democracy”, and “made our
    contribution to the current of aspirations whose milestones were Copenhagen
    and Zimmerwald”. (That’s the kind of people we are!) We stand,
    they claim, for the slogan of “peace without
    annexations” (italics in Rabocheye Utro);
    “to the abstract nature
    and the cosmopolitan anarchism of the first current, we have counterposed
    the realism and internationalism of our stand and our tactics”.


    

      Each of these claims is a gem, to say the least. Besides ignorance
    and
    Repetilov-like[7] lying, however, all these gems contain a
    diplomacy that is perfectly sober and correct from the bourgeois
    point of view. To influence the workers, the bourgeois must assume the guise
    of socialists, Social-Democrats, internationalists, and the like, for
    otherwise they can exert no influence. The Rabocheye Utro group
    disguise themselves; they apply plenty of paint and powder, prettify
    themselves, cast sheep eyes all around, and go the limit! They are ready to
    sign the Zimmerwald Manifesto a hundred times (a slap in the face for those
    Zimmerwaldists who signed the Manifesto without combating its timidity or
    making reservations!) or any other resolution on the imperialist nature of
    the war, or take any oath of allegiance to
    “internationalism” and
    “revolutionism” (“liberation of the country” in the
    censored press being the equivalent of “revolution” in the
    underground press), if only—if only they are not prevented from
    calling upon the workers to participate in the war industries committees,
    i.e., in practice to participate in the reactionary war of plunder
    (“a war of defence”).

Only this is action; all the rest is words. Only this is reality; all the
    rest is phrases. Only this is needed by the police, by the tsarist
    monarchy, Khvostov and the bourgeoisie. The clever bourgeois in countries
    that are cleverer are more tolerant of internationalist and socialist
    phrases if only participation in defence is assured, as is evidenced by
    comment in the French reactionary press regarding the London Conference of
    the socialists of the “Triple Entente”. With the socialist
    gentry, one of these papers said, it’s a kind of tic
    douloureux, a species of nervous malady which forces people
    involuntarily to repeat the same gesture, the same muscular movement, the
    same word. It is for that reason, the paper said, that “our
    own” socialists cannot speak about anything without repeating the
    words, “We are internationalists; we stand for social
    revolution”. This is not dangerous, the bourgeois paper concludes,
    only a “tic”; what is important to “us” is their
    stand for the defence of the country.

That is how the clever French and British bourgeois reason. If
    participation in a war of plunder is defended with phrases about democracy,
    socialism, etc., is this not to

    

      the advantage of rapacious governments, the
    imperialist bourgeoisie? Is it not to the master’s advantage to keep a
    lackey who swears to all and sundry that his master loves them, and has
    dedicated his life to their welfare?
The Rabocheye Utro people swear by Zimmerwald, and in
    word separate themselves from the Plekhanovites by declaring
    (No. 2) that they “disagree in many things” with them; in
    practice, however, they agree with them on the fundamentals,
    participate with them and with their bourgeoisie, in the
    “defence” institutions of the chauvinist bourgeoisie.

The Organising Committee not only swear by Zimmerwald, but
    “sign” formal declarations; they not only stand aside from the
    Plekhanovites, but also delegate a certain anonymous
A. M.,[8] who, sheltering
    behind his anonymity, declares: “We, who have adhered to the
    August
    bloc[9]
    [perhaps A. M. is not one, but two “adherents”?], consider it
    necessary to state that the Prizyv organisation has greatly
    exceeded the limits which can be tolerated in our Party, as we understand
    them, and that there can be no room within the August bloc organisations for
    members of groups that are bolstering Prizyv”. What bold
    people these “adhering” A. M.s are, who so unflinchingly speak
    the naked truth!
Of the five persons comprising the “Secretariat Abroad” of the
    Organising Committee, which has published the collection of articles quoted,
    none wished to come out with so courageous a statement! It follows that the
    five secretaries are against a break with Plekhanov (not so very long ago
    Axelrod said that the Menshevik Plekhanov was closer to him than the
    internationalist Bolsheviks) but, afraid of the workers and unwilling to
    injure their “reputations”, they prefer to keep it dark;
    however, they have put forward a couple of anonymous
    “adherents” so as to make a splash with a cheap and safe
    internationalism. . . .

On the one hand, some of the secretaries—Martynov, Martov and
    Astrov—have engaged Nashe Dyelo in a polemic, Martov even
    coming out with a private opinion opposed to participation in the war
    industries committees. On the other hand, the Bundist Yonov, who considers
    himself “Left” of Kosovsky—a man who reflects the
    Bund’s actual policy—is willingly advanced by the Bundists to
    cover up their nationalism; he advocates the “further development of
    the

    

      old tactics [of the Second International, which led to its collapse] but
    by no means its liquidation”. The editors have supplied Yonov’s
    article with ambiguous, vapid and diplomatically evasive reservations, but
    they do not object to its substance, to a defence of the rotten and
    opportunist in the “old tactics”. The anonymous A. M.s, who have
    “adhered” to the August bloc, openly defend Nasha Zarya
    ; even if it did “deviate” from the internationalist stand, yet
    it “rejected [?] the Burgfrieden policy for Russia; it
    recognised the necessity of immediately re-establishing international links
    and, to the best of our knowledge [i.e., of the adhering anonymous A. M.s],
    it approved of Mankov’s expulsion from the Duma group”. An
    excellent defence! The petty-bourgeois Narodniks favour the re-establishment
    of links, Kerensky is opposed to Mankov, but to say that those who have come
    out in favour of “non-resistance to the war” are opposed to a
    policy of a class truce (Burgfrieden) means deceiving the workers
    with empty words.

The editors of the Organising Committee’s journal have come out in
    a body with an article entitled “Dangerous Tendencies”. This is
    a model of political evasiveness! On the one hand, here are clamorous Left
    phrases against the authors of calls for defence of the country (i.e., the
    Moscow and Petrograd social-chauvinists); on the other hand, they write:
    “It is difficult to judge which party circles both declarations
    emanated from”! In reality, there is not the slightest doubt that
    they emanated “from the circles” of Nashe
    Dyelo, although the contributors to this legally published journal are,
    of course, not guilty of having drawn up an underground declaration. Instead
    of dealing with the ideological roots of these declarations, and with the
    full identity between these roots and the liquidationist, social-chauvinist
    and Nashe Dyelo trends, the Organising Committee crowd have busied
    themselves with a ridiculous pettifogging that is, of no value for anybody
    but the police, namely, the personal authorship of members of one
    circle or another. On the one hand, the editors bluster out
    threats: we internationalists of the August bloc, they say, will close our
    ranks for “the most energetic resistance to defence
    tendencies” (p. 129), for “an uncompromising
    struggle” (p. 126); on the other hand, we find right next to such
    declarations the following piece

    

      of skulduggery: “The line of the Duma
    group, which has the support of the Organising Committee, has met
    [hitherto!] with no open opposition” (p. 129)!
As the authors themselves are well aware, this line consists in an
    absence of any line, and is a covert defence of Nashe Dyelo and
    Rabocheye Utro.
Take the most “Left” and the most
    “principled” article in the collection, the one written by
    Martov. It will suffice to quote a single sentence expressing the
    author’s main idea, to see what his adherence to principles is
    like. “It is self-evident,” he writes, “that if the present
    crisis should lead to the victory of a democratic revolution, to a republic,
    then the character of the war would radically change” (p. 116). All
    this is a shameless lie. Martov could not but have known that a democratic
    revolution and a republic mean a bourgeois-democratic revolution and a
    bourgeois-democratic republic. The character of this war between the
    bourgeois and imperialist Great Powers would not change a
    jot were the military-autocratic and feudal imperialism to be swept
    away in one of these countries. That is because, in such conditions, a
    purely bourgeois imperialism would not vanish, but would only gain
    strength. It is for that reason that our paper, issue No. 47, declared,
    in
Thesis 9,[1]

that the party of Russia’s
    proletariat will not defend, in the present war, even a fatherland of
    republicans and revolutionaries, whilst they are chauvinists like Plekhanov,
    the Narodniks, Kautsky, the Nashe Dyelo people, Chkheidze, the
    Organising Committee, etc.

Martov’s evasive phrase in a footnote to p. 118 will do him no
    good. Here, in contradiction to what he says, on p. 116, he
    “doubts” whether bourgeois democracy can fight “against
    international imperialism” (of course it cannot); he expresses
    “doubt” whether the bourgeoisie will not turn a 1793 republic
    into a Gambetta and Clemenceau republic. Here the basic theoretical error
    remains: in 1793 the foremost class in a French bourgeois
    revolution fought against European pre-revolutionary monarchies,
    whereas the Russia of 1915 is fighting, not more backward countries, but
    more advanced countries, which are on the eve of a socialist
    

    revolution. It follows that, in the war of 1914-15, only a proletariat that
    is carrying out a victorious socialist revolution, can play the part of the
    Jacobins of 1793. Consequently, in the present war, the Russian proletariat
    could “defend the fatherland” and consider “the character
    of the war radically changed”, only and exclusively if the
    revolution were to put the party of the proletariat in power, and were to
    permit only that party to guide the entire force of a revolutionary upheaval
    and the entire machinery of state towards an instant and direct conclusion
    of an alliance with the socialist proletariat of Germany and Europe
    (Sotsial-Demokrat No. 47,
Thesis 11).[2]

Martov concludes his article, in which he juggles with sonorous phrases,
      by dramatically appealing to “Russian Social-Democracy” to
      “take a clear-cut revolutionary-internationalist stand at the outset
      of the political crisis”. The reader who wants to find out whether
      these dramatic words do not conceal something rotten at the core should
      ask himself what a political stand is usually taken to mean. It means (1)
      bringing forward a formulated appraisal of the moment and the tactics to
      be used, and a series of resolutions, all this on behalf of an
      organisation (at least on behalf of a “quintet of
      secretaries”); (2) advancing a militant slogan for the current
      moment; (3) linking up these two points with action by the
      proletarian masses and their class-conscious vanguard Martov and
      Axelrod, the ideological leaders of the “quintet”, have not
      only failed to dn any of these three things, but on all of these points
      have given practical support to the social-chauvinists, have
      shielded them! During the sixteen months of war, the five secretaries
      abroad have not taken a “clear-cut stand”, or any stand at all
      on the question of programme and tactics. Martov vacillates now to the
      left, now to the right. Axelrod’s urge is only to the right (see his
      German pamphlet particularly). Here there is nothing clear, formulated or
      organised, no stand whatever! “The central militant slogan for the
      Russian proletariat at the current moment,” Martov writes in his own
      name, “must be a national constituent assembly for the liquidation
      of both tsarism and the war.” This is neither a central nor a
      militant slogan.

    

      It is quite useless because it does not reveal the basic social and class
      content, or the clear-cut political content of the concept of this dual
      “liquidation”. It is a cheap bourgeois-democratic phrase, not
      a central, or militant, or proletarian slogan.

Finally, on the main issue, i.e., connections with the masses in
    Russia, what Martov and Co. have to offer, is not merely a zero, but a
    negative quantity. They have nothing and nobody behind them. The elections
    have shown that only the bourgeoisie’s bloc with Rabocheye
    Utro has some of the masses behind it, whereas reference to the
    Organising Committee and the Chkheidze group means only shielding that
    bourgeois bloc with falsehoods.


 
Notes
 

[1]
See p. 403 of this volume.—Ed.


[2]
See pp. 403–04 of this volume.—Ed.

 



[3]
Rabocheye
Utro(The Workers’ Morning )—a Menshevik legal
      daily published in Petrograd from October to December 1915.




[4]
Petrushka—a character in Gogol’s novel, Dead
    Souls, who enjoy the process of reading printed matter, without
    troubling to understand the meaning of what he reads. He keeps on marvelling
    at the way letters make up words.




[5]
This refers
    to Trotsky, who in 1910 contributed an anonymous and slanderous article on
    the state of affairs in the R.S.D.L.P. to the German Social-Democratic
    Vorwärts. At the Copenhagen Congress of the Second
    International Lenin, Plekhanov and a representative of Polish
    Social-Democrats exposed this slander in a special statement and protested
    to the Executive of the German Social-Democratic Party against its
    publication.




[6]
K. Oransky—the Menshevik liquidator
    G. D. Kuchin, a contributor to Nasha Zarya.



[7]
Repetilov—a character in Griboyedov’s comedy Wit
    Works Woe.



[8]
A. M.—A. S. Martynov.




[9]
The
    August bloc—  as founded by Trotsky at a conference of
    non-Bolshevik groups and trends held in Vienna in August 1912.








<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index












==========

## Opportunism, and the Collapse of the Second International









Lenin: Opportunism, and the Collapse of the Second International







V. I.  

      Lenin
Opportunism, and the Collapse of the Second International




Written: Written at the end of 1915 

Published:

      First published in Proletarshay Revotutsia No. 5 (28), 1924.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [197[4]],

      Moscow,

      Volume 21,

      pages 438-454.

      Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
D. Walters and R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      2003

      (2005).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

It is instructive to compare the attitudes of the various classes and
      parties towards the collapse of the International, which has been revealed
      by the 1914-15 war. On one hand, the bourgeoisie extols to the sky those
      socialists who have expressed themselves in favour of “defending the
      fatherland”, i.e., in favour of the war and of aiding the
      bourgeoisie. On the other hand, the bourgeoisie’s more outspoken or
      less diplomatic representatives are expressing malicious joy over the
      collapse of the International, the collapse of the
      “illusions” of socialism. Among socialists who are
      “defending the fatherland” there are also two shades: the
      “extremists” like the Germans W. Kolb and W. Heine, who admit
      the collapse of the International, for which they blame the
      “revolutionary illusions”; these are out to restore a still
      more opportunist International. In practice, however they agree with
      the “moderates”, the cautious socialist “defenders of
      the fatherland”, such as Kautsky, Renaudel, and Vandervelde, who
      stubbornly deny that the International has collapsed, consider it merely
      suspended temporarily, and defend the Second International’s
      viability and right to exist. Revolutionary Social-Democrats in the
      various countries recognise the collapse of the Second International and
      the need to create a Third International.

To decide who is right, let us examine an historic document which bears
    upon the present war, and carries the unanimous and official signatures of
    all socialist parties in the world. That document is the
Basle
    Manifesto of 1912. Noteworthy enough, no socialist would, in theory,
    dare deny the need for a concretely historical analysis of every war.

    

    Today, however, none but the “Left” Social-Democrats, who are
    but few in number, would be so bold as to publicly and definitely repudiate
    the Basle Manifesto, or declare it erroneous, or analyse it carefully,
    comparing its decisions with the conduct of the socialists after the
    outbreak of the war.

Why is that so? It is because the Basle Manifesto ruthlessly exposes the
    wrong reasoning and conduct of the majority of official socialists. There is
    not a single word in this Manifesto on either the “defence of
    the fatherland” or the difference between a war of aggression and a war
    of defence! Not a syllable on a subject the official S.D. leaders
    both in Germany and in the Quadruple Entente have been talking and
    vociferating about most. In a perfectly clear, precise, and definite manner,
    the Basle Manifesto analyses the concrete clashes of interests which led
    towards war in 1912 and brought about war in 1914. The Manifesto says that
    these are clashes arising on the basis of “capitalist
    imperialism”, clashes between Austria and Russia for domination over
    the Balkans, clashes between Britain, France, and Germany over their
    “policies of conquest in Asia Minor” (the policies of all of
    them!), clashes between Austria and Italy over their attempt to
    “draw Albania into their sphere of influence”, subject her to
    their “rule”, and clashes between Britain and Germany because of
    their mutual “antagonism”, and further, because of
    “tsarism’s attempts to grab Armenia, Constantinople,
    etc.” It will be seen that this applies in full to the present war. The
    undisguised predatory, imperialist and reactionary character of this war,
    which is being waged for the enslavement of nations, is most clearly
    recognised in the Manifesto, which draws the necessary conclusion that war
    “cannot be justified on the slightest pretext of being in the least in
    the interests of the people”, that war is prepared “for the sake
    of the profits of capitalists and ambitions of dynasties”, and that on
    the part of the workers it would be “a crime to fire at one
    another”.

These propositions contain the fundamentals for an understanding of the
    radical distinction between two great historical periods. One was the period
    between 1789 and 1871, when, in most cases, wars in Europe were indubitably
    connected with the most important “interests of the
    people”, namely, a powerful bourgeois-progressive movement for

    

    national liberation which involved millions of people, with the destruction
    of feudalism, absolutism, and foreign oppression. It was on this basis alone
    that there arose the concept of “defence of the fatherland”,
    defence of a bourgeois nation that is liberating itself from
    medievalism. Only in this sense did socialists recognise “defence of
    the fatherland”. Even today it must be recognised in this
    sense ; for instance, the defence of Persia or China against Russia or
    Britain, of Turkey against Germany or Russia, of Albania against Austria and
    Italy, etc.

The 1914-15 war, as clearly expressed in the Basle Manifesto, pertains to
    an entirely different historical period and is of an entirely different
    character. This is a war among predators for division of the loot, for the
    enslavement of other countries. Victory for Russia, Britain, and France
    means the strangulation of Armenia, Asia Minor, etc.—this is
    stated in the Basle Manifesto. Germany’s victory means the
    strangulation of Asia Minor, Serbia, Albania, etc. This is stated
    in the selfsame Manifesto, and has been recognised by all socialists! All
    phrases about a war of defence or about the defence of the fatherland by the
    Great Powers (i.e., the great predators), who are fighting for world
    domination, markets and “spheres of influence”, and the
    enslavement of nations, are false, meaningless and hypocritical! It is not
    surprising that “socialists” who are in favour of defending the
    fatherland are afraid to recall or to exactly quote the Basle
    Manifesto, for it exposes their hypocrisy. The Basle Manifesto
    proves that socialists who stand for the “defence of the
    fatherland” in the 1914-15 war are socialists only in word and
    chauvinists in deed. They are social-chauvinists.

Recognition of this war as connected with national liberation leads to
    one line of socialist tactics; recognition of a war as imperialist,
    predatory and aggressive, leads to another line. The latter has been clearly
    defined in the Basle Manifesto. The war, it says, will evoke an
    “economic and political crisis”, which, it continues, must be
    “utilised” to “hasten the collapse of the rule of
    capital”. These words recognise that social revolution is
    ripe, that it is possible, that it is approaching
    in connection with the war. The “ruling classes” are afraid of a
    “proletarian revolution”, says the Manifesto, quoting the
    example of the
Paris Commune
    and

    

      of 1905, i.e., the examples of revolutions, strikes, and civil war. It
    is a lie for anybody to say that the socialists “have not
    discussed”, or “have not decided” the question of their
    attitude towards the war. The Basle Manifesto has decided this
    question; it has mapped out the line of tactics—that of proletarian
    revolutionary action and civil war.

It would be erroneous to think that the Basle Manifesto is a piece of
    empty declamation, a bureaucratic phrase, a none-too-serious threat. Those
    whom the Manifesto exposes are prepared to say such things. But that is not
    the truth! The Basle Manifesto sums up the vast amount of propaganda and
    agitation material of the entire epoch of the Second International, namely,
    the period between 1889 and 1914. This Manifesto summarises,
    without any exaggeration, millions upon millions of leaflets, press
    articles, books, and speeches by socialists of all lands. To declare this
    Manifesto erroneous means declaring the entire Second International
    erroneous, the work done in decades and decades by all Social-Democratic
    parties. To brush aside the Basle Manifesto means brushing aside the entire
    history of socialism. The Basle Manifesto says nothing unusual or
    out of the ordinary. It provides only and exclusively that
    which enabled the socialists to lead the
    masses—recognition of “peaceful” work as
    preparation for a proletarian revolution. The Basle Manifesto
    repeated what Guesde said at the 1899 Congress, where he ridiculed
    socialists’ ministerialism manifesting itself in the event of
    a war for markets, “brigandages capitalistes” (En
    garde! pp. 175-76), or what Kautsky said in 1909, in his pamphlet
    Der Weg zur Macht, in which he spoke of the end of the
    “peaceful epoch” and the advent of an epoch of wars, revolutions,
    and the proletariat’s struggle for power.

The Basle Manifesto incontestably proves the complete betrayal of
    socialism by those socialists who voted for war credits; joined governments,
    and recognised the defence of the fatherland in 1914-15. This betrayal is
    undeniahle. It will be denied by hypocrites alone. The only question is: how
    is it to be explained.
It would be unscientific, absurd and ridiculous to reduce the question to
    personalities, to refer to
Kautsky,
Guesde,
Plekhanov (and
    say: “even” such persons!). That would be a

    

      wretched
    subterfuge. Any serious explanation calls, in the first place, for an
    economic analysis of the significance of present-day politics, then
    for an analysis of their fundamental ideas, and, finally, for a
    study of the historic trends within socialism.

What is the economic implication of “defence of the
    fatherland” in the 1914–15 war? The answer to this question has been
    given in the Basle Manifesto. The war is being fought by all the Great
    Powers for the purpose of plunder, carving up the world, acquiring markets,
    and enslaving nations. To the bourgeoisie it brings higher profits; to a
    thin crust of the labour bureaucracy and aristocracy, and also to the petty
    bourgeoisie (the intelligentsia, etc.) which “travels” with the
    working-class movement, it promises morsels of those profits. The
    economic basis of “social-chauvinism” (this term being more
    precise than the term social-patriotism, as the latter embellishes the evil)
    and of opportunism is the same, namely, an alliance between an insignificant
    section at the “top” of the labour movement, and its
    “own” national bourgeoisie, directed against the masses
    of the proletariat, an alliance between the servants of the
    bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie, directed against the class that is
    exploited by the bourgeoisie. Social-chauvinism is a consummated
    opportunism.

Social-chauvinism and opportunism are the same in their political
    essence; class collaboration, repudiation of the proletarian dictatorship,
    rejection of revolutionary action, obeisance to bourgeois legality,
    non-confidence in the proletariat, and confidence in the bourgeoisie. The
    political ideas are identical, and so is the political content of their
    tactics. Social-chauvinism is the direct continuation and consummation of
    Millerandism, Bernsteinism, and British liberal-labour policies, their sum,
    their total, their highest achievement.

Throughout the entire period between 1889 and 1914, two lines in
    socialism—the opportunist and the revolutionary—are to be
    seen. Today there are also two lines in socialism. Let us not follow the
    method of referring to persons, which is practised by the bourgeois
    and opportunist liars, and let us take the trends to be seen in a
    number of countries. Let us take ten European countries:

    

      Germany, Britain,
    Russia, Italy, Holland, Sweden, Bulgaria, Switzerland, Belgium and
    France. In the first eight countries, the division into the opportunist and
    revolutionary trends coincides with the division into
    social-chauvinists and revolutionary internationalists. The main nuclei of
    social-chauvinism in the social and political sense are: Sozialistische
    Monatshefte and Co. in Germany; the Fabians and the Labour Party in
    Britain (the Independent Labour Party entered in a bloc with both,
    the influence of social-chauvinism in the latter being considerably stronger
    than in the British Socialist Party, in which about three-sevenths are
    internationalists, namely, 66 to 84); Nasha Zarya and the
    Organising Committee (as well as Nashe Dyelo) in Russia;
    Bissolati’s party in Italy; Troelstra’s party in Holland;
    Branting and Co. in Sweden; the
“Shiroki”[21] in Bulgaria;
    Greulich and “his”
people[1]

in Switzerland. It is from
    revolutionary Social-Democrats in all these countries that a more
    or less sharp protest has emanated against social-chauvinism. Two countries
    out of the ten are the exception, but even there internationalists are
    weak, but not absent; the facts are rather unknown (Vaillant has
    admitted having received letters from internationalists, which he did not
    publish) than non-existent.

Social-chauvinism is a consummated opportunism. That is beyond doubt. The
    alliance with the bourgeoisie used to be ideological and secret. It is now
    public and unseemly. Social-chauvinism draws its strength from nowhere else
    but this alliance with the bourgeoisie and the General Staffs. It is a
    falsehood for anybody (including Kautsky) to say that the
    “masses” of proletarians have turned towards chauvinism;
    nowhere have the masses been asked (with the exception, perhaps, of
    Italy, where a discussion went on for nine months prior to the declaration
    of war, and where the masses also were against the Bissolati
    party). The masses were dumbfounded, panic-stricken, disunited, and crushed
    by the state of martial law. The free vote was a privilege of the leaders
    alone—and they voted for the bourgeoisie and against
    the proletariat! It is ridiculous and monstrous to consider opportunism an
    inner-party phenomenon! All

    

      Marxists in Germany, France, and other
    countries have always stated and insisted that opportunism is a
    manifestation of the bourgeoisie’s influence over the proletariat;
    that it is a bourgeois labour policy, an alliance between an insignificant
    section of near-proletarian elements and the bourgeoisie. Having for decades
    to mature in conditions of “peaceful” capitalism, opportunism was
    so mature by 1914-15 that it proved an open ally of the bourgeoisie. Unity
    with opportunism means unity between the proletariat and its national
    bourgeoisie, i.e., submission to the latter, a split in the international
    revolutionary working class. We do not say that an immediate split with the
    opportunists in all countries is desirable, or even possible at present; we
    do say that such a split has come to a head, that it has become inevitable,
    is progressive in nature, and necessary to the revolutionary struggle of the
    proletariat, and that history, having turned away from
    “peaceful” capitalism towards imperialism, has thereby turned
    towards such a split. Volentem ducunt fata, nolentem
    trahunt.[2]

Since the onset of the war, the bourgeoisie of all countries, the
    belligerents in the first place, have united in lauding socialists who
    recognise the “defence of the fatherland”, i.e., the defence of
    the bourgeoisie’s predatory interests in the imperialist war,
    against the proletariat. See how this basic interest of the
    international bourgeoisie is making its way into the socialist parties, into
    the working-class movement, to find expression there! The example of Germany
    is particularly instructive in this respect, since the epoch of the Second
    International saw the growth of the greatest party in that country, but
    the very same thing is to be seen in other countries, with only
    minor variations in form, aspect and outward appearance.

In its issue of April 1915, Preussische Jahrbücher, a
    conservative German journal, published an article by a
    Social-Democrat, a member of the Social-Democratic Party, who
    concealed his identity behind the pseudonym of Monitor. This opportunist
    blurted out the truth regarding the substance of the policy pursued
    by the entire world bourgeoisie towards the working-class movement
    of the twentieth century.

    

      The latter can neither be brushed aside nor
    suppressed by brute force, he says. It must be demoralised from within, by
    buying its top section. It was exactly in this manner that the
    Anglo-French bourgeoisie has been acting for decades, by buying up the
    trade-union leaders, the Millerands, the Briands and Co. It is in this
    manner that the German bourgeoisie is now acting. The Social-Democratic
    Party’s behaviour, Monitor says to (and in essence in the name
    of) the bourgeoisie, is “irreproachable” in the present war
    (i.e., it is irreproachably serving the bourgeoisie against the
    proletariat). The process of the transformation” of the
    Social-Democratic Party into a national liberal-labour party is proceeding
    excellently. It would, however, be dangerous to the bourgeoisie,
    Monitor adds, if the party were to turn to the right; “it
    must retain the character of a workers’ party with socialist
    ideals. On the day it gives that up, a new party will arise to take up the
    rejected programme, giving it a still more radical formu
    lation” (Preussische Jahrbücher, 1915, No. 4,
    pp. 50-51).

These words openly express that which the bourgeoisie has always and
    everywhere done covertly. “Radical” words are
    needed for the masses to believe in. The opportunists are prepared
    to reiterate them hypocritically. Such parties as the
    Social-Democratic parties of the Second International used to be are useful
    and necessary to the opportunists because they engendered the
    socialists’ defence of the bourgeoisie during the 1914-15
    crisis. Exactly the same kind of policy as that of the German Monitor is
    being pursued by the Fabians and the liberal trade-union leaders in Britain,
    and the opportunists and the Jaurèsists in France. Monitor is an
    outspoken and cynical opportunist. Then there is another shade, a covert or
    “honest” opportunist (Engels was right when he once said that the
    “honest” opportunists are the most dangerous to the working-class
    movement). Kautsky is an example of such an opportunist.

In Die Neue ZeitNo. 9, of November 26, 1915, he wrote that the
    majority of the official party was violating its programme (Kautsky himself
    upheld the policy of the majority for a whole year after the outbreak of the
    war, justifying the “defence of the
    fatherland” lie!). “Opposition to the

    

      majority is
    growing,” he said (p. 272). (“Die Opposition gegen die
    Mehrheit im Wachsen ist.) The masses are “in
    opposition” (oppositionell). “Nach dem Kriege
    [nur nach dem Kriege? ] . . . werden die
    Klassengegensätze sich so verschärfen, dass der
    Radikalismus in den Massen die Oberhand gewinnt” (p. 272). Es
    “droht uns nach dem Kriege [nur nach dem
    Kriege? ] . . . die Flucht der radikalen Elemente aus der Partei
    und ihr Zustrom zu einer Richtung antiparlamentarischer [?? soll
    heissen: ausserparlamentarischer ] Massenaktionen. . . . So
    zerfällt unsere Partei in zwei Extreme, die nichts Gemeinsames
    haben.”[3]

Kautsky wants to represent the golden mean, and to reconcile the
    “two extremes” which “have nothing in common”!
    Today (sixteen months after the outbreak of war) he admits that the
    masses are revolutionary. Condemning in the same breath revolutionary
    action, which he calls “Abenteuer” “in
    den
    Strassen”[4]

(p. 272), Kautsky wants to
    “reconcile” the revolutionary masses with the opportunist
    leaders, who have “nothing in common” with them—but on
    what basis ? On the basis of mere words! On the basis of
    “Left-wing” words of the “Left-wing” minority in the
    Reichtag! Let the minority, like Kautsky, condemn revolutionary
    action, calling it adventurism, but it must feed the
    masses with Left-wing words. Then there will be peace in the Party,
    unity with the Südekums, Legiens, Davids, and Monitors!
But that is Monitor’s selfsame programme in its entirety, a
    programme of the bourgeoisie, only expressed in dulcet tones and in honeyed
    phrases! The same programme was carried out by Wurm as well, when at the
    session of the Social-Democratic group in the Reichstag, March 18, 1915,
    “er die Fraktion ‘warnte’, den Bogen zu
    überspannen ; in den Arbeitermassen wachse die Opposition
    gegen die Fraktionstaktik;

    

      es gelte, beim marxistischen
    Zentrum zu verharren” (Klassenkampf gegen den Krieg! Material
    zum “Fall Liebknecht”. Als Manuskript gedruckt,
S. 67).[5]

Let us note the acknowledgement, on behalf of the “Marxist
    Centre” (including Kautsky), that the masses were in a revolutionary
    temper! This was March 18, 1915! Eight and a half months later, on
    November 26, 1915, Kautsky again proposed that the revolutionary masses be
    appeased with Left phrases!
Kautsky’s opportunism differs from Monitor’s only in the
    wording, in shades, and the methods of achieving the same end:
    preservation of the opportunists’ influence (i.e., the
    bourgeoisie’s) over the masses, preservation of the
    proletariat’s submission to the opportunists (i.e., the
    bourgeoisie)! Pannekoek and Gorter have very properly dubbed
    Kautsky’s stand “passive radicalism”. (It is
    verbiage, to quote the French who have had occasion to make a
    thorough study of this variety of revolutionism, from their
    “home-made” models!) I would rather prefer to call it covert,
    timid, saccharine and hypocritical opportunism.

In substance, the two trends in Social-Democracy now disagree, not in
    words or in phrases. When it comes to the art of blending “defence of
    the fatherland” (i.e., defence of bourgeois plundering) with phrases on
    socialism, internationalism, freedom for the peoples, etc., Vandervelde,
    Renaudel, Sembat, Hyndman, Henderson, and Lloyd George are in no wise
    inferior to Legien, Südekum, Kautsky, or Haase! The actual difference
    begins with a complete rejection of defence of the fatherland in the present
    war, and with acceptance of revolutionary action in connection with the war,
    during and after it. In this question, the only serious
    and business-like one, Kautsky is at one with Kolb and Heine.

Compare the Fabians in Britain and the Kautskyites in Germany. The former
    are almost liberals, who have never recognised Marxism. Engels wrote of the
    Fabians on

    

      January 18,
1893:[6]

 “A gang of place hunters, shrewd enough
    to understand the inevitability of the social revolution, but totally
    unwilling to entrust this gigantic work to the immature proletariat
    alone. . . . Their fundamental principle is fear of
    revolution....” And on November 11, 1893, he wrote: “Haughty
    bourgeois, benevolently descending to the proletariat to liberate it from
    above, if only it is willing to understand that such a raw, uneducated mass
    cannot liberate itself, and can attain nothing without the charity of those
    clever attorneys, litterateurs, and sentimental
females.”[22]

How far from these
    the Kautskyites seem to be in their “theory”! In practice, however, in
    their attitude towards the war, they are quite identical ! This is
    convincing proof of how the Marxism of the Kautskyites has withered, turned
    into a dead letter, a piece of cant.

The following instances will reveal the kind of obvious sophisms used by
    the Kautskyites since the outbreak of war, to refute the tactics of
    revolutionary proletarian action, as unanimously adopted by the socialists
    in Basle. Kautsky advanced his theory of “ultra-imperialism”. By
    this he meant the substitution of “joint exploitation of the world by
    internationally united finance capital, for the struggle of capital of some
    nations against that of other countries” (Die Neue Zeit No. 5,
    April 30, 1915, p. 144). At the same time, Kautsky himself added: “Can
    such a new phase of capitalism be at all achieved? Sufficient premises are
    still lacking to enable us to answer this question!” On the ground that
    a new phase is “conceivable”, though he himself lacks the
    courage even to declare it “achievable”, he now rejects the
    revolutionary tasks of the proletariat at a time when the phase of crisis
    and war has obviously arrived! Revolutionary action is rejected by the
    selfsame leader of the Second lnternational who, in 1909, wrote a book
    entitled Der Weg zur Macht. Translated into almost all the
    principal European languages, the book revealed the connection
    between the impending war and the revolution, and proved that
    “revolution cannot be premature”!
In 1909, Kautsky proved that the epock of
    “peaceful” capitalism had passed, and that the epoch of wars and
    revolutions was at hand. In 1912, the Basle Manifesto made this view the
    basis of the entire tactic of the world socialist

    

      parties. In 1914 war came,
    followed by the “economic and political crisis” foreseen at
    Stuttgart and Basle. At this juncture Kautsky invented theoretical
    “subterfuges” to be used against revolutionary tactics!
Axelrod has advanced the same ideas, only clothed in a phraseology a
    little more to the “Left”. He writes in free Switzerland, and it
    is his desire to exert an influence on Russian revolutionary workers. In his
    pamphlet, Die Krise und die Aufgaben der internationalen
    Sozialdemokratie, Zurich, 1915, we find a discovery that is so pleasing
    to the opportunists and the bourgeois of the whole world, namely, that
    “das Internationalisierungsproblem der Arbeiterbewegung ist mit
    der Frage der Revolutionisierung unserer Kampfesformen und Methoden nicht
    identisch” (p. 37) and that “der Schwerpunkt des
    Internationalisierungsproblems der proletarischen Befreiungsbewegung liegt
    in der weiteren Entwicklung und Internationalisierung eben jener
    Alltagspraxis [p. 40] . . . beispielsweise müssen die
    Arbeiterschutz und Versicherungsgesetzgebung . . . zum Objekt ihrer
    [der Arbeiter ] internationalen Aktionen und Organisationen
    werden”
(p. 39).[7]

It goes without saying that such “internationalism” has the
    full approval, not only of the Südekums, Legiens and Hyndmans, together
    with the Vanderveldes, but also of the Lloyd Georges, Naumanns and Briands!
    Axelrod defends Kautsky’s “internationalism” without even
    quoting or analysing any of the latter’s arguments for defence of the
    fatherland. Like the Francophile social-chauvinists, Axelrod is even afraid
    to mention that it is revolutionary tactics that the Basle Manifesto speaks
    of. Against the future—the uncertain and unknown future—Axelrod
    is prepared to advance the most Left-wing and blatantly revolutionary
    phrases, such as saying that the future International will meet,
    entgegentreten wird (den Regierungen im Falle der

    Kriegsgefahr ) 
    

      mit der Entfachung eines rewlutionäiren
    Sturmes. ...Einleitung der sozialistischen Revolution
    ”
(p. 14).[8]

No joking here! When, however, it is a matter of
    applying revolutionary tactics right now, during the present crisis, Axelrod
    says ganz à la
Kautsky[9]

:

“Revolutionäre
    Massenaktionen”—such tactics “hätte noch
    eine gewisse Berechtigung, wenn wir unmittelbar am Vorabend der
    sozialen Revolution ständen, ähnlich wie es etwa in
    Russland seit den Studentendemonstrationen des Jahres 1901 cler Fall
    war, die das Herannahen entscheidender Kämpfe gegen den
    Absolutismus
ankündigten”[10]

(pp. 40-41), and then he
    fulminates against the “Utopien”,
    “Bakunismus”, quite in the spirit of Kolb, Heine,
    Südekum, and Legien. The example of Russia exposes Axelrod most
    strikingly. Four years elapsed between 1901 and 1905, and nobody could
    guarantee, in 1901, that the revolution in Russia (the first revolution
    against absolutism) would take place four years later. Prior to the social
    revolution, Europe is in exactly the same situation. Nobody can tell whether
    the first revolution of this kind will come about in four years. That a
    revolutionary situation, however, actually exists is a fact that
    was predicted in 1912 and became a reality in 1914. The 1914 demonstrations
    of workers and starving citizens in Russia and Germany also undoubtedly
    “ankündigen das Herannahen entscheidender
    Kämpfe”.[11]

It is the bounden duty of socialists to support
    and develop such demonstrations and every kind of “revolutionary mass
    action” (economic and political strikes, unrest among the troops, right
    up to insurrection and civil war); furnish them with clear slogans; create
    an underground organisation and publish underground literature, without
    which the masses cannot be called upon to rise up in revolution;
    help them get a clear understanding of the revolution,

    

      and organise for
    it. It is in this way that the Social-Democrats acted in Russia in 1901, on
    the eve (“am Vorabend”) of the bourgeois revolution
    which began in 1905, but has not ended even in 1915. In the very sameway,
    the Social-Democrats are obliged to act in Europe in 1914-15 “am
    Vorabend der sozialistischen Revolution”. Revolutions are never
    born ready-made; they do not spring out of Jupiter’s head; they do not
    kindle at once. They are always preceded by a process of unrest, crises,
    movements, revolts, the beginnings of revolution, the latter
    not always developing to the very end (if, for instance, the
    revolutionary class is not strong enough). Axelrod invents pretexts so as to
    distract Social-Democrats from their duty of helping develop the
    revolutionary movements burgeoning within the existing revolutionary
    situation. Axelrod defends the tactics of David and the Fabians, while
    masking his own opportunism with Left-wing phrases.

“Den Weltkrieg in einen Bürgerkrieg umwandeln zu wollen
    wäre Wahnsinn
gewesen,”[12]

writes David, leader of the
    opportunists (Die Sozialdemokratie im
Weltkrieg,[13]

Berlin, 1915,
    p. 172), in objecting to the manifesto of the Central Committee of our
    Party, the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, which was published on
    November 1, 1914. The manifesto advanced the civil war slogan, adding:
    “Wie gross die Schwierigkeiten dieser Umwandlung zur gegebenen
    Zeit auch sein mögen—die Sozialisten werden niemals
    ablehnen, die Vorarbeiten in der bezeichneten Richtung
    systematisch, unbeugsam, und energisch auszuführen, falls
    der Krieg zur Tatsache geworden
ist.”[14]

(Quoted by David, p. 171.) It
    is noteworthy that a month before David’s book appeared (May 1, 1915),
    our Party published (in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 40, March 29)
    resolutions on the war, which advocate systematic “steps towards
    turning the present imperialist war into a civil war”, these steps
    being defined in

    

      the following way: (1) refusal to vote for war credits,
    etc.; (2) rejection of
“Burgfrieden”[15]

;

(3) formation of
    an underground organisation; (4) support for fraternisation by the men in
    the trenches; (5) support for every kind of revolutionary mass action by the
    proletariat in general.

O brave David! In 1912 he did not think it “madness” to refer
    to the example of the Paris Commune. In 1914, however, he was echoing the
    bourgeois outcry of “madness”.

Plekhanov, a typical representative of the social-chauvinists of the
    Quadruple Entente, has given an appraisal of revolutionary tactics, which is
    fully in accord with David’s. He has called the idea
on[16]

...

to wit, the
    Vorabend[17]

of the social revolution, from which a period
    of four years or more may elapse before the entscheidende
    Kämpfe.[18]

These are, in fact, the first
    beginnings—weak as yet, but beginnings, nevertheless—of the
    “proletarian revolution” which the Basle resolution spoke of and
    which will never become strong suddenly, but will inevitably pass
    through the stages of relatively weak beginnings.

Support for and the development, extension and intensification of
    revolutionary mass action and the revolutionary movement; the creation of an
    illegal organisation for propaganda and agitation in this direction, so as
    to help the masses understand the movement and its tasks, methods and
    aims—these are the two points that any practical programme of
    Social-Democratic activity in the present war must inevitably boil down
    to. All the rest is opportunist and counter-revolutionary phrases, no matter
    what Leftist, pseudo-Marxist and pacifist contortions those phrases may be
    disguised with.

Whenever exclamations like the following are made in protest to
    us—all this in the usual fashion of the diehards in the Second
    International: “O those ‘Russian’
    methods!” (“Die russische Taktik”—Kap. VIII
    bei
David),[19]

we reply

    

      merely by referring to the facts. On
    October 30, 1915, several hundred women (einiger Nundert)
    demonstrated in front of the Parteivorstand, and sent it the
    following message through a deputation: “Die Verbreitung von
    unzensierten Flugblättern und Druckschriften und die Abhaltung
    nicht genehmigter Versammlungen wäre bei dem grossen
    Organisationsapparat heute leichter möglich als zur Zeit des
    Sozialistengesetzes. Es fehlt nicht an Mitteln und Wegen, sondern
    oaensichtlich an dem
Willen”[20]

(my italics). (Berner
    Tagwacht No. 271.)
I suppose these Berlin women workers must have been led astray by the
    “Bakuninist” and “adventurist”,
    “sectarian” (see Kolb and Co.) and
    “reckless” manifesto of the Russian Party’s Central
    Committee, dated November 1.


 
Notes
 

[1]
In the
    MS. Lenin wrote “wing” above the word
    “people”.—Ed.


[2]
Fate leads
    the willing, but drags the unwilling (Lat.).—Ed.


[3]

    “After the war [only affer the war?] the class antagonisms
    will become so sharpened that radicalism will gain the upper hand among the
    masses [p. 272]. . . . We are threatened with the flight of the radical
    element from the Party after the war [only after the war?]
    . . . and with their rushing to join the current of anti-parliamentary [??
    should be: extra-parliamentary] mass action. . . . Thus our Party is divided
    into two extremes which have nothing in
    common.”—Ed.


[4]
Street
    adventurism.—Ed.


[5]

“He
    warned the group not to test the patience of the masses too far, as
    opposition is growing among the masses against the group’s tactics;
    one must remain with the Marxist Centre.” (The Class Struggle
    Against the War! Material on the Liebknecht Case. Published as a
    manuscript, p. 67).—Ed.


[6]

See
    Engels’s letters to F. A. Serge of January 18 and November 11,
    1893.
—Lenin

[7]

“The
    problem of internationalising the labour movement is not identical with the
    guestion of revolutionising the forms and methods of our
    struggle” (p. 37) and that “the gist of the problem of
    internationalising the proletarian movement for freedom lies in the future
    development and internationalisation of everyday practices [p. 40]
    . . . for instance, labour protection and insurance legislation
    must become the object of their [workers’] international
    action and organisations” (p. 39).—Ed.


[8]
will meet
    (the governments in case of a war danger) “with the release of a
    revolutionary storm . . . the inauguration of the socialist
    revolution”.—Ed.


[9]

    “quite in the Kautsky spirit”.—Ed.


[10]

“Revolutionary mass action”—such tactics
    “would have a certain justification if we were immediately on the eve
    of a social revolution in the very same way, for instance, as, was the case
    in Russia beginning with the student demonstrations of 1901, which were the
    forerunners of approaching decisive battles against
    absolutism”.—Ed.


[11]

    “proclaims the approaching decisive
    battles”.—Ed.


[12]

“It
    would be madness to wish to turn the world war into a civil
    war.”—Ed.


[13]
Social-Democracy in the World War.—Ed.


[14]

    “However difficult such a transformation may seem at any given moment,
    socialists will never relinquish systematic, persistent,
    and undeviating preparatory work in this direction, once war has become a
    fact.”—Ed.


[15]

“a
    class truce”.—Ed.


[16]
The page
    breaks off here. Several words are missing from the beginning of the next
    page of the manuscript. This is the first publication of the continuation of
    the article.—Ed.


[17]

“the
    eve”.—Ed.


[18]

    “decisive battles”.—Ed.


[19]

“The
    Russian tactics”. Chapter 8 in David’s
    book.—Ed.


[20]

    “Today, with the existence of a big machine of organisation it would
    be far easier to distribute illegal leaflets and pamphlets and to
    hold banned meetings than it was during the Anti-Socialist
    Law. There is no shortage of means and methods, but there seems to be a lack
    of determination.”—Ed.
    
 



[21]
See Note 90.




[22]
See Engels’s letters to F. A. Sorge of January 18 and November 11, 1893.










<
  backward

 

forward >




Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 21

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index










