# Volume  6

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 6







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 6 



 
Lenin
      Collected Works: 

    Volume 6 
January 1902-August 1903



Preface




1902




Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.

Notes on Plekhanov's First Draft Programme

Draft Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party

Three Amendments to the Draft Programme

Notes on Plekhanov's Second Draft Programme

Opinion On Plekhanov's Second Draft

Remarks on the Committee's Draft Programme

Additional Remarks on the Committee's Draft Programme

Addition
Concerning The Class Struggle
An Amendment to the Agrarian Section of the Programme



268k


Signs of Bankruptcy
24k


From the Economic Life of Russia
    
1. The
  Savings-Banks

81k


Report of the Iskra Editorial Board to the Meeting (Conference) of R.S.D.L.P. Committees
    
(N. B.) Rough
Outline of Resolution

101k



The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III
   

  ¶ IV
   

  ¶ V
   

  ¶ VI
   

  ¶ VII
   

  ¶ VIII
   

  ¶ IX
   

  ¶ X

149k


A Letter to the Zemstvoists

30k


On the Borba Group

3k


A Letter to the Northern League      Comments on the Programme of the Northern League

38k


Why the Social-Democrats Must Declare a Determined and Relentless War on the Socialist-Revolutionaries

13k


Two Letters to I. I. Radchenko

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II

106k


Revolutionary Adventurism

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II

202k


A Letter to the Moscow Committee

8k


Preface to the Second Edition of the Pamphlet, The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats

19k


The Draft of a New Law on Strikes

31k


A Letter to the Editors of Yuzhny Rabochy

13k


A Letter to a Comrade on Our Organisational Tasks

56k


Political Struggle and Political Chicanery

27k


Concerning Demonstrations

5k


Vulgar Socialism and Narodism as Resurrected by the Socialist-Revolutionaries

23k


On the Tasks of the Social-Democratic Movement

7k


The Basic Thesis Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries

13k


New Events and Old Questions

19k



To Secondary School Students
3k


On the Svoboda Group

5k


Extract from an Article Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries

6k


Draft Appeal of the Russian Organising Committee to the League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy, the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, and the Foreign Committee of the Bund

9k



On the Subject of Reports by Committees and Groups of the R.S.D.L.P. to the General Party Congress

The Working-Class
      Movement, Its History and Present
    State
History of the Local
Socialist Circles, Appearance of the
      Social-Democrats, Struggle of Trends Within Them
Organisation of the
      Local Committee, Local Groups and
      Circles
Character, Content, and
    Scope of Local Work
Attitude Towards
Revolutionary (Especially
Social-Democratic) Groups of Other Races and
Nationalities
Print-Shops, Transport,
and Arrangements for Secret
      Work
Contacts and Activity
      Among Sections of the Population
      Outside the Working Class
State of the
      Non-Social-Democratic Revolutionary and
      Opposition Trends and Attitude Towards Them 


310k


1903


Moscow Zubatovists in St. Petersburg
17k


Announcement of the Formation of an Organising Committee
18k


Some Reflections on the Letter from “7 Ts. 6 F.”
23k


Concerning the Statement of the Bund
20k


On the Manifesto of the Armenian Social-Democrats
12k


Does the Jewish Proletariat Need an “Independent Political Party”?
18k


Marxist Views on the Agrarian Question in Europe and in Russia
    
Programme of
      Lectures

    
Outline of Lecture
      One. General Theory

    
Domination of
      Capitalist Agriculture. Rent

87k


The Autocracy is Wavering....
17k


Mr. Struve Exposed by His Colleague
24k



To the Rural Poor
    
An
    Explanation for the Peasants of What the Social-Democrats
    Want

The Struggle of the Urban Workers
What Do the Social-Democrats Want?
Riches and Poverty, Property-Owners and Workers in the
Countryside
What Path Should the Middle Peasant Take? Should He Take the Side
of the Property-Owners and the Rich, or the Side of the
Workers and the Poor?
What Improvements Are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain
for the Whole People and for the Workers?
What Improvements Are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain
for All the Peasants?
The Class Struggle in the Countryside


The Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Proposed by the Newspaper Iskra in Conjunction with the Magazine Zarya


208k



Les Beaux Esprits Se Rencontrent
    
(Which May Be Interpreted
Roughly as: Birds of a Feather Flock Together)
13k



Reply to Criticism of Our Draft Programme
47k


The National Question in Our Programme
30k


Outline of an Article Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries
5k



Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
    
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903


Draft Resolution on
Demonstrations 
Draft Resolution on the
Place of the Bund in the Party
Draft Resolution on the
      Attitude Towards the Student Youth
Draft Resolution on
Party Literature 
Drafts of Minor
Resolutions

    The Economic Struggle;

    May Day;

    International Congress;

    Terrorism;

    Propaganda;

    Distribution of Forces.
Draft Resolution on the
Publication of A Periodical
      For Members of Religious Sects
Draft Rules of the
R.S.D.L.P. 
Draft Resolutions Not
    Submitted to the Congress

    Withdrawal of the Bund;

    Separate Groups;

    The Army;

    The Peasantry;
First Speech On the Agenda of the Congress, July 15
      (31)
Second Speech On the Agenda of the Congress, July 15
      (31)
Speech On the Actions of the Organising Committee,
      July 15 (31)
Speech On the Attendance of the Polish
      Social-Democrats at the Congress, July 18 (31)
Speech On the Place of the Bund In the R.S.D.L.P.,
      July 20 (August 2)
Speech On the Party Programme, July 22 (August 4)
Report On the Party Rules, July 29 (August 11)
First Speech In the Discussion On the Agrarian
      Programme, July 31 (August 13)
Second Speech In the Discussion On the Agrarian
      Programme, August 1 (14)
Third Speech In the Discussion On the Agrarian
      Programme, August 1 (14) 
Fourth Speech In the Discussion On the Agrarian
      Programme, August 1 (14) 
First Speech In the Discussion On the Party Rules,
      August 2 (15) 
Second Speech In the Discussion On the Party Rules,
      August 2 (15) 
Speech at the Election of the Editorial Board of
      Iskra, August 7 (20) 
Speech On the Attitude
      Towards the Student Youth, August 10 (23) 


166k


An Era of Reforms
22k


The Latest Word in Bundist Nationalism

12k


Martov's Contradictions and Zigzags
3k


 



      Volume 6 Transcription/Mark-up:
   

    Who? 2003 (“Signs of Bankruptcy”

    and “To Secondary
    School Students”; 

    source?). 

     •  
    R.
      Cymbala (all documents except two
    above), 2004.

    
        •
    Converted to "tx2html", Sept. 2004.
  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Preface







LCW: 6: Preface by Progress Publishers







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 6: Preface by Progress Publishers 




Lenin
      Collected Works: 
Volume 6
Preface by
      Progress Publishers


    Volume Six contains works by V. I. Lenin written between January
    1902 and August 1903.
  

    The volume includes Material for the Preparation of the
      Programme of the R.S.D.L.P., which reflects the struggle
    waged by Lenin in the Editorial Board of Iskra for the
    working out of a revolutionary programme for the party of the
    working class.
  

    A considerable part of the volume consists of works dealing with the
    question of agrarian relations and the peasantry, the theory of the
    alliance of the working class with the peasantry: “The
    Agrarian Programme of Russian Social Democracy,"the pamphlet, To
      the Rural Poor, and other works.
  

    The national question and the struggle against bourgeois and
    petty-bourgeois nationalism are dealt with in the articles,
    “The National Question in Our Programme," “Does the
    Jewish Proletariat Need an 'Independent Political Party'?", and
    other writings.
  

    The present volume contains the following works directed against the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries: “Revolutionary Adventurism,"
    “The Basic Thesis Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries,"
    “Why the Social-Democrats Must Declare a Determined and
    Relentless War on the Socialist-Revolutionaries," and others.
  

    Lenin's struggle against bourgeois liberalism is reflected in the
    articles, “The Autocracy is Wavering...", “Mr. Struve
    Exposed by His Colleague," and “Political Struggle and
    Political Chicanery."
  

    "A Letter to a Comrade on Our Organisational Tasks," and
    “Draft Rules of the R.S.D.L.P." are devoted to an elaboration
    of the organisational principles of a Marxist party.
  

    The volume includes “On the Subject of Reports by Committees
    and Groups of the R.S.D.L.P. to the General Party Congress," as well
    as draft resolutions and speeches at the Second 'Congress of the
    R.S.D.L.P. which give an idea of Lenin's work in preparation for and
    during the Party Congress.
  

    The present volume includes the following works by V. I. Lenin
    published for the first time in his Collected Works:
  

    "Concerning Demonstrations," “On the Tasks of the
    Social-Democratic Movement," “The Basic Thesis Against the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries," “To Secondary School Students,"
    “Extract from an Article Against the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries," “Draft Appeal of the Russian
    Organising Committee to the League of Russian Revolutionary
    Social-Democracy, the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, and
    the Foreign Committee of the Bund," “Marxist Views on the
    Agrarian Question in Europe and in Russia," “Outline of an
    Article Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries," “First Speech
    in the Discussion on the Party Rules," “Speech on the Attitude
    Towards the Student Youth," and “The Latest Word in Bundist
    Nationalism."
  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 









==========

## Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.








V. I.  

      Lenin
Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.[1]




Written: Written in January-April 1902 

Published:

      First published in 1924, in Lenin Miscellany II.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 17-78.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






Notes On Plekhanov’s First Draft Programme
  19



Draft Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party[10101010 10101010] 
  27



Three Amendments to the Draft Programme
  34



Notes On Plekhanov’s Second Draft Programme
  37



Opinion On Plekhanov’s Second Draft
  58



Remarks On the Committee’s Draft Programme
  61



Additional Remarks On the Committee’s Draft Programme
  74



An Amendment to the Agrarian Section of the Programme
  77

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

      The Party programme adapted at the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. in
      1903 was drawn up by the Editorial Board of Lenin’s Iskra at the
      end of 1901 and the first half of 1902.  V. I. Lenin played a prominent
      part in drawing up the draft programme of the R.S.D.L.P
    

      As early as 1895-96, while in prison, Lenin wrote the “Draft and
      Explanation of a Programme for the Social-Democratic Party” (see
      present edition, Vol. 2, pp. 93-121); at the end of 1899, while in exile
      in Siberia, he prepared a new draft programme (see present edition,
      Vol. 4, pp. 227-54). When he began publication of Iskra, Lenin
      considered its most important task to be the struggle to achieve and
      consolidate the ideological unity of Russian Social-Democracy and to
      embody this unity in the Party programme. “The discussion of
      questions of theory and policy,” he wrote, “will be connected with
      the drafting of a Party programme...” (see present edition, Vol 4,
      “Draft of a Declaration of the Editorial Board of Iskra and
      Zarya,” p. 324).
    

      The question of drawing up a draft of the Party programme became
      particularly acute in the summer of 1901: “We were in formed in
      letters from Russia that talk about the congress had intensified,”
      V. I. Lenin wrote to P. B. Axelrod on July 9, 1901. “This forces us
      more and more to think about the programme. Publication of a draft
      programme is extremely necessary and would be of tremendous
      importance” (see present edition, Vol. 36, “To
      P. B. Axelrod”). On Lenin’s suggestion, the original draft of the
      theoretical part of the programme was written by G. V. Plekhanov.
    

      At a conference of the Iskra Editorial Board held in Munich in
      January 1902, Lenin sharply criticised Plekhanov’s draft; he made over 30
      notes, pointing out a series of propositions in the draft that were
      incorrect in principle (see pp. 19-26 of. this volume). Under the
      influence of criticism by Lenin and other members of the Editorial Board,
      Plekhanov rewrote the first two paragraphs of his draft, but he did not
      agree with most of the other notes and proposals. During discussion of
      Plekhanov’s draft by the Iskra Editorial Board, big differences
      of opinion were revealed; one of the most serious was evoked by Lenin’s
      proposal to begin the programme by pointing to the development of
      capitalism in Russia; in notes written after the conference Lenin wrote:
      “The question whether or not to begin by pointing to Russia has been
      left open (3 votes in favour and 3 against).” (Lenin Miscellany
      II, 1924, p. 15.)
    

      Convinced that Plekhanov’s draft of the theoretical part of the programme
      was unacceptable, Lenin set about writing his own



      draft. The initial version of Lenin’s draft (in the correspondence of the
      members of the Iskra Editorial Board—“Frey’s draft”) was
      written by January 25 (February 7), 1902; Lenin completed work on his
      draft by February 18 (March 3), 1902 (see pp. 27-33 and 34 of this
      volume). Simultaneously Plekhanov was also working on his second draft
      programme of the R.S.D.L.P. This too came in for serious critical analysis
      by Lenin (see p. 37-57 and 58-60 of this volume). To co-ordinate Lenin’s
      and Plekhanov s drafts of the programme and draw up a joint draft
      programme of the R.S.D.L.P. the Iskra Editorial Board set up a
      “Co-ordinating” Committee.
    

      In its work this Committee took Plekhanov’s draft as a basis. However, as
      a result of Lenin’s insistent demands, a number of very important
      propositions were included in the Committee’s draft: the thesis of the
      ousting of small-scale production by large-scale production replaced
      Plekhanov’s indefinite and vague formulation; a definition more precise
      than in Plekhanov’s draft was given of the purely proletarian character of
      the Party; the thesis of the dictatorship of the proletariat as an
      essential condition of the socialist revolution became a point of the
      highest importance in the programme. Lenin got acquainted with the
      Committee’s draft programme on April 12, 1902, while travelling from
      Munich to London, and he wrote his remarks on it during the journey (see
      pp. 61-73 of this volume).
    

      At the conference of the Iskra Editorial Board held in Zurich on
      April 14, 1902, which Lenin did not attend, the general editorial draft of
      the programme was confirmed: its theoretical part (the Committee’s) and
      the practical part (already agreed to by all the members of the
      Iskra Editorial Board in early March 1902). Most of the notes,
      amendments, and additions proposed by Lenin were taken into account by the
      authors of the draft programme, when it was discussed at the Zurich
      conference.
    

      The draft programme of the R.S.D.L.P. drawn up by the Editorial Board of
      Iskra and Zarya was published in Iskra, No. 21,
      June 1, 1902, and the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., held July
      17-August 10 (July 30-August 23), 1903, adopted the Iskra draft
      programme of the Party, with minor changes.
    

      The programme of the R.S.D.L.P. existed until 1919, when a new programme
      was adopted at the Eighth Congress of the R.C.P. (B.).The theoretical part
      of the programme of theR.S.D.L.P., which described the general laws and
      tendencies of capitalist development, was included in the new programme of
      the R.C.P.(B.), on V. I. Lenin’s proposal.

    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Notes on Plekhanov's First Draft Programme







Lenin: 1902/draft: Notes On Plekhanov's First Draft Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

    


    
 

Notes On Plekhanov’s First Draft Programme




Plekhanov’s Text
Lenin’s Notes



I. The principal economic feature of present-day society is the
    domination of capitalist production relations in it,


Page 1. No. I—Capitalism is not a “feature” of
    present-day society, but its economic system or
    mode, etc.




i.e., ownership of the means of production and of commodity
    circulation by the numerically very small class of capitalists,


No. 2—The means of production belong not only to the
    capitalists, but to the landowners and small producers as well.




while the majority of the population consists of proletarians,


No. 3—The proletariat is not the majority of the population in
    many countries.




who have no other possession but their labour-power, and cannot
    subsist except by selling it.


No. 4—The proletariat possesses certain articles of
    consumption (and partly means of production too).




In consequence of this, the majority of the population is reduced to
    the dependent position of wage-workers, whose labour creates the
    income of the capitalists.


Page 2. No. 5±of the landowners.




II. The sphere of domination of capitalist production relations is
    constantly expanding, as continuous technical progress


To page 2. Not technical progress but private owner ship
    expropriates and ver elendet [Impoverishes.—Ed.] the small producer.





increases the economic importance of the big enterprises and thereby


No. 6—“and thereby”?? Of itself technical progress can not
    increase the economic importance of the big enterprises. As
    the result of technical progress (+a number of economic changes,
    such as in market conditions,etc.)small scale production is being
    oust ed by large-scale production.




decreases the number of independent small producers, reduces their
    role in the economic life of society,


No. 6-7. Capitalism does not always"decrease the flu m b e
    r of small producers" (relatively, and not necessarily
    absolutely, particularly in Russia).

        
    (Capitalism expropriates and leads him—the small
    producer—to degradation and impoverishment....)

        
    Page 2. No. 7. Reduces the role of the small=increases the
    economic importance of the big (one and the same thing).




and at places turns them directly into vassals and tributaries of
    the big manufacturers.


No. 8—Directly—delete. The process of the separation of
    the producer from the means of production is not indicated.




III. Capitalist production relations weigh more and more heavily on
    the working class, as technical progress, by increasing the
    productivity of labour, not only makes it materially possible for
    the capitalists to intensify the exploitation of the workers, but
    converts this possibility into reality, occasioning a relative
    reduction in the demand


Page 3 of the original draft.

        
    No. 9.+and on the small producers (the peasants in general should be
    specially mentioned).

        
    No. 10—giving rise to, or engendering.




 
for labour-power simultaneously ’with a relative and absolute
    increase in its supply.


Page 3—expressed in an extremely unpopular, abstract way. Far
    better in the Erfurt

    Programme[4]

    “...the army of surplus-workers is growing”,
    “insecurity of existence is increasing.”




IV. The development of labour productivity does not raise the p rice
    of labour-power, but, on the contrary, is very often the direct
    cause of its reduction. Thus, technical progress, which signifies an
    increase in social wealth, causes greater social inequality in
    capitalist society, widens the distance between the propertied and
    the property- less, and increases the workers’ economic dependence
    on the capitalists.


Page 4—“the price of labour-power” is very often reduced
    (also expressed in a very abstract way;=the growth of exploitation,
    oppression, poverty, degradation) ."Thus” causes greater
    inequality. It would appear from this that greater inequality is
    engendered only by the increase (intensification) in the
    exploitation of the wage-worker, whereas it is engendered:

        

    1) by the expropriation of the small producer +2) by the
    impoverishment of the small producer+3) by the increase in
    exploitation +4) by the growth of the reserve army.




V. With such a state of affairs in capitalist society and with the
    constantly growing mutual rivalry among the capitalist countries on
    the world market, the sale of commodities necessarily lags behind
    their production, and this periodically causes more or less severe
    industrial crises attended by more or less lengthy periods of
    industrial stagnation, leading to a further


Page 5. Is it necessary to indicate the causes of crises in
    the programme? If so, the shortcoming is that two causes are
    indicated: 1) greater social inequality (“with such a state of
    affairs," p. 4)

    +2) the growth of rivalry. The basic cause of

    crises=Planlosigkeit,[ Planlessness.—Ed.]

    private appropriation under social production, is not in dictated.





reduction in the number and economic importance of the small
    producers,


Pages 5-6: reduction of the

    “e c o n o m i c

      i m p o r t a n c e”

    of the small producers is too abstract a term. Expropriates
    (=reduces the number?) and verelendet.




to a still greater dependence of wage-labour upon capital,


Page 6—of wage-“labour”? Isn’t it better to say of
    the workers?




and to a still more rapid relative, and at places even absolute,
    deterioration of the conditions of the proletariat and the small
    producers.


Page 6—consequences of a crisis—relative and
      absolute deterioration of the conditions. Isn’t it better to
      say plainly: unemployment, poverty of the workers and the small
      producers.




VI. But as these inevitable contradictions of capitalism grow and
    develop, the discontent of the working class with the existing order
    of things also grows, its struggle against the capitalist class
    becomes sharper, and in its midst the realisation spreads ever more
    widely and rapidly


Page 7—instead of discontent — indignation.

         Page 7—the spreading of a
    realisation (—γ) is placed on a par with the
    growth of indignation (—α) and the aggravation of the
    struggle (—β). But α and β are spontaneous,
    whereas y should be introduced by us.




that the yoke of economic dependence, which lies on its shoulders,
    can be thrown off only through its own efforts, and that to throw
    off this yoke a social revolution

    

    is necessary, i.e., the destruction of capitalists production
    relations and the conversion of the means of production and of the
    circulation of products into public property.


Page 7—“only through its own efforts”. This should be
    expressed in a more general way: can be the act only
      of the working class, etc.

        

    Pages 7-8, 1) destruction of capitalist production
    relations?—Socialist

    production[1]
t a k i  n g

           
      t h e

           

      p l a c e[2]

    of commodity production, 2) the expropriation of the exploiters, 3)
    the conversion of the means of production into public
    property? The conversion of private into public property.




VII. This revolution of the proletariat will emancipate the whole of
    mankind, now oppressed and suffering, since it will put an end to
    all forms of oppression and exploitation of man by man.

 



VIII. In order to replace capitalist commodity production by the
    socialist organisation of the production of articles to satisfy the
    needs of society and ensure the well-being of all its members, in
    order to effect its revolution,


Page 9–unclear[3]

:

“to satisfy the needs of society and
      ensure the well-being of all its members.” This is
insufficient: (cf. the Erfurt Programme: “the greatest
      well-being and all-round harmonious perfection”).




the proletariat must have command of political power, which will
    make it master of the situation and enable it ruthlessly to smash
    all the obstacles it will come up against on the road to its great
    goal. In this sense the dictatorship of the proletariat is an
    essential political condition of the social revolution.


Page 9. “Master of the situation,” “ruthlessly to
    smash,” “dictatorship”??? (The social revolution is enough for
    us.)





IX. But the development of international exchange and the world
    market has established such close ties among all nations of the
    civilised world, that this great goal can be attained only through
    the united efforts of the proletarians of all countries. Hence the
    present-day working-class movement had to become, and has long
    become, an international movement.

Page 10—nil.



X. Russian Social-Democracy regards itself as one of the detachments
    of the world army of the proletariat, as part of international
    Social-Democracy.

 



XI. It pursues the same ultimate aim as the Social-Democrats of all
    other countries set themselves.


Page 11 .—“The same

    Endziel.”[Ultimate aim.—Ed.]

    Why the repetition?




It discloses to the workers the irreconcilable antagonism between
    their interests and those of the capitalists, explains to them the
    historical significance, nature, and prerequisites of the social
    revolution which the proletariat is to carry out, and organises
    their forces for an unremitting struggle against their exploiters.


Page 11. Might there not be confusion?—"The same
    Endziel—and right along side the task of the
    Social-Democratic Party:

    1) To disclose to (?) the workers the irreconcilable
    antagonism between their interests and those of the capitalists. 2)
    To explain to them the significance, nature, and prerequisites of
    the social revolution (±the necessity of revolution?).

        

    The Germans put this more forcibly: weisen naturnotwendiges

      Ziel.[To indicate the naturally necessary aim.—Ed.]

    3) To organise their forces for an unremitting
      struggle against

    t h e i r

    e x p  l o i t e r s

    (N.B.?+a g a i n s t

    t h e

    g o v e r n m e n t?)+?

    t o

    d i r e c t

    the struggle of the proletariat.

        

    1) is included in 2). 1)— too limited. It should be: a to
    indicate the ultimate aim, β to create an organisation of
    revolutionaries to direct the struggle of the proletariat.




 
XII. But its immediate aims are considerably modified by the fact
    that in our country numerous remnants of the pre-capitalist —
    serf-owning — social system are an oppressive burden on the
    entire working population and are the most difficult of all the
    obstacles hindering the progress of the Russian working-class
    movement.


Page 12. “Remnants of the serf-owning system ... are an
    oppressive burden on the entire working population” (+the
    retardation of the development of productive forces +the
    deterioration of living conditions+keeping the whole people in a
    state of ignorance and subjection)—the most difficult obstacle
    (=remnants)? (What are these remnants? The
    autocracy—I—all the rest? This is said

    b e l o w.)




The Russian Social-Democrats still have to work for the
    establishment of those juridical institutions which, constituting a
    natural legal complement to capitalist production relations, already
    exist in the advanced capitalist countries


12-13: necessary to work for the establishment of those (?)
    juridical institutions which already

    (?) exist in the advanced countries. (These should be named
    more concretely. Unpopular.)




and are necessary for the complete and comprehensive development of
    the class struggle of wage-labour against capital.


Page 13—of wage-labour?—of the workers, of the struggle
    of the working class against the capitalist class
    for its complete emancipation.





And since the tsarist autocracy, which is the most out standing
    remnant of the old serf-owning system and the most harmful in
    respect of further social development, is wholly incompatible with
    these juridical institutions, and since by its very nature it cannot
    but he the bitterest and most dangerous enemy of the proletarian
    emancipation movement,


Page 13. The autocracy is incompatible with these juridical
    institutions (with political liberty??).




the Russian Social-Democrats advance as their immediate political
    task the overthrow of the monarchy.


Page 14. Since the

     a u t o c r a c y

    is incompatible— the overthrow of the monarchy
    (inconsistent).




    

     

Notes
 

[1]

It is necessary to explain what this socialist production is.
—Lenin

[2]

      As is stated on pages 8-9.
—Lenin

[3]

In Lenin’s manuscript the word “unclear” is written above the
words “to satisfy the needs”.—Ed.

 



[4]

The Erfurt Programme of the German Social-Democratic Party was
      adopted in October 1891 at the Congress in Erfurt. Compared with the Gotha
      Programme (1875), it was a step forward, being based on the Marxist
      doctrine that the capitalist mode of production must inevitably yield
      place to the socialist; it stressed the need for the working class to wage
      a political struggle, indicating the party’s role as the organiser of this
      struggle, etc. However,

   

      the Erfurt Programme, too, contained serious concessions to
      opportunism. It was extensively criticised by Frederick Engels
      (“Criticism of the Draft Social-Democratic Programme of 1891”), this
      being in essence a criticism of the opportunism of the entire Second
      International, for whose parties the Erfurt Programme was a kind of
      model. However, the leadership of German Social-Democracy concealed
      Engels’ criticism from the p arty rank and file, while his most important
      remarks were ignored when the final text of the programme was drawn
      V. I. Lenin and G. V. Plekhanov considered that the Erfurt Progamme’s
      silence on the dictatorship of the proletariat was its chief defect and a
      cowardly concession to opportunism.

    

 
  


|

Draft Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party[10101010 10101010] 

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party









Lenin: 1902/draft: Draft Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party[10101010 10101010] 







V. I.  

      Lenin
Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

Draft Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour

Party[1]




      [A]
 

      I. Commodity production is ever more rapidly developing in Russia, the
      capitalist mode of production becoming increasingly dominant in it.
    

      II. As the result of continuous technical progress, small-scale
      production is being ousted to an ever greater degree by large-scale
      production. The most important part of the means of production (of the
      land and factories, tools and machinery, railways and other means of
      communication) is becoming concentrated in the hands of a relatively in
      significant number of capitalists and big landowners as their private
      property. The independent small producers (peasants, handicraftsmen, and
      artisans) are being ruined in growing numbers, losing their means of
      production and thus turning into proletarians, or else becoming servants
      and tributaries of capital. Increasing numbers of working people are
      compelled to sell their labour-power and become wage-workers, who are
      dependent on the property-owners and by their labour create the wealth of
      the latter.
    

      III. The greater the degree of technical progress, the more the growth of
      the demand for labour-power lags behind the growth of its supply, and the
      greater are the opportunities for the capitalists to intensify
      exploitation of the workers. Insecurity of existence and unemployment, the
      yoke of

    

      exploitation, and humiliation of every kind are becoming the lot of ever
      wider sections of the working population.
    

      IV. This process is being still more aggravated by industrial crises,
      which are the inevitable outcome of the basic contradictions of
      capitalism. Poverty and destitution among the masses exist side by side
      with wastage of social wealth in consequence of the impossibility of
      finding markets for commodities produced.
    

      V. Thus, the gigantic development of the productive forces of social
      labour, which is constantly becoming more socialised labour, is attended
      by monopolisation of all the principal advantages of this development by a
      negligible minority of the population. The growth of social wealth
      proceeds side by side with the growth of social inequality; the gulf
      between the class of property-owners (the bourgeoisie) and the class of
      the proletariat is growing.
    
[B]

      VI. But as all these inevitable contradictions of capitalism increase and
      develop, the number and the solidarity of the proletarians, their
      discontent and indignation also grow, the struggle between the working
      class and the capitalist class becomes sharper, and the urge to throw off
      the intolerable yoke of capitalism mounts.
    

      VII. The emancipation of the workers must be the act of the working class
      itself. All the other classes of present-day society stand for the
      preservation of the foundations of the existing economic system. The real
      emancipation of the working class requires a social revolution—which
      is being prepared by the entire development of capitalism—i.e., the
      abolition of private ownership of the means of production, their
      conversion into public property, and the replacement of capitalist
      production of commodities by the socialist organisation of the production
      of articles by society as a whole, with the object of ensuring full
      well-being and free, all-round development for all its members.
    

      VIII. This proletarian revolution will completely abolish the division of
      society into classes and, consequently, all social and political
      inequality arising from that division.
    

      IX. To effect this social revolution the proletariat must win political power,
      which will make it master of the situation

    

      and enable it to remove all obstacles along the road to its great goal. In
      this sense the dictatorship of the proletariat is an essential political
      condition of the social revolution.
    

      X. Russian Social-Democracy undertakes the task of disclosing to the
      workers the irreconcilable antagonism between their interests and those
      of the capitalists, of explaining to the proletariat the historical
      significance, nature, and prerequisites of the social revolution it will
      have to carry out, and of organising a revolutionary class party capable
      of directing the struggle of the proletariat in all its forms.
    

      XI. But the development of international exchange and of production for
      the world market has established such close ties among all nations of the
      civilised world, that the present-day working-class movement had to
      become, and has long become, an international movement. That is why
      Russian Social-Democracy regards itself as one of the detachments of the
      world army of the proletariat, as part of international Social-Democracy.
    

      XII. The immediate aims of Russian Social-Democracy are, however,
      considerably modified by the fact that in our country numerous remnants of
      the pre-capitalist, serf-owning social system, retard the development of
      the productive forces in the highest degree, render impossible the
      complete and all-round development of the proletariat’s class struggle,
      and lower the working population’s standard of living; they are
      responsible for the Asiatically barbarous way in which the
      many-million-strong peasantry is dying out, and keep the entire people in
      a state of ignorance and subjection, denying them all rights.
    

      XIII. The tsarist autocracy is the most outstanding of these remnants of
      the serf-owning system and the most formidable bulwark of all this
      barbarism. It is the bitterest and most dangerous enemy of the proletarian
      emancipation movement and the cultural development of the entire people.
    
[C]

      For these

      reasons[2]

      the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party advances as its immediate
      political task the over throw of the tsarist autocracy and its replacement
      by a

    

      republic based on a democratic constitution that would ensure:
    

      1) the people’s sovereignty, i.e., concentration of supreme state power in
      the hands of a legislative assembly consisting of representatives of the
      people;
    

      2) universal, equal, and direct suffrage, both in elections to the
      legislative assembly and in elections to all local organs of
      self-government, for every citizen who has reached the age of twenty-one;
      the secret ballot at all elections; the right of every voter to be elected
      to any of the representative assemblies; remuneration for representatives
      of the people;
    

      3) inviolability of the person and domicile of citizens;
    

      4) unrestricted freedom of conscience, speech, the press and of assembly,
      the right to strike and to organise unions;
    

      5) freedom of movement and occupation;
    

      6) abolition of social-estates; full equality for all citizens,
      irrespective of sex, religion or race;
    

      7) recognition of the right to self-determination for all nations forming
      part of the state;
    

      8) the right of every citizen to prosecute any official, without
      previously complaining to the latter’s superiors;
    

      9) general arming of the people instead of maintaining a standing army;
    

      10) separation of the church from the state and of the school from the church;
    

      11) universal, free, and compulsory education up to the age of sixteen;
      state provision of food, clothing, and school supplies to needy children.
    
[D]

      To protect the working class and to raise its fighting

      capacity,[3]

      the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party demands:
    

      1) that the working day be limited to eight hours for all wage-workers;
    

    

      2) that a weekly rest period of not less than thirty-six consecutive hours
      for wage-workers of both sexes employed in all branches of the national
      economy be established by law;
    

      3) that all overtime be prohibited;
    

      4) that night-work (from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m.) in all branches of the national
      economy be prohibited, with the exception of those branches in which it is
      essential for technical reasons;
    

      5) that employers be forbidden to employ children under the age of
         fifteen;
    

      6) that female labour be forbidden in industries specifically injurious to
      the health of women;
    

      7) that the law establish employers’ civil liability for workers’ complete
      or partial disability caused by accidents or by harmful working
      conditions; that the worker should not be required to prove his employer’s
      responsibility for disability;
    

      8) that payment of wages in kind be

      prohibited[4]

;

    

      9) that state pensions be paid to aged workers, who have become
         incapacitated;
    

      10) that the number of factory inspectors be increased; that female
      inspectors be appointed in industries .in which female labour
      predominates; that observance of the factory laws be supervised by
      representatives elected by the workers and paid by the state; piece rates
      and rejection of work done should also be supervised by elected
      representatives of the workers;
    

      11) that local self-government bodies, in co-operation with elected
      representatives of the workers, supervise sanitary conditions in living
      quarters provided for workers by employers, and also see to the observance
      of rules operating in such living quarters and the terms on which they are
      leased, with the object of protecting the wage-workers from employers’
      interference in their lives and activities as private persons and
      citizens;
    

      12) that a properly organised and comprehensive system of health
      inspection be instituted to supervise working conditions at all
      enterprises employing wage-labour;
    

    

      13) that the Factory Inspectorate’s activities be extended to artisan,
          home, and handicraft industries, and to state- owned enterprises;
    

      14) that any breach of the labour protection laws be punishable by law;
    

      15) that employers be forbidden to make any deductions from wages, on any
      grounds or for any purpose whatsoever (fines, rejections, etc.);
    

      16) that factory courts be set up in all branches of the national economy,
      with equal representation of workers and employers.
    
[E]

      Besides, with the object of democratising Russia’s state economy, the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party demands that all indirect taxation
      be abolished and progressive income-tax be introduced.
    

      With a view to eradicating the remnants of the old serf-owning system, the
      Party will work

      for[5]

:
    

      1) abolition of land redemption and quit-rent payments, as well as of all
      services now imposed on the peasantry as a taxable social-estate;
    

      2) annulment of collective

      liability[8]

      and of all laws restricting the peasant in the free disposal of his land;
    

      3) restitution to the people of all sums taken from them in the form of
      land redemption and quit-rent payments; confiscation for this purpose of
      monasterial property and of the royal demesnes, and imposition of a
      special land-tax on members of the big landed nobility who received land
      redemption loans, the revenue thus obtained to be credited to a special
      public fund for the cultural and charitable needs of the village communes;
    

      4) establishment of peasant committees
    

      a) for the restitution to the village communes (by expropriation, or, when
      the land has changed hands, by

    

      redemption, etc.) of the land cut off from the peasants when serfdom was
      abolished and now used by the landlords as a means of keeping the peasants
      in bondage;
    

      b) for the eradication of the remnants of the serf-owning system which
      still exist in the Urals, the Altai, the Western territory, and other
      regions of the country;
    

      5) empowerment of courts to reduce exorbitant rents and declare null and
      void all contracts entailing bondage.
    
[F]

      Working for the achievement of its immediate political and economic

      aims,[6]

      the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party supports every oppositional and
      revolutionary movement directed against the existing social and political
      order in Russia, but emphatically rejects all those reformist plans which
      depict every extension of police tutelage over the working masses as a
      step towards the solution of the social

      problem.[7]


      For its part, the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party is firmly
      convinced that the complete, consistent, and lasting implementation of the
      indicated political and social changes can be achieved only by
      overthrowing the autocracy and convoking a Constituent Assembly, freely
      elected by the whole people.
    

Written in late January-early February 1902



    

     
Notes
 

[1]

      The theoretical part of this programme constitutes the draft proposed by
      one of the editors,

      Frey[9]
      (and drawn up by him on the basis of
      G. V. Plekhanov’s original draft). The practical part of the programme
      (from the point indicated below to the end) is proposed by the whole
      committee, i.e., by the five editors.
—Lenin

[2]

      Here begins the text adopted by the committee as a whole.
—Lenin

[3]

      Frey moved that the beginning of this paragraph be altered to read as
      follows: “To safeguard the working class from physical and moral
      degeneration, and also to raise its fighting capacity in the struggle for
      its emancipation....”
—Lenin

[4]

      Frey moved that the following be inserted here (in the same clause):
      “that the law should establish weekly payment for all workers
      employed on a contract basis.”
—Lenin

[5]

      Frey moved that the following words be inserted here: “and for the
      purpose of facilitating the free development of the class struggle in the
      countryside,” so that the whole paragraph would read as follows:
      “With a view to eradicating the remnants of the old serf-owning
      system and for the purpose of facilitating the free development of the
      class struggle in the countryside, the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party will work for.”

—Lenin

[6]

      Frey moved that the beginning of the paragraph be altered to read as
      follows: “Fighting for these demands, the Russian Social Democratic
      Labour Party,” etc.
—Lenin

[7]

      Frey moved that the end of this paragraph he altered to read as follows:
      “...plans connected with any extension or consolidation of tutelage
      of the working masses by the police and officials.”
—Lenin
 



[9]

Frey—V. I. Lenin’s pseudonym.





[8]

Collective liability was a compulsory measure making the peas
      ants of each village commune collectively liable for timely and full
      payments and for the fulfilment of all sorts of services to the state and
      the landlords (payment of taxes and land redemption instalments, provision
      of recruits for the army, etc.). This form of bondage was retained even
      after serfdom had been abolished, and remained in force until 1906.

    

 
  

Notes On Plekhanov’s First Draft Programme

|

Three Amendments to the Draft Programme

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Three Amendments to the Draft Programme









Lenin: 1902/draft: Three Amendments to the Draft Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

Three Amendments to the Draft Programme


      No. 1. In Paragraph (A) II, instead of: “As the result of continuous
      technical progress, small-scale production is being ousted to an ever
      greater degree by large-scale production”
    

      insert the following:
    

      “Technical progress is making constant headway, large-scale
      production is developing to an ever-increasing extent, small-scale
      production is being ousted more and more or is declining.”
    

      No. 2. In Paragraph (B) VII, after: “All the other classes of
      present-day society stand for the preservation of the foundations of the
      existing economic system”
    

      insert:
 

      “and the small producer, who is being ruined under the yoke of
      capitalism, becomes truly revolutionary only to the extent that he
      realises the hopelessness of his position and places himself at the
      standpoint of the proletariat”— and further begin with a new
      paragraph.
    

      No. 3. In Paragraph (B) XII, instead of: “are responsible for the
      Asiatically barbarous way in which the many-million-strong peasantry is
      dying out”
    

      insert:
 

      “are responsible for the Asiatically barbarous forms of exploitation
      and the agonising extinction of the many-million-strong peasantry.”
    

Written in the second half of February 1902



    


    

     

Notes
 
 

 
  

Draft Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party[10101010 10101010] 

|

Notes On Plekhanov’s Second Draft Programme

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Notes on Plekhanov's Second Draft Programme









Lenin: 1902/draft: Notes On Plekhanov's Second Draft Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

Notes On Plekhanov’s Second Draft Programme

      The entire character of the programme is, in my opinion, the most
      general and basic defect of this draft, one that makes it
      unacceptable. Specifically, it is not the programme of a party engaged in
      a practical struggle, but a

      Prinzipienerklärung [A declaration of
principles.—Ed.];

      it is rather a programme for students (especially its most
      important section, which is devoted to a definition of capitalism),
      moreover for first-year students, who are acquainted with capitalism in
      general, but not yet with Russian capitalism. This basic defect leads also
      to a great deal of repetition, and the programme tends to become
      a commentary. I shall endeavour to prove this by analysing the
      draft point by point, and shall then draw the general conclusions.
    

      “The development of international exchange,” etc., to the words
      “has long become an international movement” (§
      I—for convenience in quoting I shall number each paragraph in
      consecutive order).
    

      In essence there is nothing to which objection can be taken here. Only the
      words: “the great emancipation movement of our times” are
      superfluous, for the emancipatory nature of the working-class movement is
      dealt with below at length and concretely.
    

      Further, in my opinion, this paragraph is not in its proper place. The
      programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Party should begin with a
      definition (and indictment) of Russian capitalism—and only then
      stress the international character of the movement, which in form—to
      use the words of the Communist Manifesto—is of necessity at
      first a national

      struggle.[9]


    

      § II. “Like the Social-Democrats of all other countries,
      the Russian Social-Democrats take an international stand. They regard
      their Party as one of the detachments of the world army of the
      proletariat, as part of international Social-Democracy.”
    

      The words I have underlined are superfluous, since they add absolutely
      nothing to what has been said prior to and after this. These superfluous
      words merely weaken the wholly adequate and graphic expression of thought
      contained in the words “detachment” and “part.”
    

      § III. “They pursue the same ultimate aim as the
      Social-Democrats of all other countries.”
    

      These too are superfluous words, repeated

      t w i c e

      below in §§ XIII (“the ultimate aim of all the efforts of
      international Social-Democracy,” etc.) and XVII (“the identity of the
      common ultimate aim”). A “detachment” of an army is a
      detachment for the very reason that it pursues the same aim.
    

      § IV. “This ultimate aim, which is common to the
      Social-Democrats of all countries” (again superfluous repetition),
      “is determined by bourgeois society’s nature and course of
      development.”
    

      Also superfluous words, precisely because it ’is shown further
      how bourgeois society’s nature and course of development
      “determine” this ultimate aim. This paragraph is some thing in
      the nature of a heading or section title. But headings, which are
      necessary in textbooks or articles, are quite unnecessary in a
      programme. Alles, was im Programm überfiuissig, schwächt

es [All that is superfluous in a programme
weakens it.—Ed.]

      (Engels in his notes on the draft of the Erfurt

      Programme).[10]


      §§ V and VI (as well as the beginning of VII) evoke, in addition
      to formal, remarks, one general and fundamental objection to the whole
      character of the programme as out lined in the draft.
    

      I shall first state this general objection (for which purpose it will be
      necessary in part to defend the counterdraft), and then I shall proceed to
      the formal remarks.
    

      § V gives an academic definition of “developed”
      capitalism in general; § VI speaks of the “expansion” of
      capitalist production relations together with technical progress and the

    

      growth of big enterprises to the detriment of small enterprises (or at the
      expense of the latter), i.e.., as small-scale production is being ousted
      by large-scale production.
    

      This method of exposition is illogical and incorrect.
    

      It is incorrect because the fighting proletariat learns what capitalism
      is, not from academic definitions (as one learns from textbooks), but from
      practical acquaintance with the contradictions of capitalism,
      with the development of society and its consequences. And in our
      programme we must define this development, and state—as
      briefly and graphically as possible—that matters are proceeding
      in a certain way. We should leave to commentaries all explanations of
      why things are proceeding in just this way and no other, and all details
      of the forms in which the basic tendencies find expression. As to what
      capitalism is—that will of itself follow from our definition of
      exactly how matters stand

      (resp. [Respective
(Lat.).—Ed.]

      are proceeding).
    

      It is illogical because the process of the ousting of small-scale
      production by large-scale production (§ VI) and that of the division
      of society into property-owners and proletarians (§ V) are one
      and the same process. And this is not expressed by the formulation
      given in the draft. According to the draft we have the following:
      First proposition. Developed capitalism consists in a
      considerable section of independent small- scale production having been
      ousted by large-scale production employing wage-workers. Second
      proposition. The domination of capitalism spreads in the degree that
      large-scale production ousts small-scale production....
    

      In my opinion, these two paragraphs should be combined in one, for the
      reason indicated, and the process should be expressed as follows:
      technical progress—the ousting of small-scale production by
      large-scale production —the concentration of the means of production
      in the hands of the capitalists and the landowners—the ruin of the
      independent small producers: their conversion into proletarians or into
      dependents of capital.
    

      The following objections are raised to this formulation (which the
      counterdraft has attempted to give):
    

    

      (1) It alleges that the ruin of the Russian peasantry (resp. the
          formation of large-scale landownership in Russia, etc.) depends
          solely on the growth of capitalism.
    

      This objection is, I believe, groundless. It is stated quite clearly in
      the appropriate place (viz., at the end of the programme) that there
      exists in our country a host of remnants of the serf-owning system, and
      that these remnants “barbarise” the process of
      development. But once we consider the process of the development of
      capitalism the basic process in Russia’s social and economic
      evolution, we must begin precisely by describing this process, as
      well as its contradictions and consequences. Only in this way can
      we give graphic expression to our thought that the process of the
      development of capitalism, the ousting of small-scale production, the
      concentration of property, etc., is proceeding and will continue,
      despite all the remnants of the serf-owning system, and
      through all these remnants.
    

      (2) It is said that the proposition “small-scale production is being
      ousted to an ever greater degree by large-scale production” is
      “too categorical,” “stereotyped,” etc.
    

      I must, therefore, explain the reasons which lead me to consider this
      formulation no less correct and far more apt than the
      formulation given in the draft under discussion:

      “an increase in the economic importance of the big enterprises, a
      decrease in the relative number of the small enterprises, reduction of
      their role in the social and economic life of the country.”
    

      From the purely theoretical aspect, both these formulations are
absolutely identical in meaning, and all attempts to establish
a difference in substance between them are wholly

      arbitrary.[1]

      “An increase in the importance of the big and the reduction of the
      role of the small”—is equivalent to ousting. Ousting can
      consist in nothing else. The complexity and confusion in the question of
      small-scale production being ousted by large-scale production do not
at all depend on anyone being unable (in good faith) to understand
      that

    

      ousting means “an increase in the importance of the big and
      reduction of the role of the small”—but ·depend wholly
      and exclusively on the difficulty of agreement on a choice of the
      indices and symptoms of the ousting, resp. of the increase
      in the importance of the one, resp. the reduction of the role of
      the other.
    

      In its most general form, the process of the development of capitalism in this
      respect may be expressed as follows:
    

Initial period:

      
      Total production=100.

      
      Large-scale=a. Small-scale=100—a.
    

      Subsequent period.

      
      Total production=200.

      
      Large-scale 2a+b.
      Small-scale=200—2a— b.
    

      It can be said with confidence that all and every kind of data on the
      proportional relation between large-scale and small-scale production will
      fit into this formula. Nobody out to understand the process can doubt that
      this is indeed ousting. Whether 200—2a—b
      will be greater in size than 100—a (relative ousting) or
      smaller (absolute ousting)— this is ousting in any case.
      Only a “critic” who does not wish to understand this will be
      “unable to understand”— and such people are very hard to
      please. Moreover, the commentary will give the proper rebuff to such
      people.
    

      The difficulty of the question does not at all lie in under standing that
      the indicated modification is equivalent to “ousting,” but in
      the exact definition of the magnitudes 100, a, etc. This
      is a concrete question, a question of fact, and the formulation: “an
      increase in the importance and the reduction of the role” does not
      bring us a hair’s breadth closer to its solution.
    

      For example, in the overwhelming majority of cases, all European
      industrial statistics determine this “importance” and this
      “role” by the number of workers (and agrarian
      statistics do so by the amount of land). And no one has yet
      ventured to doubt that a decrease in the proportionate number of
      workers (resp. the amount of land) means precisely
      ousting. The trouble, however, is that very often such
      indices as the number of workers (resp. the amount of land) are
      insufficient. Small enterprises may be ousted, while the
      number of workers there (the amount of land) increases—if,
      for instance,

    

      these workers are handling outside materials, or if this land is
      cultivated by inferior draught animals, or by workers in inferior
      conditions, or is cultivated and fertilised in a worse way, and so on, and
      so forth. It is common knowledge that the “critical” arguments
      against “Marxist dogma” teem with just such
      “misunderstandings,” and these “misunderstandings”
      are not eliminated one iota by saying “an increase in the
      importance and the reduction of the role” instead of
      “ousting,” since it is “generally accepted” that the
      “importance” and “role” are expressed quite simply
      by the number of workers and the amount of land.
    

      No one will doubt that such processes as the differentiation of the
      peasantry, increasing use of machinery especially by big proprietors,
      improvements in the stock of draught animals used by the big proprietors
      and deterioration of that used by smallholders (the substitution of cows
      for horses, etc.), growing “importunities” of the hired worker
      at the big enterprises and the longer working hours there, resp.
      the small peasant’s diminishing consumption, improved cultivation and
      fertilisation of the big proprietor’s land, and poorer cultivation and
      fertilisation of the smallholder’s land, the big proprietor’s advantage
      over the latter in the field of credits and association, and so on and so
      forth—all these are precisely an ousting of small-scale
      production by large-scale production (in agriculture). It is not at all
      difficult (or even necessary) to prove that all these processes amount to
      “ousting”—it is difficult to prove that it is
      precisely to these processes that attention should be paid, that
      these processes are actually taking place. This difficulty is not
      made easier in the least by the words: “an increase in the
      importance and the reduction of the role”; it can be made easier
      only by a commentary, only by examples of how people
      are unable to define (do not want to define) the true expression
      of the process of ousting (z=an increase in the importance and the
      reduction of the role).
    

      It is a sheer illusion to imagine that the words “an increase in the
      importance and the reduction of the role” are deeper, more
      meaningful, and broader than the “narrow” and
      “stereotyped” word “ousting.” These words do not
      contribute in the least towards a more profound understanding of the
      process–they merely express this process more hazily and more
      vaguely. And the reason I am contesting these words so

    

      vigorously is not because they are theoretically incorrect, but just because
      they lend an appearance of profundity to sheer haziness.
    

      A person who has “attended a seminary” and nothing more and is
      aware that a proportionate decrease (and not necessarily an absolute
      decrease) is tantamount to ousting will see in this haziness a desire to
      cover up the nakedness of the “Marxist dogma,” which has been
      compromised by the

      critics.[2]

      A person who has not attended a seminary will only sigh over such masterly
      and “fathomless wisdom”—whereas the word “ousting”
      will remind every worker and every peas ant of scores and hundreds of
      familiar instances, It is no harm if he does not immediately grasp the
      full import of this expression:

      selbst wenn einmal ein Fremdwort oder ein nicht auf den ersten Blick
in seiner ganzen Tragweite zu erfassender Satz vorkommt, schadet das
nichts. Der münd liche Vortrag in den Versammlungen, die
schriftliche Erklärung in der Presse tut da alles Nötige, und
der kurze, prägnante Satz befestigt sich dann, einmal verstanden,
im Gedächtniss, wird Schlagwort, und das passiert der breiteren
Auseinandersetzung

nie.[3]

      (Engels in his criticism of the Erfurt Draft.)
    

      From the standpoint of style, too, the words “an increase in the
      importance and the reduction of the role” instead of
      “ousting” are undesirable. This is not the language of a
      revolutionary party, but the language of Russkiye

Vedomosti.[11]

      This is the terminology not of socialist propaganda, but of a statistical
      abstract. These words seem, as it were, deliberately chosen with a view to
      giving the reader the impression that the process described is a mild one,
      culminating

    

      in nothing definite, a painless process. Since in reality the reverse is
      true, these words are to that extent quite wrong. We cannot and
      should not choose the most abstract formulations, for what we are
      writing is not an article direct ed against the critics, but the programme
      of a militant party, which makes its appeal to the masses of
      handicraftsmen and peasants. In this appeal, we must say klipp und
      klar[Clearly and
      distinctly.—Ed.] that capital “makes servants
      and tributaries of them,” “ruins” them and “ousts”
      them, driving them into the ranks of the proletariat. This is the only
      formulation that would be a true expression of what every handicrafts man
      and every peasant knows from thousands of instances. And only this
      formulation will inevitably suggest the conclusion: your only
      salvation lies in joining the party of the proletariat.
    

      In passing to the formal remarks against § V and § VI, I shall
      note the following.
    

      § V speaks of bourgeois society “in developed form,” and at the
      same time states that both a “section of the artisans” and
      “the small peasantry” have survived in this society. What
      follows is an inaccuracy. If one is to understand the words
      “developed form” in a strictly theoretical sense, then there
      will be neither artisans nor small peasants in such a society. And even if
      these words are taken in their usual sense to mean the most
      developed countries—even then we will find that in Britain, for
      example, “the small peasantry” as a separate section of
      society has in essence practically ceased to exist.
    

      “The domination of commodity production on the basis of
      capitalist production relations.” That is rather incongruous. Of course,
      fully developed commodity production is possible only in
      capitalist society, but “commodity production” in general is
      both logically and historically prius to capitalism.
    

      The term “capitalist production relations” is not used
      consistently in the draft. It is occasionally replaced by the term
      “the capitalist mode of production” (§ XI). To lessen the
      difficulty of understanding the programme, one term should, in my opinion,
      be used throughout, namely, the

    

      latter, since the former is more theoretical, and without the addition of
      the word “system,” etc. (of relations), does not indicate anything
      complete or integral.
    

      “The feudal-handicraft period...." Here, an expression seems to
      have been chosen, as though deliberately, which is least applicable to
      Russia, for it is questionable whether the term “feudalism” is
      applicable to our Middle Ages. And yet, the description given of
      “developed” bourgeois society is in substance
      applicable to Russia as well (independent small producers and the small
      peasants “have survived,” they sell “their labour-power
      periodically or constantly,” etc.). Hence, by its own formulation the
      draft refutes the opinion that no definition of the development of
      capitalism can be writ ten, which will clearly and directly have Russia in
      view.
    

      “The small producers, artisan-producers, who work to order....” To
      order from consumers or from the merchants who give out work? Probably the
      former. But precisely in Russia most small producers in industry work for
      the market and not to order.
    

      “... The major part of the articles of consumption”... (why not
      also “of the means of production”?)... “is produced for sale
      on the home or world market....” The words underlined are
      unnecessary repetition, since the increase in international exchange is
      dealt with in § I.
    

      “...The means of production and of circulation” of
      commodities. I believe that the words underlined should be transferred
      from the programme to the commentary, since one can infer that
      the capitalists own the means of circulation from the fact that
      they own the means of production in a society with a commodity economy.
    

      “...Of persons who possess no means of production and of circulation
except their labour-power....” That is not the way to put it.
    

      The reference to “constant or periodical” sale of labour
      power—“for a whole year or several months”—is a superfluous
      detail, which should be transferred to the commentary.
    

      (§ VI) “... An increase in the economic importance of the big
      industrial enterprises”—and below: the reduction of the
      role of independent small producers in general. Is the omission of big
      agricultural enterprises accidental? Or was it intended to say
      that the economic importance of

    

      big enterprises increases only in industry, whereas the role of
      small enterprises is diminishing both in industry and in-
      agriculture? If the latter is the case—then that would be
      absolutely wrong. The “economic importance of the big
      enterprises” is increasing in agriculture too (it will suffice to
      mention machinery as one example—and other examples are given
      above). Naturally, the process here is immeasurably more complex,
      but this will have to be said (and said with concrete explanations) in the
      commentary.
    

      ...Dependent “more or less completely, more or less obviously, more or
      less onerously..."—these are words which, in my opinion, are
      redundant and weaken the meaning. The phrasing in the original
      draft—"servants and tributaries — is stronger and more
      graphic.
    

      § VII begins with superfluous reiteration, again refer ring to the
      “conversion of the small producers into proletarians,” although this
      has already been noted in §§ V and VI.
    

      § VII gives an elaborate explanation of the fact that the growth of
      the demand for labour-power lags behind the growth of its supply. The
      exposition, in this case, can hardly benefit from such
      “elaborateness.” In any case, no full explanation of the
      process is, of course, given (e.g., mention is made of the growing
      employment of female and child labour, but no mention is made of the
      growing intensification of labour, etc.). It would therefore be more
      correct to refer all explanations (with concrete examples) to the
      commentary, and to formulate in the programme only what the
      contradiction of capitalism consists in and what its tendency is.
    

      The objection is raised that, by saying that “the greater the degree
      of technical progress, the more the growth of the demand for labour-power
      lags behind the growth of its supply,” the question is presented in an
      incorrect light, since the “growth of supply” is far from
      being dependent on “technical progress” alone. But this
      objection is not sound, for the words “the greater—the
      more” are by no means equivalent to the words
      “since—consequently.” The preceding paragraph explains
      what causes the “growth of supply” (“ruin,”
      “ousting,” etc.), and this will be explained more concretely in the
      commentary.
    

      “...The share of the working class in the sum-total of the material
      wealth created by its labour is constantly diminishing....”

    

      These words appear in the paragraph dealing with the intensification of
      exploitation (compare the quotation with the text directly preceding
      it). One might think there fore that what is meant by “share”
      is the relation of

      v to v+m.

      But in that event this is superfluous and does not correspond to the words
      “sum-total of wealth.”
    

      If, however, the

      sum-total=c+v+m,

      then, first, it is not quite proper to term

      c+m

      (as against v)

      the “share,” for by “share” is meant what is shared,
      i.e., articles of consumption. Further, in that case this proposition
      belongs in substance to the next paragraph, which deals with the increase
      in social wealth

      (c+v+m)

      and social inequality. In view of this, it would be better to omit the
      words quoted as superfluous repetition.
    

      Moreover, these words, as formulated, presuppose a society that is so
      developed as to consist only of wage-workers and
      capitalists (for the share of the small producers also decreases), and
      this does not accord with § V, which keeps small producers
      in a “developed” society too.
    

§ VIII should come after §§ IX and X:
      these latter deal with crises, i.e., with one of the contradictions of
      capitalism, whereas § VIII sums up all the
      contradictions of capitalism and all tendencies in its development.
    

      To the words “increase in the productivity of labour” should
      be added: “of social labour, which is constantly be coming more
      socialised labour.” The draft speaks in the wrong place of the process of
      the socialisation of labour (§ XI) and in too narrow a form
      (“the process of technical progress combines the workers’ labour more
      and more”). Capitalism’s socialisation of labour does not consist solely
      in the “combination of the labour of the workers.”
    

      The words: “A widening of the distance between the propertied and
      the propertyless” following the words “an increase in social
      inequality” are a superfluous repetition. On the other hand,
      reference to the “growing gulf” between the proletariat and
      the bourgeoisie must of necessity be added so as to define the chief
      social consequence of all the indicated contradictions of capitalism and
      pass over to the class struggle.
    

      Incidentally, with regard to a definition of the social con sequences of
      capitalism, it must be stated that here particularly the draft suffers
      from abstractness, limiting itself as

    

      it does to the utterly inadequate proposition: “multiplication of
      the difficulties in the struggle for existence and of all the privations
      and sufferings attendant on this struggle.” In my opinion it is absolutely
      essential to indicate more definitely those social consequences
      which weigh most heavily both upon the working class and the small
      producers.
    

      An objection raised against the formulation of these consequences in the
      counterdraft, is, for instance, that the words “humiliation of every
      kind” are not true. I believe they are true, embracing as they do
      such phenomena as prostitution, the conversion of the
      “intelligentsia” into mere hirelings, the conversion of the
      worker into a seller of his wife and children, submission to the iron
      discipline of capital, the use of economic power for political oppression,
      for pressure on the freedom of opinion, and so on and so forth. In exactly
      the same way it seems to me absolutely essential to point to the
      “poverty and destitution of the masses” under capitalism. I am
      not proposing to speak of the absolute growth of poverty and destitution,
      but I fully share Kautsky’s opinion that “em ausführliches
      s.-d. Programm, welches nicht erkennen lässt, dass der Kapitalismus
      naturnotwendig Massenarmut und Massenelend erzeugt, das nicht als den
      Inhalt des Strebens der Sd-tie den Kampf gegen diese Armut und dieses
      Elend bezeichnet, verschweigt die entscheidende Seite unserer Bewegung und
      enthält also eine empfindliche

Lücke”[4]

      (against the Austrian draft).
    

      It is just as essential, as I see it, to point out that “all the
      principal” (hence, not absolutely all) “advantages of the
      process of development of the productive forces are monopolised by a
      negligible minority of the population.”
    

      §§ IX and X deal with crises. In view of the changed
      formulation, there is nothing in substance here to which exception could
      be taken. In form, however, these paragraphs suffer from repetitions
      (again “world market,” again “capitalist production
      relations”). It would be far better to completely

    

      delete from the programme an attempt to explain crises, limiting
      it to noting that they are inevitable, and leaving explanation
      and elaboration to the commentary. As it is, reference is made, for
      example, to crises and to “periods of stagnation,” but on the  hole
      the entire cycle of capitalist industry is not encompassed in any way.
    

      The social consequences of crises are indicated, but again with
      repetitions (it is enough to mention the “aggravation” of the
      process, etc.) and again too vaguely: crises not only render the position
      of the small producers difficult, not only lead to the relative and
      absolute deterioration of their conditions, but actually ruin them and
      drive them into the ranks of the proletariat.
    

      Against §§ XI and XII I have
      an extremely important objection in principle: these paragraphs present
      the relation of the proletariat to the small producers in an
      altogether one-sided and incorrect way (for “the working and
      exploited masses” consist of precisely the proletariat and the small
      producers). The two paragraphs are directly at variance with the
      fundamental theses of the Communist Manifesto, the General Rules
      of the

      International[12],

      and the majority of present-day Social-Democratic programmes; they leave
      the way open to Narodnik, “critical,” and all sorts of
      petty-bourgeois misapprehensions.
    

      “...The discontent of the working and exploited masses is
      growing”—that is true, but it is absolutely incorrect to identify
      the proletariat’s discontent with that of the small producer, and merge
      the two as has been done here. The small producers’ discontent very often
      engenders (and inevitably must engender in them or among a considerable
      section of them) an urge to defend their existence as small
      proprietors, i.e., to defend the foundations of the present-day
      order, and even to turn it back.
    

      “...Their struggle and, above all, the struggle of their fore most
      representative, the proletariat, is becoming sharper....” The struggle is
      growing sharper among the small producers too, of course. But their
      “struggle” is very often directed against
      the proletariat, for in many respects the very position of the small
      producers sharply contraposes their interests to those of the
      proletariat. Generally speaking, the proletariat is not at all
      the petty bourgeoisie’s “foremost representative.”

    

      If that does occur, it is only when the small producers realise that their
      doom is inevitable, when they “d e s e r t their own
      standpoint to place themselves at that of the proletariat." It happens
      very often, on the other hand, that the anti-Semite and the big landowner,
      the nationalist and the Narodnik, the social-reformer and the
      “critic of Marxism” are the foremost representatives of the
      present-day small producer who has not yet deserted “his
      own standpoint." It is least of all appropriate to lump together each and
      every kind of sharpening, particularly at the present time, when the
      “sharpening of the struggle” of the small producers is
      accompanied by “sharpening of the struggle” of the
      “socialist Gironde” against the

      “Mountain.”[13]


      “... International Social-Democracy stands at the head of the emancipation
      movement of the working and exploited
masses....” Not at all. It stands at the head of the

      working c l a s s alone,

      of the working-class movement alone, and if other elements join
      this class these are only elements and not classes. And they come over
      completely and absolutely only when they “desert their own
      standpoint.”
    

      It organises

      t h e i r

      fighting forces...." Wrong again. Nowhere does Social-Democracy organise
      the"fighting forces” of the small producers. It organises the
      fighting forces of the working class alone. The formulation
      chosen in the draft is all the less appropriate the less it
      applies to Russia, the more restricted the exposition
      (cf. § V) is to

      “ d e v e l o p e d”

      bourgeois society.
    

Summa summarum. The draft speaks in positive form of the
      revolutionary spirit of the petty bourgeoisie (if it “sup
      ports” the proletariat, does this not signify that it is
      revolutionary?) without a single word about its conservatism (and even
      reactionary spirit). This is entirely one-sided and incorrect.
    

      We can (and must) point in positive form to the conservatism of
      the petty bourgeoisie. And

      o n l y

i n

c o n d i t i o n a l

f o r m

      should we point to its revolutionary spirit. Only such a
      formulation will coincide in full with the entire spirit of Marx’s
      teachings. For example, the Communist Manifesto declares outright
      that “of all the classes that stand face to face with the
      bourgeoisie ... the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary
      class.... The small manufacturer

    

      ... the artisan, the peasant ... are not revolutionary, but
conservative. Nay more, they are reactionary.... If by chance they are
      revolutionary,

      [“if”!][5]

      they are so only in view of their impending transfer into the proletariat
      ... they

      d e s e r t

      their own standpoint
      to place themselves at that of the

      proletariat.”[14]


      Let it not be said that matters have changed substantially in the half
      century since the Communist Manifesto. It is precisely in this
      respect that nothing has changed: and theoreticians have always and
      constantly recognised this proposition (for instance, Engels in 1894
      refuted the French agrarian programme from this very

      standpoint.[15]
      He stated outright that until the small peasant deserts
      his standpoint, he is not with us; his place is with the anti-Semites; let
      them put him through the mill, and the more the bourgeois parties dupe
      him, the more surely he will come over to us)—moreover, history
      furnishes a wealth of factual confirmation of this theory, right down to
      the most recent times, right down to nos chers amis, Messrs. the
      “Critics.”
    

      Besides, reference to the dictatorship of the proletariat
      contained in the original draft is missing here. Even if this were done
      accidentally, through an oversight, it is still indubitable that the
      concept of “dictatorship” is incompatible with
      positive recognition of outside support for the proletariat. If
      we really knew positively that the petty bourgeoisie will support
      the proletariat in the accomplishment of its, the proletariat’s,
      revolution it would be pointless to speak of a “dictatorship,” for
      we would then be fully guaranteed so overwhelming a majority that we could
      get on very well without a dictatorship (as the “critics”
      would have us believe). The recognition of the necessity for the
      dictatorship of the proletariat is most closely and
      inseparably bound up with the thesis of the Communist
      Manifesto that the proletariat alone is a really
      revolutionary class.
    

      (Parenthetically—just how “jealous” Engels was about
      this part is evident from the following passus from his criticism
      of the Erfurt Draft. “Der Ruin weiter

    

Volksschichten,” [“The ruin of the broad
masses of the people.”—Ed.]

      Engels cites from the draft, and remarks: “statt dieser
      deklamatorischen Phrase, die aussieht als täte uns der Ruin von
      Bourgeois und Kleinbürgern noch leid [!!], würde ich
      die einfache Tatsache erzählen: die durch den Ruin der
      städtischen und ländlichen Mittelstände, der
      Kleinbürger und Kleinbauern, den Abgrund zwischen Besitzenden und
      Besitzlosen erweitdrn oder

      vertiefen.”[6]

)
    

      I may be told that the counterdraft gives positive expression to the small
      producer’s conservatism (“all the other classes of present-day
      society stand for the preservation of the foundations of the existing
      economic system”), whereas revolutionariness is not expressed even
conditionally.
    

      This objection is entirely unfounded. The small producer s conditional
      revolutionariness is expressed in the counter-draft in the only way it can
      be expressed, i.e., in the wording of the indictment against
      capitalism. The conditional revolutionariness of the small producer
      is expressed:
    

      (1) in the words about his ousting and ruin by capitalism. We,
      the proletariat, accuse capitalism of bringing about

    

      large-scale production through the ruin of the peasant. Hence,
      the direct conclusion that

      i f

      the peasant grasps the inevitability of this process, he will
      “desert his own standpoint and place himself at ours.”
    

      (2)—in the words: “Insecurity of existence and unemployment,
      the yoke of exploitation, and humiliation of every kind are becoming the
      lot” (not only of the proletariat, but) “of ever wider
      sections of the working population.” This very formulation expresses the
      fact that the proletariat provides representation of the entire
      working population, and moreover a representation under which we urge (and
      compel) all to desert their own standpoint and place
      themselves at ours, and not vice versa—we do not desert our
      own stand point, and we do not merge our class struggle with the struggle
      of all sorts of weathercocks.
    

      And the idea of representation is expressed in exactly the same way
    

      (3)—in the words about the poverty and destitution of the
      masses (the masses in general, and not the workers alone).
    

      It is

      o n l y

i n

s u c h

f o r m

      that the party of the revolutionary class can express the conditional
      revolutionariness of the other classes, in order to lay before them

      i t s

      understanding of their destitution and the way to remedy that destitution,
      and, in

      i t s

      declaration of war on capitalism, to speak not only in its own name, but
      in the name of all the “poverty-stricken and destitute”
      masses. Hence it follows that whoever accepts this doctrine must join
      us. It would be simply ridiculous for us to make a special point of this
      in the programme and declare that if certain unreliable elements
      adopt our standpoint they too will be revolutionary! That would be the
      best way to destroy faith in us precisely among those half-hearted and
      flabby allies who, as it is, lack faith in

      us.[7]


    

      In addition to this objection to §§ XI and XII in
      principle, I also have a minor formal remark to make against §
      XI. This is not the proper place to speak about the
      “material possibility of doing away with capitalism”;
      what this paragraph deals with is not the material but
      the ideological prerequisites for capitalism to be done away with. If the
      material prerequisites are mentioned, then reference should also be made
      to the ideological (moral, etc.) prerequisites. It would, however, be far
      more correct to transfer this “material possibility” to the
      paragraph that deals with capitalism’s evolution and tendencies, and not
      with the class struggle.
    

      It is illogical to speak in § XII of the forthcoming social
      revolution—and only in § XV of this revolution itself and the
      necessity for it. The order should be reversed.
    

      In § XIII, the substitution of the expression “expropriation of
      the exploiters” for the words “abolition (or elimination) of
      private ownership” is, in my opinion, not a happy one. It is less
      clear and precise. Nor is the end of the paragraph properly expressed:
      “the planned organisation of the social process of production so as
      to satisfy the needs of society as a whole, as well as its individual
      members”. That is not enough. Organisation of that kind will,
      perhaps, be provided even by the trusts. It would be mere definite to say
      “by society as a whole” (for this covers planning and
      indicates who is responsible for that planning), and not merely to satisfy
      the needs of its members, but with the object of ensuring full
      well-being and free, all-round development for all the
      members of society.
    

      § XIV is, in my opinion, indefinite (I do not yet
      know whether we shall emancipate “all” oppressed
      “humanity”:

      as, for instance, the oppression of people of weak character by those of
      very strong character). If would be better to use the formulation given by
      Marx in his criticism of the Gotha Programme: the abolition of division
      into classes and of the inequality arising

      therefrom.[16]
      Engels
      too, in his criticism of the Erfurt Programme, insisted that die
      Abschaflung der Klassen ist unsere

Grundforderung,[The abolition of classes is
our fundamental

demand.[17]—Ed.]

      and that only by a precise and outright reference to this
      “fundamental demand”

    

      shall we impart an absolutely definite (and not exaggerated)
      meaning to our promises to emancipate all and to rid all of all evils.
    

      § XV—I have already dealt above with “support of the
      proletariat by other sections of the population” and with the
      omission of the “dictatorship of the proletariat.”
    

      § XVI is altogether strange and out of place. “The political
      education” of the proletariat consists in our enlightening it,
      organising it and directing its struggle—and that has already been
      dealt with in § XII (to which only “leader ship of its
      struggle” should be added).
    

      § XVII also seems to me superfluous verbosity. What is the point of
      speaking generally about the dependence of our immediate tasks on various
      social and political situations? Let this be dealt with in treatises,
      whereas we should say plainly that certain definite peculiarities
      (remnants of serf-ownership, the autocracy, etc.) modify our immediate
      task in a certain definite way.
    

      § XVIII: “In Russia capitalism is more and more
      becoming the predominant mode of production....” That is
      unquestionably insufficient. It has already become predominant
      (if I say that 60 has already become predominant over 40, it does not at
      all mean that 40 does not exist or that, it has been reduced to
      insignificance). We still have so many Narodniks, pro-Narodnik liberals,
      and “critics” rapidly reverting to Narodnik ideas that it is
      impermissible to leave room for the slightest vagueness on this point. And
      if capitalism has not yet even become “predominant,” then it would
      be better perhaps to wait awhile with Social-Democracy as well.
    

      “... advancing Social-Democracy to the very first place....”
      Capitalism is only just becoming predominant, but we are
      already in the “very first” place.... In my opinion, we should
      not talk at all about the very first place: that is self-evident from the
      entire programme. Let us leave it to history to say this about us, rather
      than say it ourselves.
    

      The draft evidently rejects the expression: the old, serf-owning
      social system, considering the expression “serf-owner ship”
      applicable only to the legal structure. I believe that this
      distinction is groundless: “serf-ownership” was, of course, a
      juridical institution, but it also corresponded to a specific

    

      system of landlord (and peasant) economy, and, besides, it
      manifested itself in numerous day-by-day relationships that were not
      provided for “by law.” For this reason it is scarcely advisable to
      avoid the expression: “the pre-capital 1st, serf-owning social
      system.”
    

      The “description” of serfdom (that the masses were, so to
      speak, baptised chattels) is utterly out of place and superfluous in our
      programme.
    

      On the other hand, it is insufficient to say about the Influence of the
      remnants of the serf-owning system that they weigh heavily upon the mass
      of working people. We must also indicate the retardation in the
      development of the country’s productive forces, and other social
      consequences of

      serfdom.[8]


      § XIX. In my opinion, it is quite superfluous to state that to us
      democracy (resp. political liberty) is a “transitional
      stage” (transitional to what? After all, we openly say below that a
      republic is our immediate practical demand)—and that a
      constitution is “the natural legal complement [“property”
      of—obviously a mistake in copying] to capitalist production
      relations." This is absolutely out of place in the programme. It would be
      wholly sufficient for us to say that the autocracy retards or restricts

      “a l l

      social development”: hence, the development of capitalism is also
      incompatible with it. Details on this score should be relegated to the
      commentary, for in the programme they even weaken our declaration of war
      on the autocracy, imparting a bookish and abstract air to the programme.
    

      Moreover, what is the point of these general passages about legal
      complements to capitalism and about a “legal structure”
      (§ XX), when later we speak much more directly and definitely about a
      republic? (Besides, § XX contains the expression “the old
      serf-owning system,” i.e., here the draft itself attributes to the word
      “serf-ownership” a broader meaning than the purely juridical.)
    

      Nor is there any point in speaking about the autocracy being incompatible
      with a legal structure, since the demand for the former’s overthrow and
      replacement by a

    

      republic follows immediately. It would be better to express ourselves more
      definitely about the people’s “lack of rights” under the
      autocracy, etc.
    

      “...The autocracy is the bitterest enemy of the aspirations of the working
      class towards emancipation....” To this should be added: “and of the
      cultural development of the whole people,” or words to that effect. In
      this way (and not by talking about “representation”) we shall
      indicate that Social- Democracy represents the interests not only of the
      working class, but of all social progress.
    


      Summing up all the above notes, I find four basic short comings in the
      draft, which, in my opinion, render it unacceptable:
    

      1) extreme abstractness of many of the formulations, so that they
      might seem intended for a series of lectures rather than for a militant
      party;
    

      2) evasion and obscuring of the question of specifically Russian
capitalism are a particularly serious shortcoming, since the
programme should provide a compendium and guide for agitation against
Russian capitalism. We must come out with a direct appraisal of Russian
capitalism and with an open declaration of war against it specifically;
    

      3) the altogether one-sided and incorrect presentation of the relation
of the proletariat to the small producers, which cuts the ground
from under our feet in the war against the “critics” and
many others;
    

      4) the constant endeavour in the programme to give explanations
      of the process. The explanations fail in their purpose anyway, and the
      exposition becomes prolix, numerous repetitions occur, and the programme
      constantly lapses into a commentary.
    

Written late February-early March 1902



    

     
Notes
 

[1]

      We would challenge anyone who does not agree with this to cite or even imagine
      a single example of any “increase in the economic importance of
      the big enterprises and reduction of the role of the small enterprises”
      that would not make it obvious that the latter are being
      ousted by the former.
—Lenin

[2]

      Such an interpretation of haziness is all the more inevitable the
      more widely such a definite formulation as, for instance, in the Erfurt
      Programme, becomes known: “...geht die Verdrängung der
      zersplitterten Kleinbetriebe durch kolossale Grossbetriebe
      (“...the scattered small enterprises are being ousted by colossal
      large-scale enterprises —Ed.)
—Lenin

[3]

      There is no harm in one’s occasionally coming across a foreign word or a
      sentence whose full import one cannot grasp at first glance. Oral reports
      at meetings and written statements in the press do all that is necessary,
      and a brief but pithy sentence, once understood, will impress itself on
      the mind and become a slogan, which is never the case with a broader
      exposition—Ed.


[4]

      “...a detailed Social-Democratic programme which does not make it
      clear that capitalism must naturally lead to mass poverty and mass
      destitution, and does not regard the struggle against this poverty and
      this destitution as the content of Social-Democracy’s aspirations, ignores
      the decisive aspect of our movement and thus has a conspicuous
      deficiency”.—Ed.


[5]

      Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin) have
      been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated–Ed.
    —Lenin

[6]

      (“in place of this declamatory phrase, which sounds as if we were in
      fact distressed by the ruin of the bourgeois and the petty bourgeois [!!],
      I would state the simple fact: through the ruin of the urban and rural
      middle estates—the petty bourgeois and the small peasants— the
      gulf between the propertied and the propertyless

      grows.—Ed.)[18]


      The Erfurt draft programme contained the following passus:
      “In diesem Befreiungskampf verficht die Sozialdemokratie als
die Verfechterin (or Vertreterin—Neue

Zeit,”[19]

      IX, 2, 789) nicht bloss der Lohnarbeiter, sondern der Ausgebeuteten
und Unterdrückten insgesamt, alle Forderungen, Massregeln und
Einrichtungen, welche die Lage des Volkes im allgemeinen und der
Arbeiterklasse im besondern zu verbessern geeignet sind.”

      [“In this struggle for emancipation, Social-Demooracy fights as the
      champion (or representative) not only of the wage Workers, but of all the
      exploited and oppressed, for all demands, measures, and institutions that
      could improve the position of the people In general, and of the working
      class in particular.”—Ed.] And Engels positively advised
      that this entire passus be deleted, asking
      sarcastically:

      “des Volkes im allgemeinen (wer ist das?)." [“The
      people in general (what does that mean?).”—Ed.] And, in accordance
      with Engels’ advice, this passus was completely
      scrapped; the paragraph stating that “the emancipation of the
      workers must be the act of the working class itself, since

      a l l

the

o t h e r

      classes stand for private ownership of the means of production and have
      the common aim of preserving the foundations of present-day
      society"—under the direct influence of Engels this
      paragraph was adopted in a sharper form than in the original
      draft.

—Lenin

[7]

      The more “indulgence” we show, in the practical part of our
      programme, towards the small producer (e.g., to the peasant), the
      “more strictly” must we treat these unreliable and
      double-faced social elements in the theoretical part of the
      programme, without sacrificing one iota of

      o u r

      standpoint. Now then, we say, If you adopt this, our, standpoint, you can
      count on “indulgence” of every kind, but If you don’t, well
      then, don’t get angry with us! Under the “dictatorship” we
      shall say about you: there is no point in wasting words where the use of
      power is required....
—Lenin

[8]

      Incidentally. The expression in the counterdraft: “the Asiatically
      barbarous wag in which the peasantry is dying out”
      is a poor one. Way of disappearance, or something like that, could be
      said.
—Lenin
 



[9]

      This refers to the following proposition of the Manifesto of the
Communist Party: “Though not in substance, yet in form, the
struggle of the proletariat with the bourgeoisie is at first a national
struggle. The proletariat of each country must, of course, first of all
settle matters with its own bourgeoisie.” (Marx and Engels, Selected
Works, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 45.)

    



[10]

      Lenin is referring to Frederick Engels’ article, “Criticism of the
      Draft Social-Democratic Programme of 1891.”

    



[11]

Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder)—a newspaper published
      in Moscow from 1863 onwards; it expressed the views of the moderate
      liberal intelligentsia, and insisted on the need for reforms that would
      transform Russia into a constitutional monarchy. Among its contributors in
      the 1880s and 1890s were the democratic writers M. Y, Saltykov-Shchedrin,
      G. I. Uspensky, and V. G. Korolenko. It also published items written by
      liberal Narodniks. In 1905 it be came the organ of the Right wing of the
      bourgeois Constitutional-Democratic (Cadet) Party. Lenin said that
      Russkiye Vedomosti was a peculiar combination of
      “Right-wing Cadetism and a strain of Narodism” (see
      present edition, Vol. 19, “Frank Speeches of a Liberal”). In 1918
      the publication was closed down together with other counter-revolutionary
      newspapers.

    



[12]

      This refers to Karl Marx’s Provisional Rules of the International
Working Men’s Association adopted on November 1, 1864, at a session
of the General Council of the First International, and the General
Rules of the International Working Men’s Association
   

adopted in September 1874 by the London Conference of the First
International, which took the Provisional Rules of the
International as its basis (see Marx and Engels, Selected
Works, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 386-89).

    



[13]

The Mountain (la Montagne) and the Gironde were the
      names of two political groupings of the bourgeoisie at the time of the
      French bourgeois revolution of the end of the eighteenth century. The
      Mountain—the Jacobins—was the name given to the more
      determined representatives of the revolutionary class of the time—
      the bourgeoisie—who advocated the abolition of absolutism and
      feudalism. Unlike the Jacobins, the Girondists wavered between revolution
      and counter-revolution, and entered into deals with the monarchy.
    

      Lenin called the opportunist trend in Social-Democracy the
      “socialist Gironde,” and the revolutionary Social-Democrats—
      “proletarian jacobins." the ’Mountain." After the R.S.D.L.P. split
      into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, Lenin frequently stressed that the
      Mensheviks were the Girondist trend in the working-class movement.

    



[14]

      Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1, Moscow, 1958, pp. 43-44.

    



[15]

      This refers to Frederick Engels’ article, “The Peasant Question in
      France and Germany.” in which he criticised the agrarian programme of the
      Workers’ Party of France, adopted at the Marseilles Party Congress in 1892
      and enlarged at the Nantes Party Congress in 1894 (see Marx and Engels,
      Selected Works, Vol. 11. Moscow.  1958, pp. 420-40).

    



[18]

      Frederick Engels, “Criticism of the Draft
      Social Democratic Programme of 1891.”

    



[19]

Die Neue Zeit (New Times)—a theoretical magazine of the
      German Social-Democratic Party, published in Stuttgart from 1883 to
      1923. Before October 1917, it was edited by Karl Kautsky. later by
      Heinrich Cunow. Some of the writings of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels
      were first published in Die Neue Zeit: “Critique of the
      Gotha Programme” by Karl Marx (in No 18, 1890-91). “Criticism
      of the Draft Social-Democratic Programme of 1891” by Frederick Engels (in
      No. 1, 1901-02). and others. Engels constantly helped the Editorial Board
      of the magazine with his advice, and not infrequently criticised it for
      allowing deviations from Marxism to appear in it. Contributors to Die
      Neue Zeit included prominent leaders of the German and international
      working-class movement at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the
      twentieth centuries, such as August Bebel, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Rosa
      Luxemburg, Franz Mehring, Clara Zetkin. G. V. Plekhanov. Paul Lafargue,
      and Victor Adler. From the second half of the nineties, the periodical
      began systematically publishing articles by revisionists,

   

      including a series of articles by Eduard Bernstein entitled
      “Problems of Socialism,” which opened the revisionists’ campaign
      against Marxism. During the First World War the magazine adopted a
      Centrist, Kautskian position, in actual fact supporting the
      social-chauvinists.

    



[16]

      Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow,
      1958, p. 30.

    



[17]

      Frederick Engels, “Criticism of the Draft Social-Democratic
      Programme of 1891 ."

    

 
  

Three Amendments to the Draft Programme

|

Opinion On Plekhanov’s Second Draft

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Opinion On Plekhanov's Second Draft









Lenin: 1902/draft: Opinion On Plekhanov's Second Draft







V. I.  

      Lenin
Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

Opinion On Plekhanov’s Second Draft


      Four basic shortcomings pervade the whole draft and, in my opinion, make
      it entirely unacceptable:
    

      1) In the manner of formulation of the most important section, which
      contains a definition of capitalism, this draft is a programme of an
      economic textbook on capitalism in general rather than a
      programme for the proletariat, which is fighting against very
      real manifestations of a very definite capitalism.
    

      2) The programme is particularly unsuitable for the party of the
      Russian proletariat, because the evolution of Russian capitalism
      and the antagonisms and social evils engendered by Russian capitalism are
      almost entirely evaded and obscured by the selfsame system of defining
      capitalism in general. In its programme the party of the Russian
      proletariat should formulate in the most unambiguous manner its
      arraignment of Russian capitalism, its declaration of war on Russian
      capitalism. This is all the more necessary inasmuch as the Russian
      programme cannot be identical in this respect with the European
      programmes: the latter speak of capitalism and of bourgeois society
      without indicating that these concepts are equally applicable to Austria,
      Germany, and so on, because that goes without saying. In relation to
      Russia this cannot be taken for granted.
    

      To dispense with the question by saying that capitalism “in its
      developed form” is distinguished in general by such and
      such features—and in Russia capitalism “is becoming
      predominant”—is to evade making the concrete arraignment
      and declaration of war that is most important for a party engaged in a
      practical struggle.
    
 

      That is why the draft fails to achieve one of the principal aims of a
      programme: to provide the Party with a directive for its day-by-day
      propaganda and agitation concerning all the various manifestations of
      Russian capitalism.
    

      3) Some of the most important paragraphs are formulated in the draft with
      an inaccuracy which will inevitably engender most dangerous
      misinterpretations and hamper our theoretical struggle and
      propaganda. Thus, for example, the growth of large-scale production is
      limited to “industrial” enterprises. The evolution of agrarian
      capitalism is disregarded or even evaded. Further, instead of “the
      dictatorship of the proletariat” there is “the revolution
      which the proletariat will have to effect with the support of other
      sections of the population which are suffering from capital ist
      exploitation,” and even the class struggle of the proletariat has been
      replaced by “the struggle of the working and exploited masses.” This
      formulation contradicts the basic principle of the International:
      “The emancipation of the workers must be the act of the working
      class itself.” Besides the proletariat, the other part of the
      “working and exploited masses” (i.e., mainly the small
      producers) is only partially revolutionary in its struggle
      against the bourgeoisie. It is revolutionary only when, “with a view
      to joining the proletariat,” it “places itself at the standpoint
      of the proletariat” (The Communist Manifesto). As for the
      reactionary nature of the small producers, that is not brought out in the
      draft, so that on the whole the relation of the proletariat to
      the “working and exploited masses” is presented
      incorrectly. [For example, the draft reads: “their struggle
      (the struggle of the working and exploited masses) and, above all, the
      struggle of their foremost representative, the proletariat, is becoming
      sharper.” “The sharpening of the struggle” of the small
      producers is expressed in anti-Semitism, in Caesarism, in peasant unions
      against the farm labourers, and even in the struggle of the socialist
      Gironde against the Mountain. Representation of all the working and
      exploited masses by the proletariat should be expressed in the programme
      in our arraignment of capitalism for the poverty of the

      m a s s e s

      (and not only for the poverty of the working class), for unemployment
      among “ever wider sections of the working population” (and not
      of the working class).]
    
 

      4) The draft constantly slips away from a programme in the strict sense of
         the word towards a commentary. A programme should give
         concise statements, without a single superfluous word, and
         leave all explanations to commentaries, pamphlets, agitation,
         etc. Engels was therefore fully justified when he accused the Erfurt
         Programme of being too long, abounding in too much detail and
         repetition, so as to tend towards becoming a commentary.
    

      In the draft this shortcoming is still more manifest; there is a dreadful
      amount of repetition; in any case, the attempts made to introduce
      explanations of the process into the programme (instead of merely
      giving a definition of the process) fail to achieve their purpose
      and render the programme impossibly prolix.
    

Written in late February-early March 1902



    

     
Notes
 
 

 
  

Notes On Plekhanov’s Second Draft Programme

|

Remarks On the Committee’s Draft Programme

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Remarks on the Committee's Draft Programme









Lenin: 1902/draft: Remarks On the Committee's Draft Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

Remarks On the Committee’s Draft
Programme[1]




Text of the Committee’s Draft
Lenin’s Remarks




A question mark indicates a desire to improve the style.




1. The development of international exchange has established such
    close ties among all nations of the civilised world, that the great
    emancipation movement of the proletariat had to become, and has long
    become, an international movement.





2. For this reason the Russian Social-Democrats regard their
    Party as one of the detachments of the world army of the
    proletariat, as part of international Social-Democracy, and pursue
    the same ultimate aim as the Social-Democrats of all other
    countries.

The style needs brushing up.

      
      

    This “as” is not good Russian. Clumsy
    style. “They pursue the same ultimate aim as the
    Social-Democrats of all other countries have set them selves,” or
    something to that effect.




3. This ultimate aim is determined by bourgeois society’s nature
      and course of development.


I would recommend that
    “nature and” be deleted as superfluous words. The

    u l t i m a t e

      a i m

    is determined by the course and not by the modifications of

    

    this general “course” that are explained by the concept
    of “nature of development.” Hence, these superfluous words are
    also not quite accurate.




This society is characterised by the domination of commodity
    production under capitalist production relations, i.e., by the fact
    that the most important and most considerable part of the
    articles of consumption is produced


Why only “articles of consumption”? What about means of
    production?  “Products,” etc., would be better.




for sale on the home or world market, and the most important
    and most considerable part of the means


These words should, in my opinion, be deleted. Unnecessary repetition.




of production and of circulation of these articles of
      consumption— commodities—


These words should be deleted. Commodities are not limited to articles of consumption.




belongs to a relatively small


(Instead of “relatively small,” perhaps negligible,
    since the words: “most important and most
    considerable part” are sufficiently restrictive. But this is
    not important.)




class of persons, V whereas the overwhelming majority

      of· 

      the population consists partly of persons who possess no
    means of production


The words “to the capitalists and landowners” should be
    added.Otherwise the result is an abstract concept which is
    particularly out of place in conjunction with the
    subsequent “peasants and handicraftsmen.”






      and of circulation whatever (proletarians) and partly of those who
      have at their disposal only very


“And of circulation” should be deleted. Proletarians of
    the purest water can have and do have “means of
    circulation” which are exchanged for articles

    o f
c o n s u m p t i o n.




insignificant means of production, which do not ensure their
    existence (certain sections of small producers, as, for instance,
    small peasants and handicraftsmen).

      

    All these persons are forced by their economic position to sell
    their labour-power constantly or periodically, i.e., to hire
    themselves to the owners of the means of production and of
    circulation of commodities, and by their labour create the latter’s
    income.


The style requires brushing up! “Means of production”
    ensure (?) existence.




4. The domination of capitalist production relations grows more and
    more as constant technical progress, by increasing the economic
    importance of the big enterprises, ousts the independent small
    producers, that is, causes a relative decline in their number by
    converting part of them into proletarians, diminishes the
    role of the others in social and economic life, and at places makes
    them more or less completely, more or less obviously, more or less
    onerously, dependent upon the big manufacturers.


  
      
    ?

  
      

    “Upon capital”—not only upon big capital.




5. By converting part of the independent small producers into
    proletarians, this technical progress leads to a still
    greater

    

    increase in the supply of labour-power, making it possible for the
    manufacturers to employ female and child labour to an ever greater
    extent in the process of commodity production and circulation. And
    since, on the other hand, this same process of technical
    (machine) progress leads to a relative decrease in the
    manufacturers’ need of the workers’ physical labour, the demand for
    labour-power necessarily lags behind its supply, as a consequence of
    which the dependence of wage-labour on capital increases and the
    exploitation of the former by capital is intensified. The
    share of the working class
in the sum-total of the social income created
by its labour is constantly
    diminishing.


  
      
    ?

  
    ?

      

    These words should be deleted as a needless repetition of the idea
    already expressed in the preceding proposition.

      

    In general, § 5 brings out in particular relief the general
    defect of the draft: long periods and an undesirable
    prolixity of exposition. Incidentally: this results in what
    Engels in his criticism of the Erfurt Draft called
    “schiefe

      Nebenbedeutung.” [“The possibility
      of misinterpretation.”—Ed.]

    For instance, it appears
    as if the increase in the employment of female and child labour is
    due solely to the “conversion” of the independent
    small producers into proletarians, whereas this is not so; it also
    takes place prior to such

    “c o n v e r s i o n.”

    The beginning of § 5 is a superfluous repetition.
    





6. This state of affairs with in bourgeois so-


Omission.




Over-production, which causes more or less severe industrial crises,
    followed by more or less lengthy periods of industrial stagnation,
    is an inevitable result of the growth of the productive forces, in
    the absence of planning, which is characteristic of commodity
    production, and under the capitalist production relations inherent
    in present-day society. In their turn, crises and periods of
    industrial stagnation render the position of the independent
    small producers still more difficult, and lead still more
    rapidly to the relative and, in some places, even the absolute
    deterioration in the proletarians’ conditions.



  
      

    Repetition again!!

      
      

    This is insufficient. Not only do they “render their position
    difficult,” but ruin them outright on a mass scale.

      

    The first part of § 6 would gain a great deal if it were made
    shorter.




7. Thus, technical progress, which implies an increase in labour
    productivity and the growth of social wealth, entails, in bourgeois
    society, an increase In social inequality, a widening of the
    distance between the propertied and the propertyless, a
    growth of insecurity of existence, unemployment and
    poverty of every description.


“Growth of poverty of every description”—this
    borrowing from my draft is not a very apt one. I did not speak about
    the growth of poverty. “Of every description”
    includes “absolute” too. The reference to the
    poverty of the masses should therefore be worded some what
    differently.






      8. But, as all these contradictions, inherent in the capitalist
      mode of production, grow and develop, the working and exploited
      masses’ discontent with the existing order of things also grows,
      and the struggle of their foremost representative—the
      proletariat—against the champions of this order becomes
      sharper.
    



      § 8 shows the committee’s stubborn disinclination to
      observe the precise and unambiguous

      c o n d i t i o n

      it was set at its very “birth.” On the basis of this
condition an insertion should have been made (which the
      committee has done in § 10), and,

      m o r e o v e r,

      before the insertion the text should deal only with the class
      struggle of the proletariat

      a l o n e.

    This latter demand, clearly expressed in the conciliation agreement,
    was not carried out by the commit tee, and I consider that
    I am within my rights in insisting that it be carried out.

      

    Prior to what is stated at the end of § 10, it is

    i n c o r r e c t

    to speak of the discontent of all the working masses in general and
    to call the proletariat their “foremost representative,” since
    this is true

    o n l y

      u n d e r

      t h e

      c o n d i t i o n

    expressed at the end of § 10. The committee presents the
    conditional as some thing unconditional. The half-heartedness of the
    small producer and his

    s e m i -

      r e a c t i o n a r y

      s p i r i t

    have not been in any way expressed by the commit tee: this
    is quite impermissible. The result is that the

    

    possibility of finding this small producer (or a
    part of this section) among the
    principled “champions of this order” (the same
    phrase in § 8 1!) has been entirely

    f o r g o t t e n!!

    And yet this possibility

    v e r y

    often becomes a reality before our very eyes.

      

    In order to have the right to speak of the movement of the
    proletariat, its class struggle and even the class
    dictatorship, it is necessary first to single out this

    o n e

    class, and then only to add something about its role as a
    representative. Otherwise the result is a lack of coherence in the
    draft; § 8 is not connected in strict logic either
    with the continuation (why not a “dictatorship of the
    working masses”??), or with the beginning (if all the
    social antagonisms are aggravated, that

    m e a n s

    that the struggle of the

    t w o

      c l a s s e s

    grows ever sharper, and this is something the committee has
    forgotten to point out!!). It does not hang together.
    




At the same time, technical progress, by socialising the process
    of labour within the workshop and concentrating
    production,


The socialisation of labour is far from being limited to what takes
    place within the workshop: this passage must be corrected.






    more and more rapidly creates the possibility of the social
    revolution,

      which constitutes the ultimate aim of the entire activity of
      International Social-Democracy, as the conscious spokesman
      of the class movement of
the proletariat.


+“and the necessity” (for the social
    revolution).

      


      Cf. No. 13. N.B.
    




9. This social revolution will consist in the removal of
    capitalist production relations and their substitution by socialist
    production relations, i.e., it will consist in the expropriation of
    the exploiters for the purpose of converting the means of production
    and of circulation of products into public property, and in the
    planned organisation of the social production process so as to
    satisfy the needs of both society as a whole and its
    individual members. The achievement of this aim will emancipate all
    of oppressed humanity, since it will put an end to all forms
of the exploitation of one part of
    society by another.


?





    Not accurate. Such “satisfaction” is
    “given” by capitalism as well, but not to all
    members of society and not in equal degree.

      

    —My objections have already been set

    forth–N.B.[See pp. 28, 54 of this
      volume.—Ed.]
    




10. To effect its social revolution, the proletariat must win
    political power (the class dictatorship), which will make it
    master of the situation and enable it to surmount all
    obstacles. Organising for this purpose into an independent political
    party, which is opposed to all bourgeois parties,



  
    ?

  
    ?

      

    “Opposed to

    a l l

    bourgeois parties” means to the petty-bourgeois
    parties as well, does it not?? But the majority of the
    petty bourgeois are “working and exploited." That does
    not hang together.
    






the proletariat calls upon all other sections of the
    population which are suffering from capitalist exploitation to
    join its ranks,



Social-Democracy organises and calls upon. “The
    proletariat ... calls into its [!]
    sections”—ganz

      unmöglich!
    [ Quite
      impossible!—The reference is to an infelicity in the Russian
      style.—Ed.  ]




counting on their support, in as much as they are conscious
    of the hopelessness of their position in present-day society and
    place themselves at the standpoint of the proletariat.


The words “counting on their support” should be
    deleted. They are redundant (if it calls upon, that means
    it counts on) and have schiefe Nebenbedeutung. It calls
    upon those who are conscious, inasmuch as they are conscious,
    das

      genügt. [That is
      enough.—Ed.]
    




11. The Social-Democratic Party, the party of the fighting
    proletariat, directs all manifestations of its class struggle,
    discloses to the whole of the working and exploited masses the
    irreconcilable antagonism between the interests of
    the exploiters and the interests of the exploited, and explains
    to them the historical significance and the indispensable
    prerequisites for the future social revolution.



  

    “Irreconcilability of their (the masses) interests with the
    very existence of capitalism,” or a similar correction. Not all the
    working people find themselves in a position wherein their
    “interests” are “irreconcilably” opposed to
    the interests of the exploiters. The working peasant has

    s o m e t h i n g,

    somewhat, a/n, in common with the big landowner. We need more
    general and broader statements, lest the result be an
    inaccuracy and amount to phrase-mongering.
    







    12. But despite the identity of their common ultimate aim, an
    identity conditioned ·by the dominance of the same mode of
    production throughout the civilised world, the Social-Democrats of
    different countries do not set themselves the same immediate tasks,
    both because this mode is not everywhere developed in equal degree
    and also because its development in different countries takes place
    under varying social and political conditions.



  
      

    ? Style!!

      
      

    § 12—the end. An attempt should be made to short en
    this. It would by very useful for this paragraph to shrink. Would it
    not be possible to condense ten words into two by saying
    “national features,” or a similar expression?




13. In Russia, side by side with capitalism, which is rapidly
    extending the sphere of its domination and more and more becoming
    the predominant mode of production, we still meet at every step
    remnants of our old, pre-capitalist social order, which was based on
    bondage of the masses of working people to the land lords, to the
    state, or to the head of the-state. These remnants retard the
    development of the productive forces in the highest degree,


§ 13—the beginning. My most humble thanks for the tiny
    step in my direction. But “becoming the predominant....”
    [At this point Lenin expresses his opinion of a
    piece of infelicitous phrasing in the
    draft,—Ed.]




hamper the all-round development of the proletariat’s class
    struggle, lower the working population’s standard of living, are
    responsible for the Asiatically barbarous way in which the
    many-million-strong peasantry is being ruined and reduced to

    

    degradation, and keep entire people in a state of ignorance, total
    absence of rights, and subjection.



  
    N.B.

  
      
    ? Style!

      
      

    § 13—the end. Correction desirable: I have already
    suggested how (my amendments to my

    draft [See p. 34 of this
      volume.—Ed.]),

    or you get “...barbarous way in which...  is being ruined and
    reduced to degradation...”?
    




14. As the most outstanding of all survivals of our serf-owning
    system and the most formidable bulwark of all this barbarism, the
    tsarist autocracy is wholly incompatible with political and civil
    liberties, which have long been in existence in the advanced
    countries of capitalist production, as the natural legal
    complement to that production. By its very nature it must crush
    every social movement and is bound to be the bitterest enemy
    of all the proletariat’s emancipatory aspirations.

      

    For these reasons, Russian Social-Democracy advances as its
    immediate political task the overthrow of the tsarist autocracy and
    its replacement by a republic based on a democratic constitution
    that would ensure, etc.



  
        
        
        

      ? Style.

        
        

      ? Style.

        

      This won’t do. Not every: bimetallism and
      pre-Raphaelitism are also “social movements.” This must be
      amended.

        

      “Natural legal complement”—a correct thought
      very badly expressed. For capitalism the “naturalness”
      of liberty is complicated by 1,001 social and historical factors,
      which the word “natural” does not bring out. Moreover,
      it smacks, reeks, of a sort of liberalism. Some thing should be
      said to the effect that the “autocracy is
      inevitably doomed to death by the entire
      development of capitalism, which imperatively requires civil and
      political liberties for the expression of its increasingly complex
      interests,” or

    

      something like that, in short, the idea of inevitability
      should be expressed, without giving rise to misunderstandings by
      attributing this inevitability to “natural”
      developments.

        
        

      On the whole, the more one reads the committee’s draft, the more
      one is convinced of the fact that it is, so to say,
      semi-digested. I take it upon myself to predict that this
      quality in the draft will bring down upon us a great deal of
      justified reproaches, if we publish it in such a
      form. Everyone will see that it is just “pasted
      together.”

        

      If the Lord God has chosen to punish us for our sins by obliging
      us to come out with a “mongrel” draft, we should at
      least do every thing in our power to reduce the
      unhappy consequences. Therefore, those who are above all
      guided by a desire to “get through with it as quickly as
      possible” are quite wrong. It may be taken for granted that
      now, given such a constellation, nothing but evil will
      come of haste, and our editorial draft will be unsatisfactory. It
      is not absolutely necessary to publish it in No. 4 of

      Zarya[2]:

      we can publish it in No. 5 and in a special

    

      impression before No. 5 appears. If we do this, a delay
      of a month or so will do no harm at all to the Party. And, in
      deed, it would be better if the illustrious committee goes over it
      again thoroughly, thinks it over, digests it, and gives us a draft
      of its own, an integral draft, rather than one that has
      been pasted together. Let me repeat: if this task is unrealisable,
      it would be far better to revert to the plan of two drafts (and we
      shall be fully able to carry out this plan without any
      “awkwardness”: Plekhanov publishes his draft over his
      signature in Zarya, and I publish mine on the side," in
      Geneva, as X, Y or Z). I hereby most respectfully request the
      august Board to give its close consideration to
      “all the circumstances of the case.”

        

      12.IV.1902—I am writing in the train: I apologise for the
      scribble. If I have time, I shall write again and more clearly.
    





Written April 12, 1902



    

     
Notes
 
 



[1]

      V. I. Lenin’s remarks on the Committee’s draft of the
      theoretical part of the programme were written in the margins and between the
      lines of the manuscript of the Committee’s draft, and also on the backs of the
      manuscript pages. Particular points in the Committee’s draft which Lenin
      singled out (by underlining, brackets, vertical lines in the margin, etc.) are
      underscored with fine lines.





[2]

Zarya (Dawn)—a Marxist scientific and political
      magazine, was published in 1901-02 in Stuttgart by the Iskra
      Editorial Board.  Only four numbers (three books) of Zarya were
      issued: No. 1—in April 1901 (which actually appeared on March 23,
      New Style); No. 2-3—in December 1901; No. 4—in August 1902.
    

      The tasks of Zarya were defined in the draft declaration of
      Iskra and Zarya which V. I. Lenin wrote in Russia (see
      present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 320-30). However, when the question of joint
      publication of these organs abroad was discussed with the Emancipation of
      Labour group, it was decided to publish Zarya legally and
      Iskra illegally; consequently there was no mention of
      Zarya in the declaration of the Editorial Board of
      Iskra, a declaration published in October 1900.
    

Zarya criticised international and Russian revisionism, and
      defended the theoretical principles of Marxism. It published V. I. Lenin’s
      writings: “Casual Notes,” “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and
      the Hannibals of Liberalism,” “Messrs. the ’Critics’ on the Agrarian
      Question” (the first four chapters of “The Agrarian Question
      and ’the Critics of Marx’\thinspace"), “Review of Internal Affairs,”
      “The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy” and also
      G. V. Plekhanov’s “Criticism of Our Critics. Part 1. Mr. Struve as
      Critic of Marx’s Theory of Social Development,” “Kant
      versus Kant, or Herr Bernstein’s Spiritual Testament,” and
      others.

    

 
  

Opinion On Plekhanov’s Second Draft

|

Additional Remarks On the Committee’s Draft Programme

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Additional Remarks on the Committee's Draft Programme









Lenin: 1902/draft: Additional Remarks On the Committee's Draft Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

Additional Remarks On the Committee’s Draft Programme


      Besides my remarks written on the draft itself, I should like to note the
      following:
    

      § 3. “Society (bourgeois) is characterised by the domination of
      commodity production under capitalist production relations,
      i.e." ... then follows a description of the basic features of
      capitalism. The result is an incongruity: the “i.e."
      connects dissimilar, unequal concepts, namely, 1) the
      modification of commodity production in a form conditioned by the
      domination of capitalist production relations, and 2) the sale of products
      on the market and the sale of their labour-power by the masses of the
      population.
    

      This incongruity, this equating of the b a s i c and most general
      features of commodity production in general and of capitalism in
      general—and the modifications of commodity production on the basis
      of capitalist production relations (then commodities are no longer
      exchanged simply according to value)—clearly shows how poor
      G. V. Plekhanov’s formulation is (and yet the committee adopted this
      formulation, merely rephrasing it). In a programme that presents only the
      most general and basic features of capitalism and does not set forth
      even the theory of surplus-value, we suddenly “nod” to
      Böhm-Bawerk by calling to mind that “commodity production on
      the basis of capitalism” is not quite the same as simple commodity
      production! If so, then why not add to the programme special references to
      Mikhailovsky, Berdayev, and the like? On the one hand, only one very
      general socialist expression is used to cover even all of Marx’s teachings
      about the exploitation of labour by capital:

      “create by their labour the latter’s income” (end of §
      3)—and

    

      on the other hand, note is made of the specific transformation of
      surplus-value into profit under “commodity production on the basis
      of capitalist production relations.”
    

      G. V. Plekhanov is quite right when he states that the words “commodity
      production on the basis of capitalist production relations” express the
      fundamental idea of Volume

      III.[1]

      But that is all. There is no point in including this idea in the
      programme—just as there is no point in describing in the programme
      the mechanism of realisation, which is the fundamental idea of Volume II,
      or in describing the conversion of excess profit into ground rent. In the
      programme it is sufficient to

      n o t e

      the exploitation of labour by capital=the creation of surplus-value,
      whereas to speak of every kind of transformation and modification
      of the forms of this surplus-value is out of place (and impossible in a
      few short propositions).
    

Addition Concerning the Class Struggle

      I fully share V. Zasulich’s opinion that in our country it is possible to
      attract a much larger proportion of small producers into the ranks of
      Social-Democracy and much more rapidly (than in the West), that to achieve
      this we must do

      a l l

      in our power, and that this “wish” should be expressed in the
      programme “against” the Martynovs and Co. I am in full
      agreement with all this.

      I

      w e l c o m e

      the addition that has been made at the end of § 10—I emphasise
      this to avoid any misunderstanding.
    

      However, there is no need to go to the other extreme, as V. Zasulich does!
      A “wish” should not be confused with reality, and
      with immanently necessary reality at that, to which alone our

      Prinzipienerklärung[A declaration of
principles.—Ed.]

      is devoted. It would be desirable to attract a

      a l l

      the small producers—naturally. But we know that they constitute a
      special class, even if bound to the proletariat by a thousand ties and
      intermediate grades, but nevertheless a special class.
    

In the first place it is essential to draw a line of
      demarcation between ourselves and all others, to single out the
      proletariat alone and

      e x c l u s i v e l y,

      and only then declare

    

      that the proletariat will emancipate all, that it calls on all, Invites
      all.
    

      I agree to this “then,” but I demand that this “in the first
      place” should come first!
    

      Here in Russia the monstrous sufferings of the “working and
      exploited masses” did not rouse any popular movement until
      a “handful” of factory workers began the struggle, the class
      struggle. And

      o n l y

      this “handful” guarantees the conduct, continuation, and
      extension of this struggle. It is in Russia, where the critics
      (Bulgakov) accuse the Social-Democrats of “peasantophobia”,
      and the

      Socialist-Revolutionaries[2]

      shout of the need for

      r e p l a c i n g

      the concept of the class
      struggle by the concept of “the struggle of

      a l l

      the working and exploited” (Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsit,
No. 2[3])–it
      is in Russia that we must, in the first place, draw a line of
      demarcation between ourselves and all this riffraff, by means of the
      most clear-cut definition of the class struggle alone of the proletariat
      a l o n e—and only then declare that we call on
      all, that we shall undertake everything, take everything, extend to
      include everything. But the committee “extends,” while forgetting to
      draw a line of demarcation!! And I am accused of being narrow-minded be
      cause I demand that this extension be preceded by
      “demarcation”?! But that is trickery, gentlemen!!
    

      The struggle inevitably facing us tomorrow against the combined forces of the
      critics±the more Leftist gentlemen of Russkiye Vedomosti and
      Russkoye

Bogatstvo[4]+the

      Socialist-Revolutionaries will most imperatively demand of us that very
      demarcation between the class struggle of the
      proletariat and the “struggle” (is it a struggle?) “of
      the working and exploited masses.” Phrase-mongering about these masses is
      a trump card in the hands of all the unsicheren

Kantonisten,[Unreliable cantonists. In this
context—“unreliable allies.”—Ed.  ]

      and the committee is playing into their hands and depriving us of a weapon
      for the struggle against half-heartedness, in order to emphasise one half!
      But do not for get the other half!
    

Written April 1902



    

     
Notes
 
 



[1]

      This refers to the third volume of Karl Marx’s Capital. Below is
      a reference to the second volume of Capital.




[2]

Socialist-Revolutionaries (S. R .s)—a petty-bourgeois party
      in Russia, which arose at the end of 1901 and beginning of 1902 as a
      result of the union of Narodnik groups and circles. The newspaper
      Revolutsionnaya Rossiya (Revolutionary Russia) (1900-05) and the
      magazine Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii (Herald of the Russian
      Revolution) (1901-05) became its official organs. The views

   

      of the Socialist-Revolutionaries were an eclectic mixture of the ideas of
      Narodism and revisionism; they tried, as Lenin put it, to mend “the
      rents of Narodism with the patches of fashionable opportunist ’criticism’
      of Marxism” (see present edition, Vol. 9, “Socialism and the
      Peasantry”). The Socialist-Revolutionaries did not see the class
      distinctions between proletariat and peasantry, glossed over the class
      differentiation and contradictions within the peasantry, and rejected the
      proletariat’s leading role in the revolution. The tactic of individual
      terrorism which the Socialist-Revolutionaries advocated as a basic method
      of struggle against the autocracy caused great detriment to the
      revolutionary movement and made it difficult to organise the masses for
      the revolutionary struggle.
    

      The agrarian programme of the Socialist-Revolutionaries en visaged the
      abolition of private ownership of the land and its transfer to the village
      communes on the basis of equalitarian tenure, and also the development of
      all forms of co-operatives. There was nothing socialist In this programme,
      which the Socialist-Revolutionaries tried to present as a programme for
      “socialising the land ," since abolition of private ownership
      of the land, as Lenin pointed out, cannot of itself abolish the domination
      of capital and the poverty of the masses. The struggle for the abolition
      of landlord ownership was the real, historically progressive content of
      the agrarian programme of the Socialist-Revolutionaries. This demand
      objectively expressed the interests and aspirations of the peasantry at
      the stage of the bourgeois-democratic revolution.
    

      The Bolshevik Party exposed the attempts of the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      to camouflage themselves as socialists, waged a stubborn struggle against
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries to gain influence over the peasantry, and
      laid bare the harmful consequences for the working-class movement of their
      tactic of individual terrorism. At the same time, on definite conditions,
      the Bolsheviks concluded temporary agreements with the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries in the struggle against tsarism.
    

      In the final analysis, the absence of class homogeneousness in the
      peasantry was responsible for the political and ideological instability
      and organisational confusion in the Socialist-Revolutionary party, and
      their constant vacillation between the liberal bourgeoisie and the
      proletariat. There was a split in the Socialist-Revolutionary Party
      already in the years of the first Russian revolution: its Right wing
      formed the legal Labour Popular-Socialist Party, which held views close to
      those of the Constitutional Democrats (Cadets); the “Left”
      wing took shape as the semi-anarchist league of “Maximalists.”
      During the Stolypin reaction, the Socialist-Revolutionary party
      experienced a complete ideological and organisational break-down, and the
      First World War saw most Socialist-Revolutionaries adopt the standpoint of
      social-chauvinism.
    

      After the victory of the February bourgeois-democratic revolution in
      1917, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, together with the Mensheviks
      and Cadets, were the mainstay of the counter-revolutionary
      bourgeois-landlord Provisional Government, of which leaders

   

      of the party (Kerensky, Avxentyev, Chernov) were members. Influenced by
      the revolutionising of the peasantry,· the “Left” wing
      of the Socialist-Revolutionaries founded an independent party of Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries at the end of November 1917. Striving to
      maintain their influence among the peasant masses, the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries formally recognised Soviet power and entered
      into an agreement with the Bolsheviks, but soon began a struggle against
      Soviet power. During the years of foreign military intervention and civil
      war, the Socialist-Revolutionaries carried on counter-revolutionary
      subversive activity, strongly supported the interventionists and
      whiteguard generals, took part in counter-revolutionary plots, and
      organised terrorist acts against leaders of the Soviet state and the
      Communist Party. After the civil war, the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      continued their hostile activity against the Soviet state within the
      country and abroad among whiteguard émigrés.

    



[3]

Vestnik Russkot Revolutsii. Sotsialno-Politicheskoye
Obozreniye (Herald of the Russian Revolution. Socio-Political

Review)—an 

      illegal magazine published abroad (Paris-Geneva) in 1901-05; four numbers
      were issued. Beginning with No. 2 it became the theoretical organ of the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party. Among contributors to the periodical were
      M. R. Gots (A. Levitsky), I. A. Rubanovich, V. M. Chernov (Y. Gardenin),
      Y. K. Breshko-Breshkovskaya.

    



[4]

Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth) —a monthly magazine
      published in St. Petersburg from 1876 to 1918. In the early nineties it
      passed into the hands of the liberal Narodniks headed by
      N. K. Mikhailovsky, and became the chief Narodnik organ. As such, in 1893,
      it began a campaign against the Russian Social-Democrats. In its
      distortion and falsification of Marxism, Russkoye Bogalsivo
      relied on the West-European revisionists; grouped round it were publicists
      who subsequently became prominent members of the Socialist-Revolutionary
      Party, the “Popular Socialists” and the Trudovik (Labour)
      groups in the State Dumas.
    

      From 1906 Russkoye Bogatstvo became the organ of the semi-Cadet
      party of “Popular Socialists.” The magazine changed its title
      several times: Sovremenniye Zapiski (Contemporary Notes), Sovremennost
      (Modern Times), Russktye Zapiski (Russian Notes); from April 1917 it
      again became Russkoye Bogatstvo.


 
  

Remarks On the Committee’s Draft Programme

|

An Amendment to the Agrarian Section of the Programme

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## An Amendment to the Agrarian Section of the Programme









Lenin: 1902/draft: An Amendment to the Agrarian Section of the Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Material for the Preparation of the Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

An Amendment to the Agrarian Section of the
Programme[2]


      I propose the following amendment to Clause 4 of our agrarian programme:
      instead of “Establishment of peasant committees (a) for the
      restitution to the village communes (by expropriation, or, when the
      land has changed hands, by redemption, etc.) of the land," etc., to
      state: “Establishment of peasant committees (a) for the restitution
      to the village communes (by expropriation) of the land which..." etc.,

    

      i.e., to

      _
      s c r a p

_

t h e

_

i t a l i c i s e d

_

w o r d s.

    

      It seems to me that this amendment should be made for the following
      considerations:

    

      1. In the agrarian programme we present our “maximum,” our
      “socio-revolutionary demands” (see my

      commentary[3]).

      Allowing land redemption, however, runs counter to the socio-revolutionary
      nature of the entire demand.

    

      2. Both the historical tradition of “redemption” (that of

      1861)[4]

      and its very content (cf. the well-known phrase: “redemption is
      nothing but

      purchase”)[5]

      give it the specific flavour of a mawkishly well-intentioned and bourgeois
      measure. Our allowing land redemption makes it not impossible for the
      entire essence of our demand to be discredited (and there will be more
      than enough vilifiers prepared to do

      this.)[1]


      3. The fear that an “injustice” would be committed by taking
      away the cut-off lands from people who have paid money for them is
      groundless. We have in any case set two restrictive conditions for this
      measure of restituting the

    

      cut-off lands: [(1)—“the lands cut off in 1861,” and <2)—
      “now used as a means of keeping the peasants in bondage.”]
      It is absolutely right to confiscate property serving the purposes of
      feudal exploitation, and to do so without compensation. (Let the
      purchaser of the cut-off lands then sue the seller—that is no affair
      of ours.)
    

      4. By allowing “redemption,” we are placing the onus of
      monetary payment on the peasants, who by reason of labour rent
      were most deeply involved in natural economy:

      the abruptness of the transition to monetary payments may ruin
      the peasants in an

_ e s p e c i a l l y _

rapid way, and this would run counter to the entire spirit of our
      programme.
    

      5. Even if a purchaser of cut-off lands is to be “compensated”
      by way of exception, this should by no means be done at the
      expense of the peasants, who have the moral and historical right to these
      cut-off lands. “Compensation” can be made by giving a
      corresponding plot somewhere in the border regions, etc.; but that does
      not concern us.
    

      I ask everyone to vote:

      F o r=discarding

      the words about redemption, deleting the words I have indicated.
    

A g a i n s t=endorsing

      of the old text.
    

      1) G. V.—

          

      2) P. B.—

          

      3) V. I.—

          

      4) Berg—

          

      5) A. N.—

          

      6) Frey—for.
    

Written April 1902



 
Notes
 

[1]

      By allowing land redemption, we are degrading the restitution of
      the cut-off lands from an extraordinary, revolutionary measure to the most
      petty “reform.”
    —Lenin
 



[2]

“An Amendment to the Agrarian Section of the
      Programme” was presented by Lenin for discussion by the other
      members of the Iskra Editorial Board.
    

      To conduct a vote on this amendment, Lenin wrote at the end of the
      manuscript the pseudonyms or initials of the members of the Iskra
      Editorial Board: G. V..—Plekhanov; P. B.—Axelrod;
      V. I.—Zasulich; Berg—pseudonym of Y. 0. Martov; A. N.—
      Potresov.

    



[3]

      Lenin calls his work entitled The Agrarian Programme of Russian
      Social-Democracy a commentary on the agrarian section of the Party
      programme (see pp. 107-50 of this volume).

    



[4]

      According to the “Regulation Governing Redemption by Peas ants Who
      Have Emerged from Serf Dependence..." adopted on February 19, 1861,
      the peasants were obliged to pay compensation to the landlords for land
      allotted to them. In concluding the land redemption deal, the tsarist
      government paid over to the landlords the compensation money, which was
      regarded as a debt of the peasants payable over a period of 49 years. The
      instalments of this debt, which the peasants paid annually, were called
      land redemption payments, whose heavy and intolerable burden result ed in
      mass ruination and impoverishment of the peasants. The landlords’ former
      peasants alone paid the tsarist government about 2,000 million rubles at a
      time when the market price of the land which had passed to the peasants
      did not exceed 544 million rubles. As all the peasants did not come under
      the land redemption scheme at once, but at various times until 1883, the
      land redemption payments were to be completed only by 1932. However, the
      peasant movement during the first Russian revolution of 1905-07 compelled
      the tsarist government to abolish land redemption payments as from January
      1907.

    



[5]

“Redemption is nothing but purchase” was said by
      Volgin, one of the characters in N. G. Chernyshevsky’s Prologue,
      which expressed N. G. Chernyshevsky’s own attitude to the
      “emancipation” of the peasants in 1861.

    

 
  

Additional Remarks On the Committee’s Draft Programme

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Signs of Bankruptcy









Lenin: Signs of Bankruptcy







V. I.  

      Lenin
Signs of Bankruptcy




Published:
Iskra No. 17, February 15, 1902.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      ???,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 79-85.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1901).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

      Only a year has elapsed since

      Bogolepov[1]
      was struck by Karpovich’s bullet,
      which cleared the way for a “new course” in the government’s policy
      towards the universities. During this year we have observed successively
      an unusual surge of social indignation, an unusually gentle note in
      speeches by our rulers, a regretfully all-too-usual infatuation of society
      with these new speeches, an infatuation which has extended to a certain
      section of the students as well, and, lastly, following on the fulfilment
      of Vannovsky’s florid promises, a new outburst of students’ protests. To
      those who last spring expected a “new era” and seriously believed that the
      tsarist drill sergeant would fulfil but a modicum of the hopes harboured
      by students and society–in short, to the Russian liberals, it should now
      be clear how mistaken they were in once again giving credence to the
      government, how little justification there was for halting the movement
      for reform which in the spring had begun to assume impressive forms, and
      for allowing themselves to be lulled by the sweet strains coming from the
      government sirens. After the promise to reinstate at the universities all
      last year’s victims had been broken, after a series of new reactionary
      measures had flung a challenge to all those who demanded a real reform of
      the educational system, after a series of fresh and violent reprisals
      against demonstrators who demanded that the fraudulent bankrupt should
      make good his promises–after all this the government of “cordial concern”
      has published “provisional

      regulations”,[2]

      for student organisations as means of “pacification”, and... instead of
      "pacification is confronted with a general conllagration of “disorders”
      again involving all educational institutions.
    
 

      We, revolutionaries, have never for a moment believed that Vannovsky’s
      promised reforms were meant in earnest. We kept on telling the liberals
      that the circulars of this “cordial” general and the rescripts of Nicholas

      Obmanov[3]
      were just another manifestation of the liberal policy the
      autocracy has become so adept in during forty years of struggle against
      the “internal enemy”, i.e., against all progressive elements in Russia. We
      warned the liberals against the “pipe dreams” they began to indulge in
      following the government’s very first steps in the spirit of the “new
      course”. We exposed the deliberate falsity of the government’s promises,
      and warned society: “If your opponent has been stunned by the first
      serious assault, keep on showering fresh blows at him, redoubling their
      strength and frequency....” That travesty of the right to organise which
      the “provisional regulations” are now offering the students was predicted
      by the revolutionaries from the very beginning of the talk about this new
      gift from the government. We knew what could and should have been expected
      of the autocracy and its miserable attempt at reform. We knew that
      Vannovskv would “pacify” nobody and nothing, that he would not fulfil any
      progressive hopes, and that the “disorders” would inevitably recur in one
      form or another.

      A year has passed, but society is still marking time. The higher
      educational institutions that are supposed to exist in any well-ordered
      state have again stopped functioning. Tens of thousands of young people
      have again had the tenor of their life upset, and society is again faced
      with the old question: “What next?”
    


      A considerable majority of the students have refused to recognise the
      “provisional regulations” and the organisations allowed by them. With
      greater determination than they usually show, the professors are
      expressing obvious dissatisfaction with this gift of the government. And,
      indeed, one does not have to be a revolutionary, one does not have to be a
      radical, to recognise that this so-called “reform” not only fails to give
      the students anything resembling freedom, but is also worthless as a means
      of bringing any tranquility into university life. Is it not immediately
      ohvious that these “provisional regulations” create in advance a series of
      causes for conflict between the students and the authorities?

    

      Is it not obvious that the introduction of these regulations threatens to
      turn any students’ meeting, lawfully called for the most peaceful
      purpose, into a starting-point for fresh “disorders”?  Can it be doubted,
      for example, that by presiding at such meetings the inspectors, who
      exercise police functions, will constantly annoy some, evoke protest in
      others, and intimidate and gag yet others? And is it not clear that
      Russian students will not allow the character of the discussions at such
      meetings to be forcibly determined at the “discretion” of the authorities?
      


      Yet the “right” of assembly and organisation granted by the government in
      the absurd form established by the “provisional regulations” is the
      maximum that the autocracy can give the students, if it is to
      remain an autocracy. Any further step in this direction would amount to a
      suicidal disturbance of the equilibrium on which the government’s
      relations with its “subjects” rest. Reconciling themselves to this maximum
      that the government can offer, or intensifying the political,
      revolutionary character of their protest–such is the dilemma the
      students are facing. The majority are adopting the latter
      alternative. More clearly than ever before, a revolutionary note rings in
      the students’ appeals and resolutions. The policy of alternating brutal
      repression with Judas kisses is doing its work and revolutionising the
      mass of students.
    


      Yes, in one way or another, the students have settled the question
      confronting them and have declared that they are again prepared to take up
      the weapon they laid aside (under the influence of the lullabies). But
      what does society, which seems to have dozed off to these treacherous
      lullabies, intend to do? Why does it persist in maintaining silence and in
      “sympathising on the quiet”? Why is nothing heard of society’s protests,
      its active support for the renewed unrest? Is it really prepared to wait
      “calmly” for the inevitable tragic events by which every student movement
      has been attended hitherto? Does it really intend to

      confine itself to the wretched role of teller of the number of victims in
      the struggle and passive observer of its shocking scenes? Why do we not
      hear the voice of the “fathers”, when the “children” have unequivocally
      declared their intention to offer up new sacrifices on the altar of

    

      Russian freedom? Why does our society not support the students at least in
      the way the workers have already supported them? After all, the higher
      educational institutions are attended not by the proletarians’ sons and
      brothers, and yet the workers in Kiev, Kharkov, and Ekaterinoslav have
      already openly declared their sympathy with the protesters, despite a
      uumber of “precautionary measures” taken by the police authorities and
      despite their threats to use armed force against demonstrators. Is it
      possible that this manifestation of the revolutionary idealism of the
      Russian proletariat will not influence the behaviour of society, which is
      vitally and directly interested in the fate of the students, and will not
      urge it to energetic protest?
    


      The student “disorders” this year are beginning under fairly favourable
      portents. They are assured the sympathy of the “crowd”, “the street”. It
      would be a criminal mistake on the part of liberal society not to make
      every effort to completely demoralise the government by giving timely
      support to the students, and to wrest real concessions from it.
    

      The immediate future will show how far our liberal society is capable of
      such a role. The outcome of the present student movement largely depends
      on the answer to this question. But whatever that outcome may be, one
      thing is certain: the recurrence of general student disorders after so
      brief a lull is a sign of the political bankruptcy of the present
      system. For three years the universities have been unable to settle down
      to normal life, studies are conducted by fits and starts, one of the cogs
      of the state machine is ceasing to function and, after turning uselessly
      for a time, is again coming to a standstill for a long while. There can be
      no doubt that under the present political regime there is no radical cure
      for this disease. The late Bogolepov sought to save the fatherland by a
      “heroic” method borrowed from the outmoded medicine prescribed by Nicholas
      I. We know what that led to. It is obvious that there can be no furthur
      progress in this direction. The policy of flirting with the students has
      now suffered a fiasco. But there is no other way besides violence and
      flirtation, and each new manifestation of this unquestionable bankruptcy
      of the existing regime will undermine its

    

      foundations more and more, depriving the government of all prestige in the
      eyes of the indifferent philistines, and increasing the number of people
      who realise the need to struggle against it.
    

      Yes, the bankruptcy of the autocracy is beyond doubt, and it is hurrying
      to announce the fact to the world at large. Is it not a declaration of
      bankruptcy that “a state of emergency” has been proclaimed in a good third
      of the Empire, and local authorities in all parts of Russia have come out
      simultaneously with “compulsory decrees” forbidding, under pain of severe
      penalties, acts that Russian laws do not allow as it is? By their very
      nature, all emergency regulations, which suspend the operation of ordinary
      laws, are meant to operate for only a limited time and in a limited
      area. The assumption is that extraordinary circumstances demand the
      temporary application of emergency measures in definite localities for the
      purpose of restoring the equilibrium necessary for the unimpeded operation
      of ordinary laws. That is the argument used by representatives of the
      existing regime. Twenty odd years have elapsed since the introduction of
      the emergency law. Twenty years of its operation in the principal centres
      of the Empire have not brought about the “pacification” of the country, or
      restored public order. After this powerful remedy has been in use for
      twenty years, it appears that the disease of “unreliability”, which it was
      devised to combat, has become so widespread and struck such deep roots as
      to make it necessary to extend it to all towns and factory centres of any
      importance! Is this not bankruptcy, openly declared by the bankrupt
      himself? Confirmed adherents of the present order (undoubtedly such do
      exist) must be horrified by the fact that the population is gradually
      becoming inured to this potent medicine, and is ceasing to react to fresh
      injections of it.
    


      The bankruptcy of the government’s economic policy is also coming
      to light, this time against its will. The autocracy’s repacious methods of
      running the economy have

      rested on the monstrous explotation of the peasantry. These methods have
      taken for granted, as an inevitable consequence, recurrent famines among
      the peasants in one locality or another. At such times the predatory state
      has attempted

    

      to parade before the population in the noble role of considerate provider
      for the very people it has robbed. Beginning with 1891, famines have taken
      an enormous toll of victims, and from 1897 they have followed one another
      almost without interruption. In 1892 Tolstoi bitterly derided the fact
      that “the parasite is preparing to feed the plant upon whose juices it

      thrives”.[4]

      It was, indeed, an absurd idea. Times have changed, and with famine having
      turned into a normal state of affairs in the countryside, our parasite is
      not so much taken up with the utopian idea of feeding the plundered
      peasantry, as with declaring that very same idea an offence against the
      state. The aim has been achieved–the huge famine of today is taking place
      in an atmosphere of dead silence that is unusual even in our country. The
      groans of the starving peasants are not heard; there is no attempt on the
      part of the public to take the initiative in combating the famine; the
      newspapers say nothing about the situation in the villages. An enviable
      silence, but do not Messrs. the Sipyagins feel that this quiet is highly
      reminiscent of the calm before a storm?  

      The state system, which for ages has rested on the passive support of
      millions of peasants, has reduced the latter to a state in which year in
      year out they are unable to provide food for themselves. This social
      bankruptcy of the monarchy of Messrs. the Obmanovs is no less instructive
      than its political bankruptcy.
    


      When will the affairs of our fraudulent bankrupt be wound up? Will he
      manage to carry on much longer, living from day to day, and patching up
      the holes in his political and financial budget with skin taken from the
      living body of the national organism? The greater or lesser period of
      grace that history will allow our bankrupt will depend on many factors;
      but one of the most important will be the degree of revolutionary activity
      displayed by those who have become aware of the existing regime’s complete
      bankruptcy. Its decay is in an advanced stage, and is far ahead of the
      political mobilisation of the social

      elements destined to be its gravediggers. This political mobilisation will
      be carried out most effectively by revolutionary Social-Democracy, which
      alsone will be capable of dealing a a mortal blow al the autocracy. The
      new clash between the

    

      students and the government enables and obliges us all to accelerate this
      mobilisation of all social forces hostile to the autocracy. Months of
      hostilities in political life are accounted by history as the equivalent
      of years. The times we live in are indeed times of hostilities.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      This refers to the assassination of Bogolepov, Minister of Public
      Education, in February 1901 by a student named Karpovich. General
      Vannovsky, former Minister of War, was appointed Minister of Public
      Education in Bogolepov’s place.

    



[2]

      The reference is to the “Provisional Regulations for the
Organisation of Student Bodies in Higher Educational Institutions under
the Ministry of Public Education,” adopted on December 22, 1901
(January 4, 1902) by Vannovsky, Minister of Public
Education. Dissatisfied with the “provisional regulations,” which
put their organisations under constant administrative control, the
students protested against this fresh act of governmental arbitrariness
and refused to recognise these “regulations.”  Even liberal
professors protested against the “provisional regulations,” which
imposed on them the duty of police surveillance over the students.

    



[3]

Nicholas (Nika-Milusha) Obmanov—a character in
      A. V. Amfiteatrov’s feuilleton, “Messrs. the Obmanovs,”
      published in the news paper Rossiya (Russia) on January 13(26),
      1902. In veiled form the feuilleton gave a satirical character
      sketch of the last Romanovs:

      Nicholas I, Alexander II, Alexander III and his wife Maria Fyodorovna, and
      the then reigning Emperor Nicholas II. For publication

   

      of this feuilleton the newspaper was suppressed and Amfiteatrov
      exiled to Minusinsk. The article, “Messrs. the Obmanovs,” was widely
      distributed throughout Russia in illegal editions and handwritten
      copies.

    



[4]

      V. I. Lenin is quoting Lev Tolstoi’s article, “Concerning
      Starvation.”

    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## From the Economic Life of Russia









Lenin: From the Economic Life of Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
From the Economic Life of Russia




Published:
Iskra, No. 17, February 15, 1902.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 86-96.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      Under this general heading we intend to publish from time to time, as the
      material accumulates, articles and commentaries in which all aspects of
      Russia’s economic life and economic development will be described from the
      Marxist point of view. Now that

      Iskra[1]
      has begun to appear fort-nightly, the absence of such a section is most
      keenly felt. However, we must call the most earnest attention of all
      comrades and sympathisers of our publications to the fact that to conduct
      this section (at all properly) we need an abundance of material and in
      this respect our editors find themselves in an exceptionally unfavourable
      position. The contributor to the legal press cannot even imagine the most
      elementary obstacles that sometimes frustrate the intentions and
      endeavours of the “underground” writer. Do not forget,
      gentlemen, that we cannot use the Imperial National Library, where tens
      and hundreds of special publications and local newspapers are at the
      service of the journalist. Material for an economics section at all
      befitting a “news paper,” i.e., material that is at all brisk,
      topical, and interesting to both reader and writer, is scattered in small
      local newspapers and in special publications which are mostly either too
      expensive or are not at all on sale (government,

      Zemstvo,[2]
      medical publications, etc.). That is why it will be possible to run an
      economics section tolerably well only if all readers of
      the illegal newspaper act in accordance with the proverb: “Many a
      little makes a mickle.” Putting aside all false modesty, the Editorial
      Board of Iskra must admit that in this respect they are very
      poorly supplied. We are sure that most of our readers are able to read the
      most various special and local publications, and actually do

    

      read them “for themselves.” Only when every such reader
      asks himself each lime he comes across some interesting item:

      “Is this material available to the editors of our paper? What have I
      done to acquaint them with this material?”— only then shall we
      succeed in having all the outstanding developments in Russia’s economic
      life appraised, not only from the standpoint of the official, Novoye

Vremya,[3]
      Witte panegyrics, not only for the sake of the traditional
      liberal-Narodnik plaints, but also from the standpoint of revolutionary
      Social-Democracy.
    

      And now, after this non-liberal plaint, let us get down to the subject.
    

1. The Savings-Banks

      Of late the savings-banks have become one of the most favoured subjects of
      panegyrics, not only from Witte, but from the “critics” as
      well. The Davids and Hertzes, the Chernovs and Bulgakovs, the
      Prokopoviches and Totomiantses, in a word, all adherents of the
      fashionable “criticism of Marxism” (to say nothing of
      respectable professors, like the Kablukovs and Karyshevs) chant in various
      tones and voices: “These orthodox devotees talk about the
      concentration of capital!—Why, the savings-banks alone show us the
      decentralisation of capital. They talk of mounting poverty! In actual
      fact, we see an increase in small savings among the people.”
    

      Let us take the official statistics on the Russian savings-banks for

      1899,[4]
      which someone was kind enough to send us, and examine them more
      closely. In 1899 there was a total of 4,781 state savings-banks in Russia,
      of which 3,718 were located at post- and telegraph-offices and 84 at
      factories. In five years (from 1895 to 1899) the number of savings-banks
      increased by 1,189, i.e., by one-third. During the same period the number
      of depositors increased from 1,664,000 to 3,145,000, i.e., by almost one
      and a half million (by 89 per cent), and the total deposits increased from
      330,000,000 rubles to 608,000,000 rubles, i.e., by 278,000,000 rubles, or
      by 84 per cent. And so there has apparently been an enormous increase in
      “the people’s savings”?
    
 

      But what strikes the eye in this connection is the following
      circumstance. From literature about the savings banks it is known that in
      the eighties and early nineties the total deposits increased most
      rapidly in the famine years, 1891 and 1892. That is on the one
      hand. On the other, we know that during this period in general, during the
      eighties and nineties taken together, the increase in “the people’s
      savings” was accompanied by an astonishingly rapid and drastic
      process of impoverishment, ruin, and starvation among the peasantry. To
      understand how these conflicting phenomena could go together one need only
      recall that the growth of money economy was the principal feature
      in Russia’s economic life during the period mentioned. The increase in
      savings-bank deposits is by itself not at all indicative of a growth in
      “the people’s” savings in general, but only of a growth in
      monetary “savings” (and sometimes even only of their
      concentration in central institutions). Among the peasantry, for example,
      it is quite possible that, with the transition from natural economy to
      money economy, there should be an increase in monetary savings
      with a decrease in the sum-total of “the people’s”
      savings. The peasant of the old type kept his savings in a stocking when
      these savings were in cash, but most often these savings were made up of
      grain, fodder, coarse linen, firewood, and like articles “in kind.”
      The peasant who has been or is being ruined now has savings neither in
      kind nor in cash, while a negligible minority of peasants who are growing
      rich are accumulating monetary savings which are beginning to find their
      way into state savings-banks. Hence, the in crease in deposits parallel
      with the spread of famine is quite understandable; what it denotes is not
      an advancement in the people’s welfare, but the elimination of the
      old-type, independent, peasant by the new rural bourgeoisie, i.e., the
      wealthy peasants, who are unable to run their farms without permanent farm
      labourers and day labourers.
    

      The statistics classifying depositors according to occupation provide
      interesting oblique confirmation of what has been said above. These data
      cover nearly three million (2,942,000) accounts, with deposits totalling
      545,000,000 rubles. The average deposit is shown to be 185 rubles—a

    

      sum, as you see, that clearly points to the predominance, among
      depositors, of “fortunates” who constitute a negligible
      minority of the Russian people and who have inherited or acquired
      property. The biggest depositors are the clergy: 46,000,000
      rubles spread over 137,000 accounts, i.e., an average of 333 rubles per
      account. It seems that being responsible for saving the souls of their
      flock is not an unprofitable business.... Next in line are the
      landowners:

      9,000,000 rubles on 36,000 accounts, i.e., average of 268 rubles;
      further—merchants: 59,000,000 rubles on 268,000 accounts,
      i.e., an average of 222 rubles; then come officers—with an average
      of 219 rubles per account, civil servants—averaging 202
      rubles. “Agricultural and other rural occupations” hold only
      sixth place: 640,000 accounts totalling 126,000,000 rubles, i.e., the
      average account is 197 rubles; then come “employees in private
      businesses”—with an average of 196 rubles; “miscellaneous
      occupations — 186 rubles; urban trades—159 rubles;
      “domestic servants”— 143 rubles; factory
      workers—136 rubles, and last come “private
      soldiers”—86 rubles.
    

      Thus, factory workers practically come last among depositors
      (exclusive of private soldiers, who are maintained by the state)! Even
      domestic servants have higher average savings (143 rubles per account, as
      against 136 rubles) and possess a much larger number of accounts. To be
      precise: domestic servants have 333,000 accounts with deposits totalling
      48,000,000 rubles, while factory workers have 157,000 accounts with
      deposits totalling 21,000,000 rubles. The proletariat, which creates all
      the wealth of our aristocracy and our magnates, is in a worse condition
      than servants of the latter! Of the total number of Russian factory
      workers (not less than two million people) only approximately
      one-sixth are able to make even the most modest deposits in the

      savings-banks[5]—and

      this despite the fact that workers’ entire income comes exclusively in
      money, and they often have to support families living in the villages, so
      that for the most part their deposits are not “savings” at all
      in the real sense of the word, but simply sums put aside for the
      next remittance to their families, etc. Moreover, we say nothing of the
      fact that the group listed under the heading “factory workers”
      probably

    

      includes office clerks, foremen, superintendents, in a word, persons who
      are not actually factory workers.
    

      As to the peasants—if one considers that they are mostly entered
      under the heading of “agricultural and other rural
      occupations,"—well, their average savings account is, as we
      have seen, higher than even that of employees in private businesses, and
      considerably exceeds the average savings of those coming under the heading
      of “urban trades” (i.e., presumably, shopkeepers, artisans,
      janitors, etc.). Obviously, these 640,000 peasants (out of approximately
      10,000,000 households, or families) with 126,000,000 rubles in
      savings-banks belong exclusively to the peasant bourgeoisie. It
      is only to these peasants, and perhaps to those most closely associated
      with them, that the data on progress in agriculture, the spread of
      machinery, improvements in land cultivation, and higher living standards,
      etc., apply— data brought forward against the socialists by
      Messrs. the Wittes so as to show an “advancement in the people’s
      welfare,” and by Messrs. the Liberals (and the “Critics”) so as to
      refute the “Marxist dogma” about the decline and ruin of
      small-scale farming. These gentlemen do not notice (or pretend not to
      notice) that the decline of small-scale production is expressed precisely
      in the fact that a negligible number of people who grow rich through the
      ruin of the masses come from the ranks of the small producers.
    

      Of still greater interest are data classifying the total number of
      depositors according to the size of their deposits. In round figures, this
      classification is as follows: of three million depositors, one million
      possess accounts not exceeding 25 rubles. Their deposits
      total 7,000,000 rubles (out of 545,000,000 rubles, i.e., only 12 kopeks of
      every 10 rubles of the aggregate deposits!). The average account is 7
      rubles. That is to say, the really small depositors, who
      constitute one-third of the total number, possess only 1/(?), of
      the aggregate sum. Further, depositors with accounts of between 25 and 100
      rubles constitute one-fifth of the total number (600,000) and own a total
      of 36,000,000 rubles, the average account being 55 rubles. If we
      combine these two groups, we see that over 50 per cent
      of all depositors (1,600,000 out of 3,000,000) own only 42,000,000 rubles,
      or 1/12, of the grand total of 545,000,000 rubles. Of the remaining

    

      well-to-do depositors one million have accounts ranging from 100 to 500
      rubles, with deposits totalling 209,000,000 rubles, the average account
      being 223 rubles. Four hundred thousand depositors have accounts exceeding
      500 rubles each, with deposits totalling 293,000,000 rubles, an average of
      762 rubles. Consequently, these evidently well-to-do people, who form
      less than 1/7 of the total number of depositors, possess more
      than half (54 per cent) of the total capital.
    

      Hence, the concentration of capital in present-day society, the
      dispossession of the masses, makes itself felt with great force even in an
      institution especially intended for the “younger brother,” the
      poorer section of the population, since deposits are limited by law to
      1,000 rubles. And let us note that this concentration of property, which
      is typical of any capitalist society, is still higher in the advanced
      countries, despite the greater “democratisation” of their
      savings-banks. In France, for instance, as of December 31, 1899, there
      were 10,500,000 savings-bank accounts with deposits totalling
      4,337,000,000 francs (a franc is slightly less than 40 kopeks). That makes
      an average of 412 francs per account, or about 160 rubles, i.e.,
      less than the average deposit in Russian savings-banks. The
      number of small depositors in France is also comparatively larger than in
      Russia: approximately one-third of depositors (3 1/3 million) have
      accounts ranging up to 20 francs (8 rubles), the average deposit being 13
      francs (5 rubles). Altogether these depositors possess only 35,000,000
      francs out of a total of 4,337,000,000, i.e., 1/125 Depositors with
      accounts of up to 100 francs constitute a little over 50 per cent of the
      total number (5,300,000), but possess a total of only 143,000,000 francs,
      i.e., 1/33 of the aggregate deposits. On the other hand, depositors with
      accounts of 1,000 francs and over (400 rubles and over), while
      constituting less than one-fifth (18.5 per cent) of the total
      number of depositors, have concentrated in their hands over
      two-thirds (68.7 per cent) of all deposits, viz., 2,979,000,000
      francs out of a total of 4,337,000,000 francs.
    

      Thus, the reader now has before him a certain amount of information for an
      appraisal of our

      “critics"’ 

      arguments. One and the same fact—the enormous increase

    

      in savings-bank deposits, and in particular the increase in the number of
      small depositors—is interpreted in different ways. The
      “critics of Marxism” say: the people’s welfare is growing and
      decentralisation of capital is increasing. The socialists say: what is
      taking place is the conversion of savings “in kind” into
      monetary savings, and the number of well-to-do peasants, who are turning
      bourgeois and converting their savings into capital, is increasing. An
      incomparably more rapid growth is to be seen in the number of peasants
      being driven into the ranks of the proletariat, which lives by the sale of
      its labour-power and puts (at least temporarily) part of its meagre income
      into the savings-banks. The large number of small depositors merely goes
      to show how numerous are the poor in capitalist society, since the share
      of these small depositors in the aggregate deposits is negligible.
    

      The question arises: in what way do the “critics” differ from
      the most ordinary bourgeois?
    

      Let us go further, and see how the capital of the savings-banks is used
      and for what purposes. In Russia this capital serves primarily to
      strengthen the might of the militarist and bourgeois-police state. The
      tsarist government (as we have already pointed out in a leading article in
      No. 15 of

      Iskra[See present edition, Vol. 5,
“The Budget”.—Ed.])

      disposes of this capital just as arbitrarily as
      it does of all other public property it lays hands on. It quite calmly
      “borrows” hundreds of millions of this capital for financing
      its Chinese expeditions, for hand-outs to capitalists and landowners, for
      re-equipping the army, enlarging the navy, etc. Thus, in 1899, for
      example, 613,000,000 rubles out of aggregate savings-bank deposits of
      679,000,000 rubles were invested in securities, viz., 230,000,000 rubles
      in state loans, 215,000,000 rubles in mortgages held by the Land
      Banks, and 168,000,000 rubles in railway loans.
    

      The Treasury is doing some very profitable “business”:

      first, it covers all expenses incurred by the savings-banks and gets a net
      profit (hitherto credited to the reserve fund of the savings-banks);
      secondly, it compels the depositors to cover the deficits in our
      state economy (compels them to

    

      loan money to the Treasury). From 1894 to 1899, deposits in savings-banks
      totalled an average of 250,000,000 rubles per annum, while withdrawals
      amounted to 200,000,000 rubles. Consequently, that leaves fifty
      million rubles annually that can be used for loans to patch up
      holes in the Treasury’s money-bags, into which thieving fingers are dipped
      by all but the laziest. Why fear deficits due to squandering money on wars
      and on hand-outs to hangers-on at Court, to landlords and manufacturers
      when it is always possible to obtain sizable sums from the “people’s
      savings”!
    

      We shall add parenthetically that one of the reasons the Treasury is
      conducting such profitable business is because it is steadily lowering the
      rate of interest paid on monetary deposits, which is lower than the
      interest on securities. For example, in 1894 the interest paid on monetary
      deposits was 4.12 per cent, and on securities—4.34 per cent; in 1899
      it was 3.92 per cent and 4.02 per cent, respectively. As is well known,
      reduction of interest is a feature common to all capitalist countries and
      it brings out most clearly and graphically the growth of big capital and
      large-scale production at the expense of small-scale production,
      because in the final analysis the rate of interest is determined by the
      ratio between aggregate prof its and the aggregate capital invested in
      production. Nor can we ignore the fact that the Treasury is constantly
      intensifying its exploitation of postal and telegraph employees:

      at first they had only the mails to look after; then the telegraph was
      added; now they have been burdened also with the job of receiving and
      paying out savings deposits (it should be remembered that 3,718 out of the
      4,781 savings-banks are at post- and telegraph-offices). A terrific
      increase in the intensity of labour and a longer working day—that is
      what this means to the mass of postal and telegraph employees. As to their
      salaries, the Treasury scrimps on them like the most close-fisted kulak:
      the lowest grade of employees, those who have just entered service, are
      paid literally starvation rates; then comes an endlessly graded
      succession of twenty-five-kopek and fifty-kopek rises, and the prospect of
      a niggardly pension after forty to fifty years of drudgery is intended to
      increase even more the bondage of this varitable “proletariat of
      officialdom.”
    
 

      But let us return to the way savings-bank capital is used. We have seen
      that (by order of the Russian Government) the banks invest 215,000,000
      rubles in mortgages held by the Land Banks and 168,000,000 rubles in
      railway loans. This fact has provided food for still another and of late
      extremely widespread display of bourgeois ...

      I meant to say “critical” wisdom. In essence, the Bernsteins,
      the Hertzes, the Ghernovs, the Bulgakovs, and their like tell us, this
      fact means that the small depositors in the savings-banks are becoming
      railway owners and land mortgage holders. It is a fact,
      they argue, that even such purely capitalist and colossal enterprises as
      the railways and banks are becoming more and more decentralised, are being
      divided up, and are passing into the hands of petty proprietors, who
      acquire them by purchasing shares, bonds, mortgages, etc.; it is a fact
      that the wealthy, the owners of property are growing in number—yet
      those narrow-minded Marxists are fussing about with the antiquated theory
      of concentration and the theory of impoverishment. If, for instance, the
      Russian factory workers have 157,000 accounts at savings-banks with
      aggregate deposits amounting to 21,000,000 rubles, about 5,000,000 rubles
      of this sum is invested in railway loans, and about 8,000,000 rubles in
      Land Bank mortgages. That means that Russian factory workers own 5,000,000
      rubles’ worth of railways and are landowners worth 8,000,000 rubles. Now
      go and talk of a proletariat! Hence, the workers are exploiting the
      landowners, since, in the form of interest on mortgages, they receive a
      modicum of rent, i.e., a small portion of the surplus-value.
    

      Yes, this precisely is the line of reasoning adopted by the latest critics
      of Marxism.... And—here is something that will surprise you—I
      am prepared to agree with the widespread opinion that we should welcome
      this “criticism,” since it has brought a stir into a theory which
      was alleged to be stagnant; I am prepared to agree to that on the
      following condition. There was a time when the French socialists whetted
      their skill as propagandists and agitators by analysing the sophisms of
      Bastiat, while the German socialists followed suit by unravelling the
      sophisms of

      Schulze-Delitzsch[6];

      as for us, Russians, it has thus far fallen to

    

      our lot to deal only with the company of “critics.” And so, I am
      prepared to shout, “Long live criticism!”—on
      condition that, in our propaganda and agitation among the
      masses, we, socialists, engage as widely as possible in an
      analysis of all the bourgeois sophisms of fashionable “criticism.”
      If you agree to this condition we can call it a bargain! Incidentally, our
      bourgeoisie are more and more maintaining a discreet silence; for they
      prefer the protection of the tsarist

      archangels [ An appellation given in tsarist Russia
to members of the secret police.—Ed.]

      to that of the bourgeois theoreticians, and it will be very convenient for
      us to accept the “critics” as the “devil’s advocates.”
    

      Through the savings-banks eyer larger numbers of workers and small
      producers are taking a share in big enterprises. This is undoubtedly a
      fact. What this fact shows, how ever, is not an increase in the number of
      property-owners, but 1) the growing socialisation of labour in capitalist
      society, and 2) the growing subordination of small-scale production to
      large-scale production. Take the small Russian depositor. Over 50 per cent
      of such depositors, as we have seen, have accounts of up to 100 rubles, to
      wit 1,618,000 depositors with savings totalling 42,000,000 rubles, i.e.,
      an average of 26 rubles per depositor. Thus, this depositor “owns”
      about 6 rubles’ worth of railways and about 9 rubles’ worth of
      “landed property.” Does this make him wealthy or a
      “proprietor”?  No, he remains a proletarian, who is forced to sell
      his labour-power, i.e., to become a slave of those who own the means of
      production. As for his “share” in “railway and
      banking” business, it merely shows that capitalism is increasingly
      linking together individual members of society and individual classes. The
      interdependence of individual producers was infinitesimal in patriarchal
      economy; it is now constantly increasing. Labour is becoming more and more
      social, and enterprises less and less “private,” although they still
      remain almost entirely in private hands.
    

      His participation in a big enterprise undoubtedly weaves the
      small depositor into the pattern of that enterprise. Who benefits
      from this link? Big capital does, which extends its transactions by paying
      the small depositor no

    

      more (and often less) than it pays any other lender, and by being the
      more independent of the small depositors, the smaller and
      the more scattered the latter are. We have seen that the share of the
      small depositors is extremely small even in the savings-bank capital. How
      insignificant, then, must it be in the capital of the railway and banking
      magnates? By giving his mite to these magnates, the small depositor enters
      into a new dependence on big capital. He cannot even think of
      having any say in the use of this big capital; his “profit” is
      ridiculously small (26 rubles at 4 percent=1 ruble a year!). Yet in the
      event of a failure he loses even his miserable mite. What the abundance of
      these small depositors signifies is not the decentralisation of big
      capital but the strengthening of the power of big capital, which
      is able to dispose of even the smallest mites in the
      “people’s” savings. His share in big enterprises does not make
      the small depositor more independent; on the contrary, he becomes more
dependent on the big proprietor.
    

      What follows from the increase in the number of small depositors is not
      the reassuring philistine deduction about an increase in the number of
      wealthy people, but the revolutionary conclusion of the growing dependence
      of the small depositors on the big, of the mounting contradiction between
      the increasingly socialised nature of the enterprises and the preservation
      of private ownership of the means of production. The more the
      savings-banks develop, the more interested do the small depositors become
      in the socialist victory of the proletariat, which alone will make them
      real, and not fictitious, “sharers” in and administrators of
      social wealth.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

Iskra (The Spark)—the first all-Russian illegal Marxist
      news paper, which Lenin founded in 1900 and which played a decisive part
      in creating the revolutionary Marxist party of the working class.
    

      Since police persecution made publication of a revolutionary newspaper
      impossible in Russia, Lenin, while in exile in Siberia, worked out all
      details of a plan for publishing one abroad. When his exile ended (January
      1900), he immediately set about giving effect to this plan. In February
      1900 Lenin conducted negotiations in St. Petersburg with V. I. Zasulich,
      who had illegally come there from abroad, on participation of the
      Emancipation of Labour group in publishing an all-Russian Marxist
      newspaper. In late March and early April 1900, the so-called “Pskov
      Conference” took place, at which V. I. Lenin, Y. 0. Martov,
      A. N. Potresov and S. I. Radchenko, together with the “legal
      Marxists” P. B. Struve and M. I. Tugan-Baranovsky, discussed Lenin’s
      draft editorial declaration on the programme and tasks of an all-Russian
      newspaper (Iskra) and a scientific-political magazine
      (Zarya). Lenin visited a number of Russian cities (Moscow,
      St. Petersburg, Riga, Smolensk, Nizhni-Novgorod, Ufa, Samara, Syzran),
      established connections with Social-Democratic groups and individual
      Social-Democrats and came to an agreement with them concerning support for
      the future Iskra. When Lenin arrived in Switzer land in August
      1900, he and A. N. Potresov had a conference with members of the
      Emancipation of Labour group concerning the programme and tasks of the
      newspaper and the magazine, possible contributors, and the composition and
      location of the editorial board. These negotiations almost ended in a
      rupture (see present edition, Vol. 4,“How the ‘Spark’ Was Nearly
      Extinguished,” pp. 333-49), but finally agreement on all the questions at
      issue was reached with the Emancipation of Labour group.
    

      The first number of Lenin’s Iskra was published in Leipzig in
      December 1900, while the following numbers came out in Munich, in London
      from July 1902 and in Geneva from the spring of 1903. Great assistance in
      organising the publication of Iskra was given by the German
      Social-Democrats Clara Zetkin, Adolf Braun and others, by the Polish
      revolutionary Julian Marchlewski who was living in Munich at the time, and
      by Harry Quelch, one of the leaders of the British Social-Democratic
      Federation. The Editorial Board of Iskra consisted of
      V. I. Lenin, G. V. Plekhanov, Y. 0. Martov, P. B. Axelrod,
      A. N. Potresov, and V. I. Zasulich.  I. G. Smidovich-Leman was the first
      secretary of the Editorial Board, to be later followed, from the spring of
      1901, by N. K. Krupskaya,

   

      who also dealt with all Iskra’s correspondence with Russian
      Democratic organisations.
    

Iskra centred its attention on problems of the revolutionary
      struggle of the proletariat and all the working people of Russia against
      the tsarist autocracy, but it also p aid great attention to leading
      international events, and chiefly to the international working-class
      movement. In actual fact Lenin was the editor-in-chief and leader of
      Iskra; he wrote articles on all the main questions of Party
      construction and the Russian proletariat’s class struggle.
    

Iskra became the centre for the unification of the Party’s
      forces, mobilising and training the Party’s cadres. In a number of Russian
      cities (St. Petersburg, Moscow, Samara, etc.) R.S.D.L.P. groups and
      committees of Lenin’s Iskra trend were established, and in
      January 1902 a Russian Iskra organisation was set up at a
      conference of Iskra supporters held in Samara. The Iskra
      organisations were created and carried out their work under the direct
      guidance of Lenin’s pupils and comrades-in-arms: N. E. Bauman,
      I. V. Babushkin, S. I. Gusev, M. I. Kalinin, P. A. Krasikov,
      G. M. Krzhizhanovsky, F. V. Leugnik, P. N. Lepeshtnsky, I. I. Radchenko,
      and others.
    

      On Lenin’s initiative and with his direct participation, the
      Iskra Editorial Board drew up the draft Party programme
      (published in No. 21 of Iskra) and prepared the Second Congress
      of the R.S.D.L.P., which took place in July-August 1903. When the Congress
      met, most local Social-Democratic organisations In Russia had adhered to
      Iskra, approved its tactics, programme, and organisational plan,
      and recognised it as their leading organ. A special decision of the
      Congress noted the unique role of Iskra in the struggle for the
      Party, and appointed it the Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P. The Second
      Congress ratified an editorial board consisting of Lenin, Plekhanov, and
      Martov. Martov, who insisted on retention of all six former editors,
      refused to go on the board, despite the Party Congress decision, and
      Nos. 46-51 of the paper appeared under the editorship of Lenin and
      Plekhanov. Later Plekhanov went over to the Menshevik position, and
      demanded that the Iskra Editorial Board should include all the
      old Menshevik editors rejected by the Congress. Lenin could not agree to
      this, and on October 19 (November 1), 1903, he left the Iskra
      Editorial Board. He was co-opted into the Central Committee and from there
      conducted a struggle against the Menshevik opportunists. No. 52 of
      Iskra appeared under the editorship of Plekhanov alone. On
      November 13 (26), 1903, Plekhanov, acting alone and in defiance of the
      Congress, co-opted the former Menshevik editors into the Iskra
      Editorial Board. Beginning with No. 52, the Mensheviks transformed
      Iskra into their own organ. p. 86
    



[2]

Zemstvo—the name given to the local
      government bodies introduced in the central gubernias of tsarist Russia in
      1864.
    

      The powers of the Zemstvos were limited to purely local economic problems
      (hospital and road building, statistics, insurance, etc.). Their
      activities were controlled by the provincial governors

   

      and by the Ministry of the Interior, which could overrule any decisions
      disapproved by the government. p. 86
    



[3]

      In speaking of the “Novoye Vremya panegyrics”
      V. I. Lenin has in mind the reactionary trend of the tsarist Russian press
      as typified by the newspaper Novoye Vremya (New Times) which was
      published in St. Petersburg from 1868 to October 1917.
    

Novoye Vremya-ism was an expression used to denote reactionism,
      venality, and toadyism. p. 87
    



[4]

      V. I. Lenin has in view the “Report of the State Savings-Banks for
      1899,” published by the Board of the State Savings-Banks (year of
      publication not indicated). p. 87
    



[5]

      The calculation is inaccurate: 157,000 is not one-sixth, but approximately
      one-twelfth of the two million factory workers. p. 89
    



[6]

Bastiat—French bourgeois economist of the first half of the
      nineteenth century. Bastiat preached civil peace, the “harmony of
      interests” of the various classes of bourgeois society. Karl Marx in
      his work, “Carey and Bastiat,” written in July-December 1857,
      sharply criticised and ridiculed Bastiat’s doctrine.
    

Schulze-Delitzsch—German economist and supporter of
      Bastiat. In an effort to divert workers and artisans, who were becoming
      proletarianised, from the revolutionary struggle, he advocated the
      establishment of co-operative societies and loan and savings-banks, which,
      he claimed, could improve the proletariat’s condition within the framework
      of capitalism and save the artisan small producers from ruin. p. 94
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Report of the Iskra Editorial Board to the Meeting (Conference) of R.S.D.L.P. Committees









Lenin: Report of the Iskra Editorial Board to the Meeting (Conference) of R.S.D.L.P. Committees







V. I.  

      Lenin
Report of the Iskra Editorial Board to the Meeting (Conference) of R.S.D.L.P. Committees[2]




Published:

      First Published in 1923, in Vol. V of the Collected Works of N. Lenin (V. Ulyanov).

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 97-106.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      March 5, 1902.
    

      Comrades! Only the day before yesterday we received notice of the meeting
      to be called for March 21, together with the entirely unexpected
      information that the original plan to hold a conference had been
      superseded by a plan to convene a Party congress. We do not know who is
      responsible for this sudden and unmotivated change. On our part, we
      consider it most unfortunate. We protest against such rapid changes in
      decisions on highly complex and important Party measures, and strongly
      recommend a return to the original plan for a conference.
    

      To be convinced of the necessity for this, it is enough, in our opinion,
      to give more careful consideration to the agenda (Tagesordnung)
      of the congress, which was likewise communicated to us only the day before
      yesterday; more over, we do not know whether this is only a draft
      Tagesordnung, and whether this agenda has been proposed by one or
      by several organisations. The agenda provides for nine questions to be
      discussed by the congress in the following order (I am giving a brief
      summary of the points): A) the economic struggle; B) the political
      struggle; C) political agitation; D) May Day; E) the attitude towards
      opposition elements; F) the attitude towards revolutionary groups
      unaffiliated to the Party; G) organisation of the Party; H) the Central
      Organ, and I) representatives and Party organisations abroad.
    

      First, in its architecture and in the wording of the individual questions
      this agenda produces an irresistible

    

      impression of

      “economism.”[3]

      We do not of course think that the organisation proposing this agenda
      would entertain “economist” views to this day (although to
      some extent this is not altogether impossible), but we ask the
      comrades to remember that it is also necessary to take into account both
      the opinion held by international revolutionary Social-Democracy, and
      those survivals of “economism” which are still widespread in
      our country. Just imagine: the advanced party of political struggle calls
      a congress at a time when all revolutionary and opposition forces in the
      country, which have begun a direct attack on the autocracy, are straining
      every effort—and all of a sudden we lay chief stress on the
      “economic struggle”, with “politics”
      following only in the wake!! Is this not a copy of the
      traditional error of our “economists,” who claim that political
      agitation (resp. struggle) should come after the economic? Is it
      possible to imagine that it would occur to any European Social-Democratic
      Party, during a revolutionary period, to place the question of the
      trade-union movement before all other questions? Or take this separation
      of the question of political agitation from the question of the political
      struggle! Does it not smack of the usual fallacy which contraposes the
      political struggle to political agitation as something fundamentally
      different, something belonging to a different stage? Or, lastly, how is
      one to explain the fact that demonstrations figure in the agenda
      primarily as a means of the economic struggle!?? After
      all, we must not forget that at the present time a number of
      elements hostile to Social-Democracy are levelling against all
      Social-Democracy the accusation of “economism”: these
      accusations are being made by

      Nakanune,[4]

      by Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii, by

     Svoboda,[1]

 [5]

      and even (even!) by Russkoye Bogatstvo. We must not forget that
      whatever resolutions the conference may adopt, the agenda itself will
      remain a historical document by which the level of our entire Party’s
      political development will be judged.
    

      Secondly, it is astonishing that the agenda raises (a few days before the
      congress!) questions that should be

    

      discussed only after thorough preparations, only when it is possible to
      adopt really definite and comprehensible decisions on them—otherwise
      it is better not to discuss them at all for the time being. For example,
      points E and F: the attitude towards opposition and other revolutionary
      trends. These questions must be discussed in advance, from all angles,
      reports drawn up on them, and differences in existing shades made
      clear—only then can we adopt decisions that would actually offer
      something new, that would serve as a real guide for the whole
      Party, and not merely repeat some traditional “generalisation.” In
      point of fact, just consider: can we in a few days prepare a comprehensive
      and well-grounded decision that would take into consideration all the
      practical requirements of the movement on the questions of the attitude
      towards the “revolutionary-socialist Svoboda group”
      or towards the new-born “Socialist-Revolutionary Party”? This apart
      from the strange impression, to say the least, that will be produced on
      every one by the fact that revolutionary groups unaffiliated to the Party
      are mentioned, while nothing is said on so important a question as the
      attitude towards the

      Bund,[6]
      or a revision of the clauses dealing with the latter, in the resolutions
      of the First Congress of the Party.
    

      Thirdly—and most important—there is an unpardonable omission
      in the agenda: not a word is said of the stand taken by
      present-day Russian revolutionary Social-Democracy on matters of
      principle, or of its Party programme. At a time when the
      whole world is clamouring about the “crisis of Marxism,” and all
      Russian liberal publicists are clamouring even about its collapse and
      disappearance, when the question of the “two trends in Russian
      Social-Democracy” has not only been placed on the order of the
      day, but has even found its way into various lecture programmes, into the
      programmes for propagandists’ talks and self-education groups—at a
      time like this it is quite impossible to pass over these questions in
      silence. We, comrades, are being ridiculed by our opponents, who·
      already say even in print (see Nadezhdin, “The Eve of the
      Revolution”) that we have grown accustomed to “reporting that all’s
      well”!...
    

      In our opinion, all the above-mentioned shortcomings in the agenda prove
      convincingly how irrational is the

    

      plan to convert into a congress a conference that has already been
      summoned. We understand, of course, how keenly everyone feels the fact
      that there has been no Party congress since 1898, how tempting the idea is
      of using the efforts spent in organising the conference so as to put an
      end to this existence of a “party without party institutions.” But
      it would be a very great mistake to let these practical considerations
      make us forget that from a congress of the Russian Social-Democratic
      Labour Party everyone now expects decisions which would be on a level with
      all the revolutionary tasks of the present time; that if we fail
      to rise to the occasion now, at this truly critical moment, we
      may bury all Social-Democracy’s hopes to gain the hegemony in the
      political struggle; that it is better not to be grudge an expense of a few
      thousand rubles and several months of preparatory organisational work, and
      to use the present conference so as to prepare for the summer a congress
      that will really be a general Party congress capable of finally
      settling all immediate problems both in the sphere of theory (the
      theoretical programme) and in the sphere of the political struggle.
    

      Look at the Socialist-Revolutionaries, who are more and more skilfully
      taking advantage of our shortcomings and gaining ground to the detriment
      of Social-Democracy. They have only just formed a “party,” founded a
      theoretical organ, and decided to launch a political
      monthly newspaper. What will be said of the Social-Democrats if
      after this event they fail to achieve at their congress results
      at least such as these? Are we not running the risk of creating
      the impression that when it comes to a clear-cut programme and
      revolutionary organisation the Social-Democrats are not ahead of this
      “party,” which is known to be gathering around it self all sorts of
      indeterminate, undetermined, and even undeterminable elements?
    

      In view of all this we believe that the present congress of committee
      representatives should not be declared the Second regular Congress of the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, but an unofficial
      conference. This conference s main and immediate task should
      be to organise and prepare for next summer a real general Party
      congress capable of endorsing the Party programme, making final

    

      arrangements for publication of a political weekly organ of the Party, and
      in general bringing about the complete and actual unification of all
      committees and even of all groups (in

      print-shops,[7]
      etc.) of Social-Democrats on the basis of steadfastness of principle,
      loyalty to the principles of revolutionary Social-Democracy, and genuinely
      militant preparedness for offensive political action.
    

      Proceeding from this basic idea, we take the liberty of submitting to the
      comrades for their consideration the following Tagesordnung for
      our conference:
    

      1. Statement of principles. In the resolution on this question an
      emphatic stand should be taken against those deplorable attempts to
      restrict our theory and our tasks, which were but recently quite
      widespread. By vigorously rejecting any such restrictions the Party
      conference will make an important contribution to the unification of all
      Social-Democrats on matters of principle and will re establish the shaken
      prestige of revolutionary Marxism. Some comrades may perhaps express. fear
      that discussion on the statement of principles will take up a great deal
      of time and divert attention from practical questions. We do not in the
      least share these apprehensions, for we believe that the extensive debates
      in the illegal press have cleared up the question so well that we shall
      reach an agreement on the principles of revolutionary Social-Democracy
      with great speed and ease. On the other hand, it is utterly impossible to
      do without a statement of principles.
    

      Moreover, the removal of this question from the conference’s
      Tagesordnung would in any case fail in its purpose since the very
      same question would inevitably come up, only in more disjointed form, in
      the discussion of the resolutions on the economic struggle, the political
      struggle, etc. For this reason it would be far more expedient to first
      finish with this matter, refrain from splitting up our resolutions on
      political agitation, strikes, and so on, and give one connected exposition
      of the view on our main tasks.
    

      On our part, we will endeavour to prepare a draft of this resolution and
      append it to this report (if time permits).
    

      2. The Second regular Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour
Party. Here we have in view the preliminary (and, of course, to a
certain extent tentative)

    

      decision on the question of the date of the congress (summer, or not later
      than autumn, since it is desirable to end it before the next
      “season”), the place (in connection with which the conditions of
      secrecy must be carefully considered), the funds required for its
      arrangement (Iskra, on its part, would be prepared to immediately
      contribute 500 rubles for this purpose, from a certain special donation it
      has received; we would possibly be able soon to find another such sum or
      even more. We should discuss how many thousand rubles it will
      approximately cost, and practical ways of raising the rest); lastly, the
      general principles of representation and the fullest possible
      representation (i. e., so as to ensure representation of definite
      pre-selected committees and certain groups, and possibly also of study
      circles of Russian Social-Democrats, to say nothing of the comparatively
      easy task of securing representatives from the two Social- Democratic
      organisations abroad; a procedure should also be adopted for discussing
      the question of inviting to the congress such organisations that may be
      founded in the interim between conference and congress, etc., etc.).
    

      3. Election 01 

an Organising Committee. Generally speaking, the task of this
      O.C. should be to implement conference decisions, make preparations for
      and arrange the congress, set a final date and place for the latter,
      attend to its practical organisation, arrange such matters as the
      transport of literature, and establish Party print-shops in Russia (with
      the aid of Iskra, two local print-shop groups sympathising with
      our publications have been formed in Russia; they have succeeded in
      publishing in their two print-shops Nos. 10 and 11 of Iskra, the
      pamphlets. What Next?, The Tenth Anniversary 01 the Morozov Strike,
      The Speech by Pyotr Alexeyev, The Indictment in the Obukhov Case, and
      many others, as well as a number of leaflets. We hope that representatives
      from these local groups will be able to participate in the work of the
      conference and that they will assist in every way in the accomplishment of
      the general Party tasks); further, it should give assistance to various
      local organisations, labour unions, students’ organisations, and so on and
      so forth. With the support of all organisations, this 0. C. could, in the
      space of three or four months, fully prepare the ground for the

    

      formation of a real Central Committee, capable de facto of
      directing the entire political struggle of our Party.
    

      In view of the complexity and variety of the O.C.’s tasks, it should, in
      our opinion, consist of a fairly large number of members (5-7), who should
      be directed to elect a bureau, distribute functions among themselves, and
      hold several meetings prior to the congress.
    

4. Election of a committee for preparing a draft Party programme.
      As the editors of Iskra (including the Emancipation of Labour

      group[8])

      have already been working on this difficult job for a long time, we
      venture to propose the following plan to the comrades. We have already
      completed the entire draft of the practical section of the programme,
      including the draft agrarian programme, and, besides, two
      variants for the theoretical part of the programme have been prepared. Our
      representative will acquaint the conference with these drafts, should this
      be found necessary and if nothing comes up to prevent him from doing
      so. From these two variants, we are at present drawing up a single general
      draft, but of course we should not like to make it public in its rough
      form, i.e., before the work is completed. Should the conference elect
      several persons to collaborate with our Editorial Board in the preparation
      of the programme, that might perhaps be the most practical solution of the
      question.
    

      For our part, we can in any case give the comrades an immediate formal
      undertaking to submit within a few weeks the final draft of the Party
      programme, which we intended to publish in advance in Iskra, so
      as to enable all comrades to get acquainted with it, and to
      obtain their comments.
    

      5. The Central Organ. In view of the tremendous difficulties
      involved in launching a periodical which would appear regularly and be
      adequately provided with literary and technical facilities, the conference
      will most likely follow the example of the First Congress of the Party and
      choose an existing publication. Whether the question is settled in this
      way, or whether it is decided to launch an entirely new periodical, it
      will in any case be necessary to instruct a special committee, or better
      still the same Organising Committee, to undertake the preparatory work

    

      and to discuss the matter from all angles together with the existing or
      newly-elected editorial board.
    

      It would be essential, in our opinion, to draw the Emancipation of Labour
      group into this discussion, for without its co-operation and guidance we
      cannot imagine the proper organisation of a political organ that would be
      consistent in principle and would in general meet all the requirements of
      the movement.
    

      Inasmuch as attempts to establish a fortnightly periodical have already
      been made before the conference, the Party should make it its immediate
      task to establish a weekly newspaper: this would be fully
      possible given really joint work on such a paper by all
      Russian Social-Democrats.
    

6. Preparation of the agenda for the Party congress and reports on
that agenda. The conference should draw up part of this agenda
itself, and entrust part of it to the Organising Committee; it should
without fail appoint (resp. find) reporters on each
question. Only by appointing re porter.s in advance is it possible to
ensure a truly comprehensive discussion of the various questions and
correct decisions on them at the congress (some of the reports could be
printed beforehand in full or in part, and discussed in the press; for
instance, we hope to publish soon an almost completed treatise on the
agrarian programme of Russian Social-Democracy, etc., written by a
member of the Editorial

      Board,[* See pp. 107-50 of this
volume.—Ed.]

      etc.).
    

7. Current practical questions of the movement—for example,
      a) discussion and endorsement of a May Day leaflet (resp.
      discussion of drafts submitted by Iskra and other organisations).
    

      b) The May Day demonstration—the time and methods of its
      organisation.
    

      c) Instructions to the Organising Committee to assist in organising
      boycotts, demonstrations, etc., and at the same time gradually to prepare
      the minds of Party members, and likewise the forces and means of the
      Party, for a general uprising of the people.
    

      d) Various financial questions relating to the maintenance of the Organising
      Committee, etc.
    

    

      Concluding our report on the tasks and Tagesordnung of our
      congress, we shall only remark that it. is absolutely impossible for us to
      draw up a detailed report on the work of Iskra because we are
      extremely pressed for time. We are therefore compelled to limit ourselves
      to the following brief outline.
    
(N. B.) ROUGH
OUTLINE OF RESOLUTION

      1. The conference categorically rejects each and every attempt to inject
      opportunism into the revolutionary class movement of the
      proletariat—attempts which have found expression in the so-called
      “criticism of Marxism,”

      Bernsteinism,[9]
      and “economism.” At a time when the bourgeoisie of all countries is
      rejoicing over the so widely publicised “crisis in socialism,” the
      conference declares, in the name of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party, its solidarity with the revolutionary international
      Social-Democratic movement, and expresses its firm conviction that
      Social-Democracy will emerge from this crisis stronger than ever and
      prepared for a relentless struggle for the achievement of its great
      ideals.
    

      2. The conference declares its solidarity with the Manifesto of the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour

      Party[10]
      and confirms that it considers the overthrow of the autocracy the
      immediate political task of the Party. The conference declares that in its
      work for the accomplishment of this immediate task as well as of its
      ultimate aim Social-Democracy lays chief stress on all-round and
      nation-wide political agitation which calls on the proletariat to fight
      against all manifestations of economic, political, national, and social
      oppression, whatever section of the population this oppression is directed
      against. The conference declares that the Party will support every
      revolutionary and progressive opposition movement directed against the
      existing political and social system. The conference particularly
      recommends, as practical methods of struggle, the organisation of
      boycotts, manifestations at theatres, etc., as well as organised mass
      demonstrations. The conference advises all Party committees and groups to
      devote

    

      due attention to the need for preparatory measures for a nation-wide armed
      uprising against the tsarist autocracy.
    

      3. The conference declares that Russian Social-Democracy will continue as
      heretofore to guide the economic struggle of the proletariat, will strive
      to extend and deepen it, to strengthen its ideological and organisational
      bonds with the Social-Democratic labour movement, and will endeavour to
      take advantage of every manifestation of this struggle so as to develop
      the political consciousness of the proletariat and draw the latter into
      the political struggle. The conference declares that there is no need what
      ever to conduct agitation from the very outset on an economic basis alone,
      or to consider economic agitation in general to be the most widely
      applicable means of drawing the masses into the political struggle.
    

      (N. B.: It is very important here too to

      e x p o s e

R a b o c h e y e

D y e l o[11]

      once again!!)
    

      4. (About the peasantry—should this be done perhaps in the spirit of
      our agrarian programme?
    

      I shall try to prepare and forward it at once.)
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

See pp. 285–86 of this volume.—Ed.

 



[2]

Report of the Iskra Editorial Board, which was written by
Lenin, was intended for the conference of committees and organisations
of the R.S.D.L.P. held on March 23-28 (April 5-10), 1902, in
Belostok. Represented at the conference were: the St. Petersburg and
Ekaterinoslav committees of the R.S.D.L.P., the League of Southern
Committees and Organisations of the R.S.D.L.P., the Central Committee of
the Bund and its Foreign Committee, the Union of Russian
Social-Democrats Abroad, and the Iskra Editorial Board (whose
representative, F. I. Dan, had a mandate from the League of Russian
Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad). Through the fault of the
conference organisers, who were “economists,” the delegate of the
Iskra Editorial Board arrived late, after the conference had
begun, while F. V. Lengnik, the representative of the Russian
Iskra organisation, did not get to the conference at all,
although he arrived in Belostok in good time. The representative of the
Nizbni-Novgorod Committee (Iskra trend), A. I. Piskunov, who
arrived in Belostok before Dan, protested at the absence of
representatives of organisations of the Iskra trend, and soon
left. The “economists” and the Bundists, who supported them,
had intended to convert the conference into the Second Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P., reckoning thereby to strengthen their own

   

position in the ranks of Russian Social-Democracy and paralyse
Iskra’s growing influence. Their attempt, however, failed, both
because of the conference’s comparatively limited composition (only four
of the R.S.D.L.P. organisations operating in Russia were represented)
and the deep disagreements on matters of principle, which were revealed
at the conference; in particular, the Iskra delegate, who
raised strong objection to the conference being converted into a Party
congress, stated that the conference had not been properly prepared and
authorised.
      

The Belostok Conference adopted a constituting resolution and a
theoretical resolution, proposed by the delegate of the Bund Central
Committee, with amendments made by the representative of the League of
Southern Committees and Organisations of the R.S.D.L.P. (the
Iskra delegate, who had advanced his own draft of the
theoretical resolution, voted against). The conference also approved the
text of a May Day leaflet, which was based on a draft drawn up by the
Iskra Editorial Board. The conference elected an Organising
Committee to prepare the Second Party Congress, consisting of
representatives of Iskra (F. I. Dan), the League of Southern
Committees and Organisations of the R.S.D.L.P.

(0. A. Yermansky), and the Central Committee of the Bund

(K. Portnoi). Soon after the conference, most of its delegates,
including two members of the Organising Committee, were arrested by the
police. A new Organising Committee to prepare the Second Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P. was formed in November 1902 in Pskov at a conference of
representatives of the R.S.D.L.P.’s St. Peters burg Committee, the
Russian organisation of Iskra, and the Yuzhny Rabochy
(Southern Worker) group.
    



[3]

“Economism”— an opportunist trend in Russian
      Social-Democracy at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the
      twentieth centuries, a Russian variety of international opportunism. The
      news paper Rabochaya Mysl (Workers’ Thought) (1897-1902) and the
      magazine Rabocheye Dyelo (Workers’ Cause) (1899-1902) were organs
      of the “economists.”
    

      In 1899 there appeared Credo, a manifesto of the
      “economists,” which was drawn up by E. D. Kuskova. When Lenin, then
      in exile, received a copy of Credo, he wrote A Protest by
      Russian Social Democrats, in which he sharply criticised the
      programme of the “economists.” This protest was discussed and
      unanimously adopted at a conference of 17 Marxists serving terms of
      political exile, held in the village of Yermakovskoye, in Minusinsk
      Region. The “economists” limited the tasks of the working
      class to an economic struggle for higher wages and better working
      conditions, etc., asserting that the political struggle was the business
      of the liberal bourgeoisie. They denied the leading role of the party of
      the working class, considering that the party should merely observe the
      spontaneous process of the movement and register events. In their
      deference to spontaneity in the working-class movement, the
      “economists” belittled the significance of revolutionary
      theory and class-consciousness, asserted that socialist ideology could
      arise

   

      out of the spontaneous movement, denied the need to instill socialist
      consciousness into the working-class movement, and thereby cleared the way
      for bourgeois ideology. The “economists,” who opposed the need to
      create a centralised working-class party, stood for the sporadic and
      amateurish character of individual circles and fostered confusion and
      wavering in the Social-Democratic movement. “Economism”
      threatened to divert the working class from the class revolutionary path
      and turn it into a political appendage of the bourgeoisie.
    

      Lenin’s Iskra played a major part in the struggle against
      “economism.” By his book, What Is to Be Done?, which
      appeared in March 1902, V. I. Lenin brought about., the final ideological
      rout of “economism.”
    



[4]

Nakanune (On the Eve)—a monthly magazine of the Narodnik
      trend, published in Russian in London from January 1899 to February 1902
      under the editorship of W. A. Serebryakov; 37 numbers were issued. Grouped
      round the magazine, which advocated general democratic views, were
      representatives of various petty-bourgeois parties and trends; a hostile
      attitude to Marxism in general and to Russian revolutionary
      Social-Democracy in particular was characteristic of Nakanune.
    



[5]

Svoboda (Freedom)—a magazine published in Switzerland by
      the “revolutionary-socialist” group Sooboda, founded
      by E. O. Zelensky (Nadezhdin) in May 1901. Only two numbers of the
      magazine appeared: No. tin 1901 and No. 2 in 1902. V. I. Lenin considered
      that the Svoboda group belonged to those “rootless
      groupings” which had “neither settled serious views,
      programmes, tactics, and organisations, nor roots in the masses”
      (see present edition, Vol. 20, “On Adventurism”). In its
      publications (besides Svoboda, the group published The Eve of
      Revolution. An Irregular Review of Problems of Theory and Tactics,
      No. 1; the newspaper-magazine Otkliki [Responses], No. 1;
      Nadezhdin’s programmatic pamphlet, The Rebirth of Revolutionism in
      Russia, and others) the Svoboda group advocated the ideas of
      terrorism and “economism.” In a bloc with the St. Petersburg
      “economists,” it came out against Iskra and the
      St. Petersburg Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. The group ceased to exist in
      1903.
    



[6]

The Bund— the General Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania,
      Poland, and Russia—was organised in 1897 at an inaugural congress of
      Jewish Social-Democratic groups in Vilno; in the main, it united
      semi-proletarian elements of the Jewish artisans in the Western regions of
      Russia. At the First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. (1898), the Bund joined
      the Party “as an autonomous organisation, independent only in regard
      to questions specially concerning the Jewish proletariat.”
    

      The Bund brought nationalism and separatism into the Rus sian working-class
      movement and took an opportunist stand on the most important questions of the
      Social-Democratic movement.

   

      In April 1901, the Bund’s Fourth Congress voted for abolition of the
      organisational relations established by the First Congress of the
      R.S.D.L.P., stating in its resolution that it regarded the R.S.D.L.P. as a
      federative association of national organisations which the Bund should
      join as a federative unit.
    

      At the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., which rejected the Bund’s demand
      that it should be recognised as the sole representative of the Jewish
      proletariat, the Bund left the Party, rejoining it in 1906, on the basis
      of a decision of the Fourth (Unity) Congress.
    

      Within the R.S.D.L.P., the Bundists constantly supported its opportunist
      wing (the “economists,” Mensheviks, and liquidators), and waged a
      struggle against the Bolsheviks and Bolshevism. To the Bolshevik
      programme’s demand for the right of nations to self-determination the Bund
      opposed the demand for cultural and national autonomy. During the years of
      the Stolypin reaction, the Bund adopted a liquidators’ stand and took an
      active part in forming the anti-Party August bloc. During the First World
      War, the Bundists took a social-chauvinist stand. In 1917 the Bund
      supported the counter-revolutionary Provisional Government and fought on
      the side of the enemies of the October Socialist Revolution, its
      leadership joining the forces of counter-revolution during the years of
      foreign military intervention and civil war. At the same time a swing
      towards co-operation with Soviet power was to be observed among the Bund
      rank and file. In March 1921 the Bund dissolved itself, part of its
      members joining the R.C.P. (B.) on a general basis.
    



[7]

      “ The reference is to the Baku and Kishinev print-shops of
      Iskra.


      The Kishinev print-shop was organised by L. I. Goldman in April 1901 and
      existed until March 12(25), 1902. It printed G. V.  Plekhanov’s article,
      “What Next?” (reprinted from No. 2-3 of Zarya),
      N. K. Krupskaya’s pamphlet, The Working Woman, The Indictment in the

Case 01 

the May Disturbances at the Obukhou Factory (reprinted from
Iskra, No. 9, with V. I. Lenin’s article, "The New
Battle,” as a supplement), V. I. Lenin’s articles, “The Struggle
Against Starvation” (reprinted from No. 2-3 of Zarya) and
“The Beginning of Demonstrations” (reprinted from
Iskra, No. 13), and also a number of manifestos an
leaflets. No. 10 of Iskra was reprinted at this print-shop.
    

      The Baku print-shop (called “Nina” in secret correspondence)
      was organised in September 1901 by a group of Baku Iskra-ists
      (V. Z. Ketskhoveli, L. B. Krasin, L. I. Galperin, N. P. Kozerenko,
      V. Sturna, and others) with the assistance of the Tiflis Committee of the
      R.S.D.L.P. Prior to March 1902, when the “Nina” print-shop
      temporarily discontinued its work, it had printed the pamphlets,
      Spiders and Flies, by W. Liebknecht, The Ways People
      Live, by S. Dikstein, The Speech of Pyotr Alexeyev, The Tenth
      Anniversary of the Morozov Strike, and proclamations and leaflets in
      Russian and Georgian. The Baku print-shop reprinted No. H of
      Iskra and printed the Georgian illegal Marxist newspaper
      Erdzola (The Struggle). After the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L
      P.,

   

      the Baku print-shop became the central Party print-shop and carried out
      tasks set by the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. In December 1905, the
      print-shop was closed down by decision of the Central Committee of the
      Party.
    



[8]

The Emancipation of Labour group—the first Russian Marxist
      group—was founded by G. V. Plekhanov in Switzerland in 1883. Besides
      Plekhanov, the group included P. B. Axelrod, L. G. Deutsch,
      V. I. Zasulich, and V. N. Ignatov.
    

      The Emancipation of Labour group did much to propagate Marxism in
      Russia. It translated into the Russian language works by Karl Marx and
      Frederick Engels, such as The Manifesto of the Communist Party; Wage
      Labour and Capital; Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, publishing
      them abroad and distributing them in Russia, and also popularised Marxism
      through its publications. The Emancipation of Labour group dealt a severe
      blow at Narodism, which was the chief ideological obstacle to the spread
      of Marxism and the development of the Social-Democratic movement in
      Russia. In his works, Socialism and the Political Struggle
      (1883), Our Differences (1885), and others, G. V. Plekhanov gave
      a Marxist criticism of the Narodnik theories of Russia’s non-capitalist
      path of development, the Narodniks’ subjective-idealist view of the role
      of the individual in history, the denial of the proletariat’s leading role
      in the revolutionary movement, etc. Written by Plekhanov and published by
      the Emancipation of Labour group, the two draft programmes of the Russian
      Social-Democrats (1883 and 1885) were an important step in preparing for
      and creating the Social-Democratic party in Russia. Of special importance
      in spreading Marxist views and in substantiating and defending dialectical
      an d historical materialism was Plekhanov’s (N. Beltov’s) book, The
      Development of the Monist View of History (1895), on which “an
      entire generation of Russian Marxists were trained” see present
      edition, Vol. 16 ,“On the Vperyod Group”). The group
      published and distributed in Russia four issues of the magazine
      Sotsial-Demokrat, as well as a series of popular pamphlets for
      workers.
    

      Engels welcomed the appearance of the Emancipation of Labour group,
      “which frankly and without equivocation accepted the great economic
      and historical theories of Marx” (see Frederick Engels’ Letter to
      V. I. Zasulich, April 23, 1885. Marx and Engels, Selected
      Correspondence, Moscow, p. 459). G. V. Plekhanov and V. I. Zasulich
      were personal friends of Engels and corresponded with him for many
      years. The Emancipation of Labour group established contacts with the
      international working-class movement and, beginning with the First
      Congress of the Second International in 1889 (Paris) and throughout the
      whole of its existence represented Russian Social-Democracy at all
      congresses of the International. But the views of the Emancipation of
      Labour group also contained serious errors: over-estimation of the liberal
      bourgeoisie’s role and under-estimation of the revolutionary nature of
      peasant ry as the reserve force of the proletarian revolution. These were
      the germ of the future Menshevik views held by Plekhanov and other

   

      members of the group. V. I. Lenin pointed out that the Emancipation of
      Labour group “provided only the theoretical foundations of
      Social-Democracy and took the first step towards the working-class
      movement” (see present edition, Vol. 20, “The Ideological
      Struggle in the Working-Class Movement”).
    

      In 1894 the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad was formed on the
      initiative of the Emancipation of Labour group. The members of the
      Emancipation of Labour group and their adherents left the Union in 1900
      and founded the Sotsial-Demokrat revolutionary
      organisation. G. V. Plekhanov, P. B. Axelrod, and V. I. Zasulich, who were
      members of the group, were on the Editorial Board of Iskra and
      Zarya. At the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. in August 1903,
      the Emancipation of Labour group announced that it had ceased to exist.
    



[9]

Bernsteinism—a trend hostile to Marxism in the German and
      international Social-Democratic movement, which originated at the end of
      the nineteenth century and was named after Eduard Bernstein, the most
      outspoken representative of revisionism.
    

      In 1896-98 Bernstein wrote a series of articles entitled “Problems
      of Socialism” for the magazine Die Neue Zeit, the
      theoretical organ of German Social-Democracy. In these articles, he tried
      under the guise of “freedom of criticism” to revise (hence the
      word “revisionism”) the philosophical, economic, and political
      foundations of revolutionary Marxism and to substitute for them bourgeois
      theories of reconciliation of class contradictions and of class
      collaboration. He attacked Marx’s doctrine of the impoverishment of the
      working class, the growth of class contradictions, crises, the inevitable
      collapse of capitalism, socialist revolution and the dictatorship of the
      proletariat, and brought forward a programme of social-reformism expressed
      in the formula: “the movement is everything, the final
      goal—nothing.” In 1899 Bernstein’s articles appeared in a hook
      entitled The Premises of Socialism and the Tasks of
      Social-Democracy. The book had the support of German
      Social-Democracy’s Right wing, and of opportunist elements in other
      parties of the Second International, including the Russian
      “economists.”
    

      Bernsteinism was condemned at the congresses of the German
      Social-Democratic Party in Stuttgart (October 1898), Hanover (October
      1899), and Lübeck (September 1901). However, the Party leadership did
      not show sufficient determination in opposing Bernstein and his adherents,
      but adopted a conciliatory attitude. The Bernsteinites continued their
      open propaganda of revisionist ideas in the magazine Sozialistische
      Monatshefte (Socialist Monthly) and in the Party organisations.
    

      Headed by V. I. Lenin, the Bolshevik Party alone waged a consistent and
      resolute struggle against Bernsteinism and its adherents and followers in
      Russia. As early as 1899, Lenin came out against the Bernsteinites in his
      “A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats” and in his article,
      “Our Programme” (see present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 167-82 and
      210-14). His writings, “Marxism and

   

      Revisionism” (see present edition, Vol. 15), “Differences in the
      European Labour Movement” (see present edition, Vol. 16), and
      others, were also devoted to an exposure of Bernsteinism.
    



[10]

      The reference is to the Manifesto of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party, issued in 1898 by the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. on the
      instructions and in the name of the Party’s First Congress. The Manifesto
      put forward the struggle for political liberty and the overthrow of the
      autocracy as the chief task of Russian Social-Democracy, and linked the
      political struggle with the general tasks of the working-class movement.
    



[11]

Rabocheye Dyelo (Workers’ Cause)—a magazine that was the
      organ of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad. It was published in
      Geneva from April 1899 to February 1902 under the editorship of
      B. N. Krichevsky, P. F. Teplov (Sibiryak), V. P. Ivanshin, and later also
      A. S. Martynov. Twelve numbers (9 books) were issued in all. The Editorial
      Board of Rabocheye Dyelo was the “economists’\thinspace" centre
      abroad. The magazine supported Bernstein’s slogan of “freedom of
      criticism” of Marxism, took an opportunist stand on questions of
      Russian Social-Democracy’s tactics and organisational tasks, denied the
      revolutionary possibilities of the peasantry, and so on. Its supporters
      propagated opportunist ideas of subordinating the proletariat’s political
      struggle to the economic, exalted spontaneity in the working-class
      movement and denied the Party’s leading role. V. P. Ivanshin, one of the
      editors of Rabocheye Dyelo, also took part in editing
      Rabochaya Mysl (Workers’ Thought), organ of the outspoken
      “economists,” which Rabocheye Dyelo supported. At the
      Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., the Rabocheye Dyelo supporters
      represented the extreme Right, opportunist wing of the Party.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy









Lenin: The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy








V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy[1]




Written: Written in February-first half of March 1902 

Published:

      First published in August 1902 in the magazine Zarya, No. 4.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      ???,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 107-150.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






I
  109



II
  111



III
  117



IV
  119



V
  123



VI
  126



VII
  132



VIII
  142



IX
  145



X
  147

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

      Written in February and the first half of March 1902, the article,
      “The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy,” which
      V. I. Lenin called a commentary to the agrarian section of the
      R.S.D.L.P.’s draft programme, was published in Zarya, No. 4, in
      August 1902. When the article was discussed by the Iskra
      Editorial Board, serious differences of opinion arose: G. V. Plekhanov,
      P. B. Axelrod and other members of the board opposed certain of its most
      important propositions (e. g., on land nationalisation, etc.). A number of
      passages, including those dealing with land nationalisation, were omitted
      when this article was published in Zarya.
    

      The article in the present edition of V. I. Lenin’s Collected
      Works is published according to the original manuscript.
    

      The postscript is not contained in the manuscript; it is given here from
      the text of the article in Zarya.









Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## I









Lenin: 1902/agrarian: I







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy



    

    


    

    I

      There is hardly any need to prove at length that an “agrarian
      programme” is essential to the Russian Social-Democratic Party. By
      an agrarian programme we mean a definition of the guiding principles of
      Social-Democratic policy on the agrarian question, i.e., policy in
      relation to agriculture and the various classes, sections, and groups of
      the rural population. Naturally, in a “peasant” country like
      Russia the agrarian programme of the socialists is chiefly, if not
      exclusively, a “peasant programme,” a programme defining their
      attitude towards the peasant question. Big landowners, agricultural
      wage-workers, and “peasants”—these are the three main
      components of the rural population in any capitalist country, Russia
      included. In the same measure as the attitude of the Social-Democrats to
      the first two of these three components (the landowners and the labourers)
      is definite and self-evident, even the very concept of the
      “peasantry” is indefinite, and all the more indefinite is our
      policy with regard to the fundamental problems of its life and
      evolution. If in the West the crux of the Social-Democrats’ agrarian
      programme is precisely the “peasant question,” how much more so must
      that be the case in Russia. It is all the more necessary for us, Russian
      Social-Democrats, to have the most unambiguous definition of our policy in
      the peasant question because in Russia our movement is still quite new and
      because the whole of old Russian socialism was, in the final analysis, a
      “peasant” socialism. True, the mass of Russian
      “radicals,” who imagine themselves the custodian of the heritage
      left by our Narodnik socialists of all shades, have practically nothing
      socialistic left in them. But all of them are all the more eager to bring
      into the forefront their differences with

    

      us on the “peasant” question, the more it pleases them to tone
      down the fact that the “labour” question has come into the
      foreground of the social and political life of Russia, and the fact that
      they have no stable principles whatever in this question, while in essence
      nine-tenths of them are the most ordinary bourgeois social-reformers in
      this matter. Lastly, the numerous “critics of Marxism,” who in the
      latter respect have almost entirely merged with the Russian radicals (or
      liberals?), are also endeavouring to lay specific emphasis on the peasant
      question, on which “orthodox Marxism is allegedly most completely
      put to shame by the “latest works” of the Bernsteins,
      Bulgakovs, Davids, Hertzes and even ... the Chernovs!
    

      Further, in addition to the theoretical uncertainties and the war of
      “progressive” trends, the purely practical requirements of the
      movement itself have of late lent special urgency to the task of
      propaganda and agitation in the countryside. However, this work cannot be
      conducted at all seriously and on a large scale without a programme
      consistent in principle and politically expedient. Since the very day of
      their appearance as an independent trend, Russian Social-Democrats have
      realised the full importance of the “peasant question.” Let us
      recall that the draft programme of the Russian Social-Democrats prepared
      by the Emancipation of Labour group and published in 1885 contains a
      demand for a “radical revision of agrarian relationships (the terms
      of redemption and allotment of land to the

      peasants).”[1]

      In the pamphlet entitled The Tasks of the Socialists in the Fight
      Against the Famine in Russia (1892), G. V. Plekhanov also spoke of
      the Social-Democratic policy on the peasant question.
    

      It is therefore quite natural that in one of its first issues (April 1901,
      No. 3) Iskra also published a rough outline of an agrarian programme,
      defining its attitude towards the principles of the Russian Social-Democrats’
      agrarian policy, in an article entitled “The Workers’ Party and the

      Peasantry.”[2]

      A great many Russian Social-Democrats were perplexed by
      this article, in connection with which we,

    

      the editors, have received a number of comments and letters. The clause on
      the restitution of the cut-off lands evoked most objections, and we were
      planning to launch a discussion on the matter in the columns of
      Zarya, when No. 10 of Rabocheye Dyelo appeared with an
      article by Martynov which, among other things, dealt with the
      Iskra agrarian programme. Since Rabocheye Dyelo has
      voiced many of the current objections, we hope that our correspondents
      will not resent our confining ourselves for the time being to a
      reply to Martynov alone.
    

      I stress for the time being because of the following
      circumstances. The Iskra article was written by one of the
      editors,
      and although the other members of the Editorial Board agreed with the
      author on the general presentation of the question, there could, of
      course, have been differences of opinion on particulars and specific
      points. In the meantime, our entire Editorial Board (i.e., including the
      Emancipation of Labour group) was occupied with the preparation of a
      collective draft programme for our Party. This work was protracted (partly
      as a result of various Party affairs and certain circumstances of our
      illegal work, and partly because of the necessity for a special congress
      to discuss the programme from all angles), and was completed only quite
      recently. As long as the clause on the restitution of the cut-off lands
      remained my personal opinion, I made no haste to defend it, since the
      general presentation of the question of our agrarian policy was far more
      important to me than this particular clause, which could still be rejected
      or substantially modified in our general draft. I shall now be defending
      this general draft. As to the “friendly reader” who took the
      trouble of communicating to us his criticism of our agrarian programme,
      we ask him now to undertake the criticism of our general draft.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]

      See appendix to P. B. Axelrod’s pamphlet, Present Tasks and Tactics of
the Russian Social-Democrats, Geneva, 1898.
—Lenin

[2]

See present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 420-28,—Ed.

 

 
  


|

II

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## II









Lenin: 1902/agrarian: II







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy



    

    II


      We shall quote the “agrarian” section of this draft programme in
      full.
    

      “With a view to eradicating the remnants of the old serf-owning system and
      for the purpose of facilitating the

    

      free development of the class struggle in the countryside, the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party will work for:
    

      “1) abolition of land redemption and quit-rent payments, as well as
      of all services now imposed on the peasantry as a taxable social-estate;
    

      “2) annulment of collective liability and of all laws restricting the
      peasant in the free disposal of his land;
    

      “3) restitution to the people of all sums taken from them in the
      form, of land redemption and quit-rent payments; confiscation for this
      purpose of monasterial property and of the royal demesnes, and imposition
      of a special land tax on members of the big landed nobility who received
      land redemption loans, the revenue thus obtained to be credited to a
      special public fund for the cultural and charitable needs of the village
      communes;
    

      “4) establishment of peasant committees
    

      “a) for the restitution to the village communes (by expropriation,
      or, when the land has changed hands, by redemption, etc.) of the land cut
      off from the peasants when serfdom was abolished and now used by the land
      lords as a means of keeping the peasants in bondage;
    

      “b) for the eradication of the remnants of the serf-owning system
      which still exist in the Urals, the Altai, the Western territory, and
      other regions of the country;
    

      “5) empowerment of courts to reduce exorbitant rents and to declare
      null and void all contracts entailing bondage.”
    

      The reader may perhaps wonder at the fact that the “agrarian
      programme” contains no demands whatever in favour of the
      agricultural wage-workers. On this score let us note that such demands
      have been included in the preceding section of the programme which
      contains the demands presented by our Party “to safeguard the
      working class from physical and moral degeneration, and also to
      raise its fighting capacity in the struggle for its emancipation.” The
      words we have underlined apply to all wage-workers, including
      those in agriculture, and all the 16 clauses of this
      section of the programme apply to the agricultural workers as
      well.
    
 

      True, this combination of industrial and agricultural workers in one
      section, with the “agrarian” part of the programme limited to
      “peasant” demands, has the drawback that the demands in favour
      of the agricultural workers do not strike the eye, are not discernible at
      first glance. A superficial acquaintance with the programme may even
      create the entirely wrong impression that we have deliberately toned down
      the demands in favour of the agricultural wage-workers. Needless to say,
      this impression would be quite false, for the drawback in question is at
      bottom of a purely external character. It can be easily obviated by closer
      acquaintance with the programme itself and the commentaries on it (and it
      goes without saying that our Party programme will “go to the
      people” only together with printed commentaries, and, what is far
      more important, with spoken commentaries as well). Should some group wish
      to make a special appeal to the agricultural workers, it need only select
      from all the demands in favour of the workers those particular demands
      that are most important to farm labourers, hands hired by the day, etc.,
      and set them out in a separate pamphlet, leaflet, or in speeches.
    

      From the standpoint of principle, the only correct way to edit
      the programme sections under analysis is one that will unite all demands
      in favour of the wage-workers in all branches of the national
      economy and will distinctly place in a special section demands in favour
      of the “peas ants,” because the fundamental criterion of what we can
      and must demand in the former and latter cases is absolutely
      different. In the draft, the fundamental difference between the two
      sections of the programme under review is expressed in the preamble to
      each section.
    

      For wage-workers we demand such reforms as would “safeguard
      them from physical and moral degeneration and raise their fighting
      capacity”; for the peasants, how ever, we seek only such
      changes as would help “to eradicate the remnants of the old
      serf-owning system and facilitate the free development of the class
      struggle in the countryside.” Hence it follows that our demands in favour
      of the peasants are far more restricted, that their terms are much more
      moderate and presented in a smaller frame-work.

    

      With regard to the wage-workers, we undertake to defend their interests
      as a class in present-day society; we do this because we consider
      their class movement the only truly revolutionary movement
      (cf. the words in the theoretical part of the programme on the relation of
      the working class to other classes) and strive to organise this particular
      movement, to direct it, and bring the light of socialist consciousness
      into it. As regards the peasantry, however, we do not by any means
      undertake to defend its interests as a class of small landowners
      and farmers in present-day society. Nothing of the kind. “The
      emancipation of the workers must be the act of the working class itself,”
      and for this reason Social-Democracy represents—directly
      and wholly—the interests of the proletariat alone, and
      seeks indissoluble organic unity with its class movement alone. All the
      other classes of present-day society stand for the preservation of the
      foundations of the existing economic system, and that is why
      Social-Democracy can undertake to defend the interests of those classes
      only under certain circumstances and on concrete and strictly defined
      conditions. For instance, in its struggle against the bourgeoisie, the
      class of small producers, including the small farmers, is a
      reactionary class, and therefore “trying to save the
      peasantry by protecting small-scale farming and small holdings from the
      onslaught of capitalism would be a useless retarding of social
      development; it would mean deceiving the peasantry with illusions of the
      possibility of prosperity even under capitalism; it would mean disuniting
      the labouring classes and creating a privileged position for the minority
      at the expense of the majority” (Iskra, No.

      3).[See present edition, Vol. 4,
        pp. 422-23.—Ed.]

      That is why in our draft programme the inclusion of the
      “peasant” demands hinges on two highly circumscribed
      conditions. We make the legitimacy of “peasant demands”
      in a Social-Democratic programme dependent, firstly, on the condition that
      they lead to the eradication of remnants of the serf-owning system, and,
      secondly, that they facilitate the free development of the class struggle
      in the countryside.
    
 

      Let us dwell in greater detail on each of these conditions, which have
      already been briefly outlined in No. 3 of Iskra.
    

      The “remnants of the old serf-owning system” are still
      extremely numerous in our countryside. This is a generally known
      fact. Labour-rent and bondage, the peasants’ inequality as a social-estate
      and as citizens, their subjection to the privileged landowners, who still
      have the right to flog them, and their degrading living conditions, which
      virtually turn the peasants into barbarians—all this is not an
      exception, but the rule in the Russian countryside, and in the final
      analysis this is all a direct survival of the serf-owning system. In those
      instances and relationships where this system still prevails, and insofar
      as it still prevails, its enemy is the peasantry as a whole. As
      opposed to serf-ownership, to the feudal-minded landlords, and the state
      that serves them, the peasantry still stands as a class, a class
      not of capitalist but of serf-owning society, i.e., as an

      estate-class.[1]

      Inasmuch as this class antagonism between the “peasantry” and
      the privileged landowners, so characteristic of serf-owning society, still
      survives in our countryside, insomuch a working-class party must
      undoubtedly be on the side of the “peasantry,” support its struggle
      and urge it on to fight against all remnants of serf-ownership.
    

      We put the word “peasantry” in quotation marks in order to
      emphasise the existence in this case of an absolutely indubitable
      contradiction: in present-day society the peasantry of course no longer
      constitutes an integral class. But whoever is perplexed by this
      contradiction forgets that this is not a contradiction in exposition, in a
      doctrine, but a

    

      contradiction in life itself. This is not an invented, but a living and
      dialectical contradiction. Inasmuch as in our countryside
      serf-owning society is being eliminated by “present-day”
      (bourgeois) society, insomuch the peasantry ceases to be a class
      and becomes divided into the rural proletariat and the rural bourgeoisie
      (big, middle, petty, and very small). Inasmuch as serf-owning
      relationships still exist, insomuch the “peasantry”
      still continues to be a class, i.e., we repeat, a class of serf-owning
      society rather than of bourgeois society. This
      “inasmuch—insomuch” exists in real life in the form of
      an extremely complex web of serf-owning and bourgeois
      relationships in the Russian countryside today. To use Marx’s terminology,
      labour rent, rent in kind, money rent, and capitalist rent are all most
      fantastically interlinked in our country. We lay special emphasis on this
      fact, which has been established by all economic investigations in Russia,
      because it necessarily and inevitably constitutes a source of that
      complexity, confusion, or, if you will, artificialness, of some of our
      “agrarian” demands, which at first glance so greatly puzzles
      many people. Whoever limits his objections to general
      dissatisfaction with the complexity and “artfulness” of the
      proposed solutions forgets that there can be no simple solution
      of such tangled problems. It is our duty to fight against all remnants of
      serf-owning relationships— that is beyond doubt to a
      Social-Democrat—and since these relationships are most intricately
      interwoven with bourgeois relationships,we are obliged to
      penetrate into the very core, so to say, of this confusion, undeterred by
      the complexity of the task. There could be only one
      “simple” solution of this task: to keep aloof, pass it by, and
      leave it to the “spontaneous element” to clear up this
      mess. But this “simplicity,” favoured by all and sundry bourgeois
      and “economist” admirers of spontaneity, is unworthy of a
      Social-Democrat. The party of the proletariat must not only support but
      must also urge on the peasantry in its struggle against all the remnants
      of the serf-owning system. To urge the peasantry on, it must not confine
      itself to wishful thinking; it must lay down a definite revolutionary
      directive, and be able to help in finding the bearings in the
      maze of agrarian relationships.
    
    

     

Notes
 

[1]

      We know that in slave and feudal societies, class divisions were also
      expressed in the division of the population into social-estates,
      each class with specific legal status in the state. That is why
      classes in a society based on slavery and feudalism (and on
      serf—ownership) were also separate social-estates. On the other
      band, in capitalist, bourgeois society, all citizens are equal in law,
      division into social-estates has been abolished (at least in principle),
      and that is why classes have ceased to be social-estates. The division of
      society into classes is a common feature to slave, feudal, and bourgeois
      societies, but in the two former estate-classes existed, whereas in the
      latter the classes are not estates.
    —Lenin
 

 
  

I

|

III

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## III









Lenin: 1902/agrarian: III







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy



    

    III


For the reader to get a clearer idea of the inevitability of a complex
solution of the agrarian question, we would ask him to compare in this
respect the workers’ and the peasants’ sections of the programme. In the
former, all the solutions are extremely simple and comprehensible even
to the most uninitiated and least imaginative person; they are
“natural,” tangible, and easily achievable. In the latter, on the
contrary, most of the solutions are extremely complex,
“incomprehensible” at first glance, artificial, improbable,
and difficult to bring about. How can this difference be explained?  Can
it be that, in the first case, the compilers of the programme gave it
sober and business-like consideration, whereas in the second case they
were lost and confused, lapsing into romanticism and phrase-mongering?
Such an explanation, it must in truth be said, would be extremely
“simple,” childishly simple, and we are not at all surprised at
Martynov having grasped at it. It did not enter his mind that economic
development itself had facilitated and simplified to the utmost the
practical solution of the workers’ minor problems. Social and economic
relationships in the sphere of large-scale capitalist production have
become (and are increasingly be coming) so transparent, clear, and
simplified that the next steps forward suggest themselves automatically,
immediately, and at first glance. On the other hand, capitalism’s
elimination of serf-ownership in the countryside has so con fused and
complicated social and economic relationships as to make it necessary to
ponder deeply over the solution (in the spirit of revolutionary
Social-Democracy) of the immediate practical questions, and it may be
said in advance and with full certainty that a “simple”
solution cannot be invented.
      

Incidentally, once we have begun to compare the workers’ and the
peasants’ sections of the programme, let us note still another
difference in principle between them. This difference may be briefly
formulated as follows: in the workers’ section we have no right to go
beyond the bounds of demands for social reform; in the peasants’
section, however, we must not stop at social-revolutionary demands. In
other words: in the workers’ section we are definitely

    

limited by the minimum programme; in the peasants’ section we can and must
produce a maximum

programme.[1]

Let us explain.
      

What we set forth in both sections is not our ultimate aim, but our
immediate demands. In both we should there fore remain on the basis of
present-day (= bourgeois) society. Therein lies the similarity
between the two sections. How ever, their fundamental difference
consists in the fact that the workers’ section contains demands directed
against the bourgeoisie, whereas the peasants’ section contains
demands directed against the would-be serf-owning landlords
(against the feudal lords, I would say, if the applicability of this
term to our landed nobility were not so

disputable[2]

).

In the workers’ section we must confine ourselves to partial
improvements in the existing, bourgeois, order. In the peas ants’
section we must strive to completely eradicate all the remnants
of the serf-owning system from this existing order. In the workers’
section we cannot bring forward demands whose significance would be
tantamount to a final smashing of bourgeois rule: when we achieve this
ultimate aim of ours, which has been adequately stressed elsewhere in
the programme and which we “never for a moment” lose sight
of in the struggle for the immediate demands, then we, the Party of the
proletariat, shall no longer confine ourselves to questions of this or
that responsibility of the employers, or to some factory housing, but
shall take into our own hands the entire management and
disposal of the whole of social production, and consequently, of
distribution as well. On the contrary, in the peasants’ section we can
and must bring

    

      forward demands whose significance would be tantamount to the final
      smashing of the rule of the feudal-minded landlords and to the complete
      eradication of all traces of serf-ownership from our countryside. We
      cannot present social-revolutionary demands among the immediate demands in
      the workers’ section, since the social revolution which overthrows the
      rule of the bourgeoisie is the proletarian revolution which achieves our
      ultimate aim. In the peasants’ section, we present
      social-revolutionary demands as well, since the social revolution which
      overthrows the rule of the serf-owning landlords (i.e., a social
      revolution of the bourgeoisie, like the Great French Revolution) is also
      possible on the basis of the existing, bourgeois, order. In the workers’
      section, we keep to our stand (conditionally, for the time being, with our
      own independent intentions and aims, but we nevertheless keep to our
      stand) in favour of social reforms, for what we are demanding here is only
      what the bourgeoisie can (in principle) concede to us without as yet
      losing its domination (and what Messrs. the Sombarts, Bulgakovs, Struves,
      Prokopoviches and Go. therefore in advance advise the bourgeoisie to
      concede in all wisdom and good faith). In the peasants’ section, however,
      we must, unlike the social-reformers, also demand what the
      feudal—minded landlords will not and cannot give us (or the
      peasants)—we must also demand what the revolution ary movement of
      the peasantry can take only by force.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]

      The objection that the demand for the restitution of the cut off lands is
      far from being the maximum of our immediate demands in favour of the
      peasantry [or of our agrarian demands in general] and that it is therefore
      not consistent will be dealt with later, when we speak of the concrete
      clauses of the programme we are defending. We maintain, and shall
      endeavour to prove, that the demand for the “restitution of the
      cut-off lands” is the maximum that we can at present advance in our
      agrarian programme.
    —Lenin

[2]

      Personally, I am inclined to decide this question in the affirmative, but
      in the given instance, it is of course neither the place nor time for
      substantiating or even for proposing this solution, since what we are
      concerned with now is the defence of the draft agrarian programme prepared
      collectively by the entire Editorial Board.
    —Lenin
 

 
  

II

|

IV

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## IV









Lenin: 1902/agrarian: IV







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy



    

    IV


      That is why the “simple” criterion of “feasibility,”
      with the aid of which Martynov so “easily” pulled our agrarian
      programme to pieces, is inadequate and worthless. This criterion of direct
      and immediate “feasibility” is applicable in general only to
      the avowedly reformative sections and clauses of our programme, and by no
      means to the programme of a revolutionary party in general. In other
      words, this criterion is applicable to our programme only by way of
      exception, and by no means as a general rule. Our programme must be
      feasible only in the broad and philosophical sense of the word, so that
      not a single letter in it will contradict the

    

      direction of all social and economic evolution. And since we have
      correctly determined this direction (in general and in particular), we
      must—in the name of our revolutionary principles and our
      revolutionary duty—fight with all our might, always and
      absolutely, for the maximum of our demands. However, to try to
      determine in advance, before the final outcome of the struggle, in the
      course of that struggle, that we shall perhaps fail to achieve the
      entire maximum means lapsing into sheer
      philistinism. Considerations of this kind always lead to opportunism, even
      if the authors of such considerations may harbour no such intentions.
    

      Indeed, is it not philistinism on Martynov’s part to discern
      “romanticism” in the Iskra agrarian programme
      “because it is highly problematic whether the peasant masses can
      be brought into our movement under the present conditions”
      (Rabocheye Dyelo, No. 10, p. 58. Italics mine)? This is a good
      example of those very “plausible” and very cheap arguments by
      means of which Russian Social-Democratism was simplified to
      “economism”. A closer look at this “plausible”
      argument will show that it is a soap-bubble. “Our movement” is
      the Social-Democratic labour movement. The peasant masses cannot
      just be “brought” into it: that is not problematic
      but impossible, and there was never any question of it. However,
      the peasant masses cannot but be brought into the
      “movement” against all the remnants of the serf—owning
      system (including the autocracy). Martynov confused matters by using the
      expression “our movement,” without giving thought to the fundamental
      difference between the character of the movement against the bourgeoisie
      and against the serf-owning

      system.[1]
   

    
 

      It is not the bringing of the peasant masses into the movement against
      remnants of serf-ownership that can be called problematic, but perhaps
      only the degree to which they are so brought: serf-owning
      relationships in the country side are closely interwoven with bourgeois
      relationships, and as a class of bourgeois society the peasants (the small
      farmers) are far more a conservative than a revolutionary element
      (particularly since in our country the bourgeois evolution of agricultural
      relationships is only just beginning). That is why, in a period of
      political reforms, it will be far easier for the government to split the
      peasants (than, for instance, the workers), far easier for it to weaken
      (or even, at the worst, to paralyse) their revolutionary spirit by means
      of minor and insignificant concessions to a comparatively small number of
      petty proprietors.
    

      All this is true. But what follows from it? The easier it is for the
      government to come to terms with the conservative elements of the
      peasantry, the greater must be our efforts, and the sooner we must exert
      them, to reach agreement with its revolutionary elements. It is our duty
      to determine with the greatest possible scientific precision the
      direction along which we must support these elements, and then to
      urge them to wage a resolute and unconditional struggle

    

      against all remnants of the serf-owning system, to urge them on at all
      times and under all circumstances, by all available means. And is it not
      philistinism to attempt to “prescribe” in advance the
      degree of success that will attend our urging? That will be
      decided by life and recorded by history; our present job, in any case, is
      to fight on, and fight to the end. Does a soldier who has already gone
      into the attack dare argue that we perhaps will wipe out not an entire
      enemy army corps, but only three-fifths of it? Is not such a demand as,
      for instance, the demand for a republic also
      “problematic” in the Martynov sense? It will surely be easier
      for the government to make partial payment on this bill than to
      meet the bill of the peasant demands for the eradication of all traces of
      the serf-owning system. But what is that to us? We shall, of course,
      pocket this partial payment, without however calling off our desperate
      struggle for full payment. We must spread the idea far and wide
      that only in a republic can the decisive battle between the proletariat
      and the bourgeoisie take place; we must

      create[2]

      and consolidate republican traditions among all the Russian
      revolutionaries and among the broadest possible masses of Russian workers;
      we should express through this “republic” slogan that we will
      carry to the end the struggle to democratise the state system, without
      looking back—and the struggle will itself determine what share of
      that payment, when and how, we shall succeed in winning. It would be
      stupid to try to calculate that share before we make the enemy feel the
      full force of our blows and without ourselves feeling the full force of
      his blows. Similarly, with regard to the peasant demands, our job is to
      determine, on the basis of scientific data, the maximum of these
      demands and to help the comrades to fight for this maximum—and

    

      then let the sober legal critics and the illegal
      “tail-enders,” the latter so enamoured of tangible results, laugh at its
      “problematic”

      character![3]

 

Notes
 

[1]

      How little thought Martynov has given to the question he has undertaken to
      write on is most vividly seen from the following statement in his article:
      “In view of the fact that tile agrarian section of our programme
      will still be of comparatively little practical significance for a
      very long time to come, it affords a wide field for revolutionary
      phrase-mongering.” The underlined words contain the very confusion
      indicated in the text. Martynov has heard that in the West agrarian
      programmes are put forward only when there is a highly developed
      working-class movement. In our country this movement is just
      beginning. Hence, our publicist hastens to conclude—“for a very long
      time to come”! He has overlooked a trifle: in the West agrarian programmes
      are written for the purpose of drawing those who are
      half-peasants,

   

      half-workers into the Social-Democratic movement against the
      bourgeoisie; while in our country such programmes are meant to
      draw the peasant masses into the democratic movement
      against the remnants of the serf-owning system. That is why in
      the West the significance of the agrarian programme will become all the
      greater, the more agricultural capitalism develops. The practical
      significance of our agrarian programme will decrease, as far as
      most o fits demands are concerned, the more agricultural
      capitalism develops, since the remnants of serf-ownership this programme
      is directed against are dying out both of themselves and as the result of
      the government’s policy. Our agrarian programme is, therefore, calculated
      in practice mainly for the immediate future, for the period
      preceding the downfall of the autocracy. A political revolution
      in Russia will at all events lead inevitably to such fundamental changes
      in our most backward agrarian system that we shall unfailingly have to
      revise our agrarian programme. But Martynov is quite sure of only one
      thing: that Kautsky’s

      book[4]
      is good (this is warranted), and that it is sufficient to repeat and
      transcribe Kautsky without bearing in mind how radically different Russia
      is with regard to the agrarian programme (this is not at all wise).
    —Lenin

[2]

      We say “create,” because the old Russian revolutionaries never paid
      serious attention to the question of a republic, never considering it a
      “practical” issue—the Narodniks, the rebels, etc.,
      because of their contemptuous anarchist attitude towards politics, those
      in the Narodnaya

      Volya[5]
      because they wanted to leap straight from the autocracy into the socialist
      revolution. It has fallen to our lot (if we leave out of account the long
      forgotten republican ideas of the Decembrists), to the lot of the
      Social-Democrats, to popularise the demand for a republic among the masses
      and to create republican traditions among the Russian revolutionaries.
    —Lenin

[3]

      It would perhaps be useful, in discussing the “feasibility” of
      the demands in the Social-Democratic programme, to recall Karl Kautsky’s
      polemic against Rosa Luxemburg in 1896. Rosa Luxemburg wrote that the
      demand for Poland’s restoration was inappropriate in the Polish
      Social-Democrats’ practical programme, since this demand could not be
      realised in present-day society. Karl Kautsky took exception to this,
      saying that this argument was “based on a strange misconception of
      the essence of a socialist programme. Whether they find direct expression
      in the programme or are tacitly accepted ’postulates,’ our practical
      demands should be conformed (werden ... darnach
      bemessen), not with their being achievable under the given
      alignment of forces, but with their compatibility with the
      existing social system, and with the consideration whether they can
      facilitate and further (fördern) the proletariat’s class
      struggle, and pave (ebnen) for it the way to the political rule
      of the proletariat. In this, we take no account of the current alignment
      of forces. The Social-Democratic programme is not written for the given
      ("den”) moment—as far as possible, it should
      cover (ausreichen) all eventualities in present-day society. It
      should serve not only for practical action (der Action), but for
      propaganda as well; in the form of concrete demands, it should indicate,
      more vividly than abstract arguments can do, the direction in which we
      intend to advance. The more distant practical aims we can set ourselves
      without straying into Utopian speculations, the better; the direction in
      which we are advancing will be all the clearer to the masses—even to
      those who are unable to grasp (erfassen) our theoretical
      premises. The programme should show what we demand of existing
      society or of the existing state, and not what we expect of
      it. As an example, let us take the programme of German
      Social-Democracy. It demands that officials should be elected by the
      people. Measured by Miss Luxemburg’s standards, this demand is just as
      Utopian as the demand for the establishment of a Polish national state. No
      one will be deluded into believing that it is possible to ensure that,
      under the political conditions obtaining in the German Reich, government
      officials are elected by the people. With just as good reason as one can
      assume that a Polish national state is achievable only when the
      proletariat wins political power, one can assert this concerning the above
      demand. But is that sufficient ground for not including it in our
      practical programme?” [Neue Zeit, XIV. 2, S. 513 u. 514. All
      italics are Karl Kautsky’s.]
    —Lenin
 



[4]

      The reference is to Karl Kautsky’s book, Die Agrarfrage. Eine
Übersicht über die Tendenzen der modernen Landwirtschaft und
die Agrarpolitik der Sozialdemokratie. (The Agrarian Question.

   

      A Review of the Tendencies of Modern Agriculture and the Agrarian
Policy of Social-Democracy), published in Stuttgart in 1899.
    



[5]

Narodnaya Volya (The People’s Will)—a secret political
      organisation of Narodnik terrorists, which arose in August 1879, following
      a split in the secret society Zemlya I Volya (Land and Liberty). The
      Narodnaya Volya was headed by an Executive Committee which included
      A. I. Zhelyabov, A. D. Mikhailov, M. F. Frolenko, N. A. Morozov,
      V. N. Figner, S. L. Perovskaya, A. A. Kvyatkovsky. While continuing to
      uphold Utopian Narodnik socialism, the members of the Narodnaya Volya
      (Narodovoltsi) at the same time put forward the task of achieving
      political liberty. Their programme envisaged the organisation of
      “permanent popular representation” created on the basis of
      universal suffrage, the proclamation of democratic liberties, the transfer
      of the land to the people, and the working out of measures for handing
      over the factories to the workers. The overthrow of the tsarist autocracy
      was the immediate aim of the Narodnaya Volya, but, since it had no links
      with the masses, the Narodovoltsi took the path of political plots and
      individual terrorism.
    

      After March 1,1881 (the assassination of Alexander II), the government
      smashed the Narodnaya Volya organisation by savage persecution,
      executions, and provocation. Repeated attempts to revive the Narodnaya
      Volya during the eighties proved fruitless. In 1886, for instance, a group
      was formed under the leadership of A. I. Ulyanov (the brother of
      V. I. Lenin) and P. Y. Shevyrev, which adopted the traditions of the
      Narodnaya Volya. After an unsuccessful attempt on the life of Alexander
      III in 1887, the group was uncovered and its active members executed.
    

      While criticising the erroneous Utopian programme of the Narodovoltsi,
      V. I. Lenin at the same time held in high regard the self-sacrificing
      struggle against tsarism waged by the members of the Narodnaya Volya
      organisation. In 1899 he pointed out in “A Protest by Russian
      Social-Democrats” that “the members of the old Narodnaya Volya
      managed to play an enormous role in the history of Russia, despite the
      fact that only narrow social strata supported the few heroes, and despite
      the fact that it was by no means a revolutionary theory which served as
      the banner of the movement” (see present edition, Vol. 4,
      p. 181).
    

 
  

III

|

V

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## V









Lenin: 1902/agrarian: V







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy



    

    V


      We shall now proceed to the second general proposition, which defines the
      nature of all our peasant demands and is expressed in the following words:
      “... for the purpose of
    

      facilitating the free development of the class struggle in the
countryside....”


      These words are of the utmost importance both for the principled
      presentation of the agrarian question in general, and for an appraisal of
      individual agrarian demands in particular. The demand for the eradication
      of the remnants of the serf-owning system is common to us and to all the
      consistent liberals, Narodniks, social-reformers, critics of Marxism on
      the agrarian question, etc., etc. In advancing this demand, we differ from
      all these gentlemen, not in principle, but only in degree: in this point
      too they will inevitably remain at all times within the limits of reforms;
      we, however, will not stop (in the sense indicated above) even at
      social-revolutionary demands. On the contrary, by demanding that the
      “free development of the class struggle in the countryside” be
      ensured, we place ourselves in opposition to all these gentlemen in
      principle, and even to all revolutionaries and socialists who are
      not Social-Democrats. These latter will also not stop at
      social-revolutionary demands in the agrarian question, but they will not
      wish to subordinate these demands precisely to such a condition as the
      free development of the class struggle in the countryside. This condition
      is the fundamental and focal point in the theory of revolutionary Marxism
      in the sphere of the agrarian

      question.[1]

      To acknowledge this condition means recognising that, despite all its
      confusion and complexity, despite all the diversity of its forms, the
      evolution of agriculture is also capitalist evolution, that (like the
      evolution of industry) it also engenders the proletariat’s class struggle
      against the bourgeoisie, that precisely this class struggle must
      be our prime and fundamental concern, the touchstone for both questions of
      principle and political tasks, as well as methods of propaganda,
      agitation, and organisation. To acknowledge this condition means
      undertaking to abide unswervingly by the class viewpoint also in the very
      painful

    

      question of the participation of the small peasants in the
      Social-Democratic movement, means sacrificing nothing of the proletariat’s
      standpoint in favour of the interests of the petty bourgeoisie, but, on
      the contrary, demanding that the small peasant, who is being oppressed and
      ruined by all modern capitalism, should desert his own class
      standpoint and place himself at the standpoint of the proletariat.
    

      By setting this condition, we shall resolutely and irrevocably put
      ourselves apart, not only from our enemies (i.e., the direct or
      indirect, conscious or unconscious supporters of the bourgeoisie, who are
      our temporary and partial allies in the struggle against the remnants of
      the serf-owning system), but also from those unreliable friends
      who, because of their mid-course presentation of the agrarian question,
      can cause (and actually do cause) much harm to the proletariat’s
      revolutionary movement.
    

      By setting this condition, we are providing a guiding principle that will
      enable any Social-Democrat, even if he finds himself in some
      out-of-the-way village, even if he is faced with the most tangled web of
      agrarian relationships which bring general democratic tasks into
      the foreground, to apply and stress his proletarian standpoint when he is
      tackling those tasks—just as we remain Social-Democrats when we
      tackle general-democratic, political problems.
    

      By setting this condition, we are replying to the objection that many
      people bring forward after a cursory acquaintance with the concrete
      demands in our agrarian programme.... “Redemption payments and
      cut-off lands shall be restituted to the village
      communes”!?—But, then, where is our specifically proletarian
      complexion and our proletarian independence? Is this not in effect a gift
      to the rural bourgeoisie??
    

      Of course it is—but only in the sense that the fall of the
      serf-owning system was itself a “gift to the bourgeoisie,” i.e.,
      since it relieved bourgeois, and not some other development, from the
      fetters and restrictions of the serf-owning system. The proletariat is
      distinguished from all the other classes oppressed by and opposed to the
      bourgeoisie for the very reason that it rests its hopes, not on a
      retardation of bourgeois development, or on any abatement or slackening of
      the class struggle, but, on the contrary, on the fullest and freest
      development of the class struggle, on the acceleration

    

      of bourgeois

      progress.[2]

      In a developing capitalist society it is impossible to eradicate
      the remnants of the serf-owning system which hamper its development, in
      such a way as not to strengthen and fortify the bourgeoisie. To be
      “baffled” by this is equivalent to repeating the mistake of
      those socialists who said that we have no need of political liberty since
      it might strengthen and fortify the rule of the bourgeoisie.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]

      In essence all the delusions and fallacies of the “critics” of
      Marxism on the agrarian question boil down to a failure to understand this
      very point, and the boldest and most consistent (and to that extent the
      most honest) of them, Mr. Bulgakov, openly declares in his
      “survey” that the “doctrine” of the class struggle
      is quite inapplicable to agricultural relationships. (Capitalism and
      Agriculture, Vol. II, p. 289.)
    —Lenin

[2]

      It stands to reason that the proletariat does not support all measures
      accelerating bourgeois progress, but only those that tend
      directly to strengthen the capacity of the working class to
      struggle for its emancipation. And “labour rent” and bondage
      weigh upon the poor section of the peasantry, which is close to the
      proletariat, much more heavily than upon the well-to-do section of the
      peasantry.
    —Lenin
 

 
  

IV

|

VI

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## VI









Lenin: 1902/agrarian: VI







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy



    

    VI

      Having examined the “general section” of our agrarian
      programme, we shall now proceed to analyse its specific demands. We shall
      take the liberty of beginning not with the first but with the fourth
      clause (on the cut-off lands), since this is the most important and the
      central clause, the one that lends a special character to the agrarian
      programme and is at the same time its most vulnerable point (at any rate,
      in the view of most of those who voiced their opinions on the article in
      No. 3 of Iskra).
    

      Let us recall that this clause is made up of the following components:
      1. It demands the establishment of peasant committees with authority to
      reorganise agrarian relationships that are direct survivals of the
      serf-owning system. The expression “peasant
      committees” has been chosen to make it quite clear that, as distinct
      from the “Reform” of 1861 with its committees of

      nobles,[4]
      the reorganisation of these relationships must rest with the peasants, and
      not with the landowners. In other words: the final abolition of
      relation. ships stemming from the serf-owning system is left, not to the
      oppressors, but to ·the section of the population which is
      oppressed by these relationships; not to the minority, but to the majority
      of those concerned. In essence, this is nothing but a democratic
      revision of the peasant reform (i. e., the very thing demanded by the
      first draft programme prepared by the Emancipation of Labour group). And
      the only reason

    

      we have not chosen this latter expression is because it indicates the true
      nature and concrete substance of this re vision less definitely and less
      expressively. Therefore, if Martynov, for instance, really had some
      contribution to make on the agrarian question, he should have stated
      definitely whether he rejects the very idea of a democratic revision of
      the peasant reform, and if not, then he should have stated just how
      he pictures

      it.[1]


      Further, 2. The peasant committees are given the right to expropriate and
      redeem landlords’ land, to effect ex changes of land, and so on (Clause
      4,b); moreover, this right is limited to cases where there is a direct
      survival of serf-owning relationships. Specifically (3), the right to
      expropriate and redeem is granted only with regard to land which, first,
      was “cut off from the peasants when serfdom was abolished”
      (since time immemorial this land had been an essential appurtenance of the
      peasant farm, part and parcel of that farm, and was artificially severed
      from it by the legalised robbery known as the great Peasant
      Reform)—and, secondly, is “used by the landlords as a means of
      keeping the peasants in bondage.”
    

      This second condition still more limits the right of redemption and
      expropriation, extending it, not to all “cut-off lands,”

    

      but only to such that to this day remain instruments of bond age and
      “by means of which,” as Iskra has formulated it,
      “forced labour, bondage, the corvée system, i.e., in actual
      fact the very same serf labour, is still maintained." In other
      words, wherever the half-hearted nature of our Peasant Reform has led to
      serf-owning forms of farming surviving to this day, with the aid of land
      cut off from the peasants’ lands, the peas ants are given the right to do
      away with these survivals once and for all, even by means of
      expropriation, the right to the “restitution of the cut-off
      lands.”
    

      We can therefore reassure our kind-hearted Martynov, who has asked with
      such alarm: “What should be done about those cut-off lands in the
      possession of the nobility or purchasers of non-noble origin, which are
      now being cultivated along model, capitalist lines?" It is not a question
      of these particular cut-off lands, my worthy friend, but rather of those
      typical (and extremely numerous) cut-off lands which to this very day
      serve as a basis for still existing remnants of the serf-owning system.
    

      Finally, 4. Clause 4, b, empowers the peasant committees to eradicate
      remnants of serf-owning system which still survive in certain parts of the
      country (servitude, uncompleted allotment of land, its demarcation, and so
      forth and so on).
    

      Hence, for the sake of simplicity, the entire content of Clause 4 may be
      briefly expressed as “restitution of the cut off lands.” The
      question arises: how did the idea of this demand originate? It arose as
      the direct outcome of the general and fundamental proposition that we must
      assist the peasants and urge them to destroy all remnants of the
      serf-owning system as completely as possible. This meets with
      “general approval,” doesn’t it? Well then, if you do agree to follow
      this road, make an effort to proceed along it independently; don’t make it
      necessary to drag you; don’t let the “unusual” appearance of
      this road frighten you, don’t be put out by the fact that in many places
      you will find no beaten track at all, and that you will have to crawl
      along the edge of precipices, break your way through thickets, and leap
      across chasms. Don’t complain of the poor road: these complaints will be
      futile whining, for you should have known in advance that you would be
      moving, not along a highway

    

      that has been graded and levelled by all the forces of social progress,
      but along paths through out-of-the-way places and back-alleys which do
      have a way out, but from which you, we or anyone else will never find a
      direct, simple, and easy way out—“never,” i.e., whilst these
      disappearing, but so slowly disappearing, out-of-the-way places and
      back-alleys continue to exist.’
    

      But if you do not want to stray into these back-alleys, then say so
      frankly and don’t try to get away by

      phrase-mongering.[2]


      You agree to fight for the abolition of the remnants of the serf-owning
      system?  Very well. Remember, however, that there does not exist
      a single juridical institution to express or stipulate these
      remnants—I am of course speaking of those remnants exclusively in
      the sphere of the agrarian relationships that we are discussing now, and
      not in the sphere of legislation relating to the social-estates, financial
      affairs, etc. Direct survivals of the corvée system, recorded times
      without number in all the economic surveys of Russia, are maintained, not
      by any special law which protects them, but by the actually existing land
      relationships. This is so to such an extent that witnesses testifying
      before the well-known Valuyev

      Commission[5]
      openly stated
      that serf-ownership would undoubtedly have been revived had it not been

    

      directly prohibited by law. Hence, one of two things: either you refrain
      altogether from touching upon the land relationships between the peasants
      and the landlords—in which case all the remaining questions are

      sAved 

      very “simply,” but then you will also be

      ignor’ing 

      the main source of all the survivals of serf-owning economy in the
      countryside, and will “simply” be avoiding a burning question
      bearing on the most vital interests of the feudal landlords and the
      enslaved peasantry, a question which tomorrow or the day after may easily
      become one of the most pressing social and political issues in Russia. Or
      else you want also to touch upon the source of the “obsolete forms
      of economic bondage” represented by the land relationships—in
      which case you must reckon with the fact that these relationships are so
      complex and entangled that they do not actually permit of any easy or
      simple solution. Then, if you are not satisfied with the concrete
      solutions we have proposed for this complex question, you no longer
      have the right to get away with a general “complaint”
      about its complexity, but must attempt to cope with it
      independently, and propose some other concrete solution.
    

      The importance of the cut-off lands in present-day peasant farming is a
      question of reality. And it is noteworthy that deep as the gulf is between
      Narodism (in the broad sense of the word) and Marxism in the appraisal of
      the economic system and the economic evolution of Russia, the two
      doctrines have no divergence on this question. Representatives of
      both trends are agreed that the Russian countryside is teeming with
      remnants of serf-ownership and (nota bene) that the predominant
      mode of private farming in the central gubernias of Russia (the
      “labour-rent system of farming”) is a direct survival of the
      serf-owning system. They are agreed furthermore that the cutting-off of
      peasant land in favour of the landlords—i.e., both the cutting-off
      in the downright literal sense and the depriving of the peasants of the
      right to use common lands as pasturage, the right to use wood lands,
      watering places, grazing grounds, and so forth—con stitutes one of
      the mainstays (if not the mainstay) of the labour-rent system. It
      will suffice to recall that, according to the most recent data, the
      labour-rent system of landlord farming predominates in no less than 17
      gubernias of European Russia. Let those who regard the clause on the
      cut-off

    

      lands as a purely artificial, “laboured” and wily invention
      try to dispute this fact!
    

      Here is what the labour-rent system of farming means. In actual fact,
      i.e., not according to ownership but according to economic utilisation,
      the landlords’ and the peasants’ lands have not been divided up
      completely, but remain merged; part of the peasants’ land, for example,
      feeds cattle required for the cultivation not of the peasants’ land but of
      the landlords’ land; part of the landlords’ land is absolutely
      indispensable to the neighbouring peasant farm as it is run at present
      (watering places, grazing grounds, etc.). This actual interlinking of land
      tenures inevitably engenders the same (or, more precisely,
      preserves the thousand-year-old) relationships between muzhik and landlord
      that existed under the serf-owning system. The muzhik re mains a serf
      de facto, working with the same antiquated implements, on the
      basis of the old three-field system, for the same old “lord of the
      manor.” What else do you want, if the peasants themselves everywhere
      bluntly call this labour rent “panshchina” and

      “barshchina,”[3]

      if the landlords themselves say when they describe their farms: my land is
      worked by “my former...” (that is, not only former, but present as
      well!)  “...peasants” with their own implements in exchange for the
      use of my pasture land?
    

      Whenever it becomes necessary to solve any complex and entangled social
      and economic problem, it is an elementary rule that one should take the
      most typical case to begin with, the case that is freest of all extraneous
      complicating influences and circumstances, and use the solution reached in
      this case as a premise for further procedure, while taking stock of these
      extraneous and complicating circumstances, one by one. Take a case that is
      most “typical” in this respect: the children of the former
      serfs are working for the sons of the former serf-owners to pay for the
      use of the latter’s pasture lands. Labour rent makes for stagnation in
      cultivation techniques and for stagnation in all social and
      economic relationships in the countryside, since this labour rent hampers
      the development of money economy and the

    

      differentiation of the peasantry, disembarrasses the landlord
      (comparatively) of the stimulus of competition (instead of raising the
      technical level, he reduces the share of the share cropper; incidentally,
      this reduction has been recorded in a number of localities for many years
      of the post-Reform period), ties the peasant to the land, thereby checking
      the progress of migration, outside employment, etc.
    

      The question arises whether any Social-Democrat will doubt that in this
      “pure” case the expropriation of the corresponding part of the
      landlords’ land in favour of the peas ants is wholly natural, desirable,
      and achievable. This expropriation will rouse

      Oblomov[6]
      from his slumber and force him to introduce more advanced methods of
      farming on his smaller estate; this expropriation will undermine (I will
      not say destroy, but precisely undermine) the labour-rent system,
      encourage the spirit of independence and democracy among the peasantry,
      raise their standard of living, and give a powerful impulse to the further
      development of money economy and capitalist progress in agriculture.
    

      And in general: once it is generally acknowledged that the cut-off lands
      are one of the principal roots of the labour-rent system—and this
      system is a direct survival of serf-ownership, which retards the
      development of capitalism— how can one doubt that the restitution of
      the cut-off lands will undermine the labour-rent system and accelerate
      social and economic progress?
    
 

Notes
 

[1]

      We note the inconsistency (or is it reservation?) of Nadezhdin, who has
      apparently adopted Iskra’s idea of peasant committees in his
      outline of the agrarian programme, but formulates this idea most lamely
      when he says: “The institution of a special court of people’s
      representatives to examine peasant complaints and statements with
      regard to all the transactions attending the
    ’Emancipation.’" (TheEve
      of the Revolution, p. 65. Italics mine.) One can complain
      only about a breach of the law. The “Emancipation” of
      February 19, with all its “transactions,” itself constitutes a
      law. The establishment of special courts to examine complaints
      about the injustice of a given law is senseless until that law is
      repealed, or new legislative standards have been set up to replace this
      law (or to annul it in part). The “court” should be invested
      not only with the right to receive “complaints” about lands
      cut off from pastures but also the right to return (resp. redeem,
      etc.) that pasture land—but in that case, first, a
      “court” authorised to make laws would no longer be a court;
      secondly, it is necessary to indicate definitely just what rights of
      expropriation, redemption, etc., this “court” would have. But
      however inapt Nadezhdin’s formulation may be, he has grasped the need for
      a democratic revision of the Peasant Reform much better than Martynov has.
    —Lenin

[2]

      For instance, Martynov levels a charge of “phrase-mongering”
      against Iskra, which has given him both the general principles of
      its agrarian policy (“the introduction of the class struggle into the
      countryside”) and a practical answer to the question of concrete programme
      demands. Without replacing these general principles with any others,
      without giving even the slightest thought to these principles, or making
      any attempt to draw up a definite programme, Martynov dismisses the whole
      matter with the following grandiloquent words: "...We must demand
      their [the peasants’ as petty proprietors] protection ... against various
      obsolete forms of economic bondage..." Isn’t that getting off rather
      cheaply? Couldn’t you try to point out to us at least one
      protective measure against at least one (let alone
      “various”!) obsolete form of bondage?  (Evidently there are also
      “forms of bondage” that are not obsolete!!) After all, the
      small credit associations, the amalgamated dairies, the mutual aid
      societies, the associations of small farmers, the peasant banks, and the
      Zemstvo agronomists are likewise all “protective measures against
      various obsolete forms of economic bondage.” Does it follow that you
      propose that “we must demand” all this?? You had better do
      some thinking first, my good friend, and then speak of programmes!
    —Lenin

[3]

Panshchina and barshchina are two equivalent terms, with
      roughly the meaning of the corvée system .—Ed.
    
 



[4]

      Lenin has in mind the gubernia committees set up in 1857-58 in all the
      gubernias of European Russia (with the exception of Archangel Gubernia) to
      draw up drafts for the emancipation of the peasants from serfdom. The
      committees consisted of persons elected from among the nobility (hence the
      name “committees of nobles”) and, in the main, they were engaged in
      seeking ways and means of carrying out the “Peasant Reform” in
      a way to give the nobility the greatest benefit from it.
    



[5]

The Valuyev Commission—the “Commission to Investigate
      the Condition of Russian Agriculture,” which functioned under the
      chairmanship of the tsars minister P. A. Valuyev. In the years 1872-73 the
      commission collected a large amount of material dealing with the condition
      of agriculture in post-Reform Russia: governors’ reports, statements and
      depositions of landlords, Marshals of the Nobility, Zemstvo
      administrations, volost boards, grain merchants, village priests, kulaks,
      statistical and agricultural societies and other bodies connected with
      agriculture. This material was published in Papers of the Commission
      of Inquiry into the Condition of Russian Agriculture, St. Petersburg,
      1873.
    



[6]

Oblomov—a landowner, the chief character in a novel of the
      same name by the Russian writer I. A. Goncharov. Oblomov was the
      personification of routine, stagnation, and incapacity for action. The
      name is used here in a generic sense to signify the Russian land owner.
    

 
  

V

|

VII

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## VII









Lenin: 1902/agrarian: VII







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy



    

    VII


      There are nevertheless very many who have doubted this, and we shall now
      proceed to consider the arguments advanced by the doubters. All these
      arguments may be classified in the following groups: a) Is the demand for
      the restitution of the cut-off lands consistent with the basic theoretical
      principles of Marxism and with the principles of the Social-Democratic
      programme? b) Is it wise, from the viewpoint of political expedience, to
      advance the demand for redressing a historical injustice, the significance
      of which is diminishing with every step in economic development? c) Can
      this demand be realised in practice? d) Admitting that we

    

      can and must advance such a demand and include in our agrarian programme
      not the minimum but the maximum, is the demand for the restitution of the
      cut-off lands consistent from this point of view? Is such a demand
      actually a maximum?
    

      As far as I can judge, all objections “against the cut-off
      lands” fit into one or another of these four groups; moreover, most
      of the objectors (including Martynov) have answered all four questions in
      the negative, considering the demand for the restitution of the cut-off
      lands wrong in principle, politically inexpedient, practically
      unattainable, and logically inconsistent.
    

      Let us consider all these questions in their order of importance.
    

      a) The demand for the restitution of the cut-off lands is considered wrong
      in principle for two reasons. In the first place, we are told that it will
      “affect” capitalist agriculture, i.e., hold up or delay the
      development of capitalism; in the second place, we are told that it will
      not only fortify but actually multiply small property. The first of these
      arguments (particularly emphasised by Martynov) is absolutely untenable,
      because, on the contrary, typical cut-off lands retard the development of
      capitalism, and their restitution will stimulate this development; as for
      non-typical cases (quite apart from the fact that exceptions are always
      and everywhere possible and only go to prove the rule), a reservation was
      made both in Iskra and in the programme (“... the land cut
      off... and now used as a means of bondage...”). This objection is due
      simply to ignorance of the real importance of the cut-off lands and labour
      rent in the economy of the Russian countryside.
    

      The second argument (which was developed in particular detail in several
      private letters) is much more serious and is in general the strongest
      argument against the programme we are defending. Generally speaking, it is
      not at all the task of the Social-Democrats to develop, support,
      consolidate, let alone, multiply, small-scale farming and small
      property. That is quite true. But the point is that what confronts us here
      is not a “general” but an exceptional case of
      small-scale farming, and this exceptional character is clearly
      expressed in the preamble to our agrarian programme: “the
      destruction

    

      of the remnants of the serf-owning system and the free development of the
      class struggle in the countryside.” Generally speaking, it is
      reactionary to support small property because such support is
      directed against large-scale capitalist economy and,
      consequently, retards social development, and obscures and glosses over
      the class struggle. In this case, however, we want to support small
      property not against capitalism but against serf-ownership; in this case,
      by supporting the small peasantry, we give a powerful impulse to the
      development of the class struggle. Indeed, on the one hand, we are thus
      making a last attempt to fan the embers of the peasants’ class
      (social-estate) enmity for the feudal-minded landlords. On the other hand,
      we are clearing the way for the development of the bourgeois class
      antagonism in the countryside, because that antagonism is at present
      masked by what is supposedly the common and equal oppression of
      all the peas ants by the remnants of the serf-owning system.
    

      There are two sides to all things in the world. In the West, the peasant
      proprietor has already played his part in the democratic movement, and is
      now defending his position of privilege as compared with the
      proletariat. In Russia, the peasant proprietor is as yet on the eve of a
      decisive and nation-wide democratic movement with which he cannot but
      sympathise. He still looks ahead more than he looks back. He is still more
      of a fighter against the privileges of the former serf-owners as a
      social-estate, privileges which are still so strong in Russia, than a
      defender of his own privileged position. In a historic moment like the
      present, it is our direct duty to support the peasants and to try to
      direct their as yet vague and blind discontent against their real
      enemy. And we shall not be in the least contradicting ourselves if we
      delete from our programme the struggle against the remnants of the
      serf-owning system in the subsequent historical period when the special
      features of the present social and political “juncture” will
      have disappeared, when the peas ants, let us suppose, will have been
      satisfied by insignificant concessions made to an insignificant number of
      property-owners and begin definitely to “snarl” at the
      proletariat. Then, we shall probably also have to delete from our
      programme the struggle against the autocracy, for it is quite
      inconceivable that the peasants will succeed in ridding themselves

    

      of the most repulsive and grievous form of feudal oppression
      before political liberty has been attained.
    

      Under the capitalist system of economy, small property retards the
      development of the productive forces by tying the worker to a small plot
      of land, by legalising old-fashioned techniques, and by making it
      difficult to bring land into the trade turnover. Where the labour-rent
      system predominates, small landed property, by ridding itself of labour
      rent, stimulates the development of the productive forces, releases the
      peasant from the bondage that tied him down to one particular place,
      relieves the landlord of “gratuitous” servants, makes it
      impossible for him to prefer unlimited intensification of
      “patriarchal” exploitation to technical improvements, and
      facilitates land being brought into the trade turnover. In a word, the
      contradictory position of the small peasant on the boundary between serf
      economy and capitalist economy fully justifies this exceptional and
      temporary support of small property by the Social-Democrats. We repeat:
      this is not a contradiction in the wording or in the formulation of our
      programme, but a contradiction in real life.
    

      It may be argued: “However slowly the labour-rent farming may be
      yielding to the pressure of capitalism, still it is yielding; it is,
      moreover, doomed to disappear completely; large-scale labour-rent farming
      is giving way to, and will be directly replaced by, large-scale capitalist
      farming. What you want is to accelerate the elimination of serf-owning by
      a measure which in essence amounts to the splitting-up (partial, but
      nevertheless splitting-up) of large-scale farms. Are you not thereby
      sacrificing the interests of the future for the interests of the present?
      For the sake of the problematic possibility of a peasant revolt against
      serf-owning in the immediate future, you are placing obstacles in the way
      of a revolt of the agricultural proletariat against capitalism in the more
      or less distant future !"
    

      This argument, however convincing it may seem at first glance, is very
      one-sided: in the first place, the small peasantry is also
      yielding—slowly no doubt, but nevertheless yielding—to the
      pressure of capitalism, and is likewise ultimately doomed to inevitable
      elimination; in the second place, large scale labour-rent farming too is
      not always “directly” re placed by large-scale capitalist
      farming; it quite often gives

    

      rise to a section of semi-dependent peasants—semi-farm labourers,
      semi-proprietors. And yet, such a revolutionary measure as the restitution
      of the cut-off lands would render a tremendous service precisely by
      substituting, at least once, the “method” of open
      revolutionary transformation for the “method” of gradual and
      imperceptible transformation of serf dependence into bourgeois dependence:
      this could not fail to exert the profoundest influence on the
      spirit’ of protest and the independent struggle of the entire rural
      working population. In the third place, we, Russian Social-Democrats, will
      also try to make use of the experience of Europe, and begin to attract the
      “country folk” to the socialist working-class movement at a
      much earlier stage and much more zealously than was done by our Western
      comrades, who after the conquest of political liberty, continued for a
      long time to “grope” for the road the industrial workers’
      movement should follow: in this sphere we shall take much that is
      ready-made “from the Germans,” but in the agrarian sphere we may
      perhaps evolve something new. And in order to facilitate for our farm
      labourers and semi-farm labourers the subsequent transition to socialism,
      it is highly important that the socialist party begin to “stand
      up” at once for the small peas ants, and do
      “everything possible” for them, never refusing a hand in
      solving the urgent and complex “alien” (non-proletarian)
      problems, and helping the working and exploited masses to regard the
      socialist party as their leader and representative.
    

      To proceed. b) The demand for the restitution of the cut off lands is
      considered politically inexpedient, since, it is argued, it is imprudent
      to switch the attention of the Party from the fundamental and imminent
      issue of the struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie over to
      the redressing of all sorts of historical injustices, which are already
      beginning to lose immediate significance. As Martynov sarcastically puts
      it, this amounts to “re-emancipating the peasants forty years too
      late.”
    

      This argument too appears plausible, but only at first glance. Historical
      injustices are of different kinds. There are such which, as it were, keep
      aloof from the mainstream of history, do not check that stream or hinder
      its course, and do not prevent the proletarian class struggle from
      extending and

    

      from striking deeper roots. It would certainly be unwise to try to redress
      historical injustices of this kind. As an example, we shall mention the
      annexation of Alsace-Lorraine by Germany. No Social-Democratic party would
      think of including in its programme the redress of a wrong of
      this kind, although, on the other hand, not one would shirk its
      duty of protesting against this injustice and of condemning all the ruling
      classes for having perpetrated it. If we had motivated our demand for the
      restitution of the cut-off lands only on the ground that an injustice had
      been committed and should be redressed, that would have been no more than
      a hollow democratic phrase. However, we do not make any plaint over a
      historical injustice the motivation of our demand, but rather the need to
      abolish the remnants of the serf-owning system and to clear the road for
      the class struggle in the countryside, i. e., a very
      “practical” and very pressing need for the proletariat.
    

      We have here an example of a different kind of historical
      injustice, one which still directly retards social development
      and the class struggle. A refusal to attempt to redress historical
      injustices of this kind would mean “defending the knout on
      the ground that it is a historical knout.” The problem of freeing our
      countryside from the burden of the remnants of the “old
      regime” is one of the most urgent questions of the day, one that is
      put forward by all trends and parties (except that of the former
      serf-owners), so that the reference to our being late is pointless in
      general and simply ludicrous when voiced by Martynov. It is the Russian
      bourgeoisie who were “late” with what is really their
      task of sweeping away all the remnants of the old regime, and we must and
      shall rectify this omission until it has been rectified, until we have won
      political liberty, as long as the position of the peas ants continues to
      foster dissatisfaction among practically the whole of educated bourgeois
      society (as is the case in Russia), instead of fostering a feeling of
      conservative self satisfaction among it on account of the
      “indestructibility” of what is supposed to be the strongest
      bulwark against socialism (as is the case in the West where this
      self-satisfaction is displayed by all the parties of Order, ranging from
      the Agrarians and Conservatives pur sang, through
      the liberal and free-thinking bourgeois, to even as far—without
      offence to Messrs. the Chernovs and the Vestnik Russkoi
      Revolutsii!—to

    

      even as far as the fashionable “critics of Marxism” in the
      agrarian question). Then, of course, those Russian Social-Democrats who
      trail along in the rear of the movement as a matter of principle, and who
      are concerned only with questions “promising palpable results,” were
      also “late,” and, because they were late in giving definite
      directives on the agrarian question as well, these
      “tail-enders” have succeeded only in providing the
      non-Social-Democratic revolutionary trends with a highly potent and
      reliable weapon.
    

      As for c) the practical “infeasibility” of the demand that the
      cut-off lands should be restituted, this objection (which has been
      particularly stressed by Martynov) is of the feeblest. In conditions of
      political liberty, the question of determining in which concrete cases
      expropriation, redemption, exchange, demarcation, etc., should be carried
      out and exactly how this should be done would be solved by the peasant
      committees ten times more easily than by the committees of nobles, which
      consisted of representatives of a minority and acted in the interests of
      that minority. Only those who are used to underestimating the
      revolutionary activity of the masses can attach any importance to this
      objection.
    

      At this point the fourth and last objection is raised. If we are to count
      on the revolutionary activity of the peasants and offer them a maximum and
      not a minimum programme, we must be consistent and demand either a peasant
      “General

      Redistribution”[3]
      or bourgeois nationalisation of the land! “If,” writes Martynov,
      “we wanted to find a genuine (sic!) class slogan for the
      mass of the small peasantry, we should have to go further and advance the
      demand for a ’General Redistribution,’ but then we should have to part
      with the Social—Democratic programme.
    

      This reasoning betrays the “economist” most strikingly, and
      reminds us of the saying about those who, if they are compelled to pray,
      do it with such zeal that they bang their foreheads against the ground.
    

      You have pronounced yourselves in favour of one of the demands
      which satisfy certain interests of a certain section of the small
      producers: hence it follows that you must desert your own
      standpoint and adopt the standpoint of that section!! Nothing of the sort
      follows; only “tail-enders,” who confuse the drawing-up of a
      programme conforming

    

      to a class’s broadly conceived interests with subservience to that class,
      can reason in this way. Although we represent the proletariat, we will
      nevertheless condemn outright the prejudiced idea of backward proletarians
      that one must fight only for demands “promising palpable results.”
      While supporting the progressive interests and demands of the peasants, we
      will decisively reject their reactionary demands. The “General
      Redistribution,” one of the most outstanding slogans of the old Narodniks,
      represents a combination of just such revolutionary and reactionary
      features. The Social-Democrats have stated dozens of times that they do
      not at all discard the whole of Narodism, with the forthrightness of a
      certain foolish bird, but select and take for their own its revolutionary
      and general democratic elements. The demand for “General
      Redistribution” contains the reactionary Utopian idea of
      generalising and perpetuating small-scale peasant production, but it also
      contains (in addition to the Utopian idea that the “peasantry”
      can serve as the vehicle of the socialist revolution) a
      revolutionary element, namely, the desire to sweep away by means of a
      peasant revolt all the remnants of the serf-owning system. In our opinion,
      the demand for the restitution of the cut-off Lands singles out from all
      the peasant’s two-way and contradictory demands precisely that which can
      have a revolutionary effect only in the direction along which society’s
      entire development is proceeding, and consequently deserves the
      proletariat’s support. In actual fact, Martynov’s invitation to “go
      further” only lands us in the absurd position of having to define
      the “genuine” class slogan of the peasantry from the
      standpoint of the existing prejudices of the peasantry, and not
      from that of the properly understood interests of the
      proletariat.
    

      Nationalisation of the land is a different matter. This demand (if it is
      interpreted in the bourgeois sense, and not in the socialist) does
      actually “go further” than the demand for the restitution of
      the cut-off lands, and in principle we fully endorse it. It goes without
      saying that, when the revolutionary moment comes, we shall not fail to
      advance it. But our present programme is being drawn up, not only for the
      period of revolutionary insurrection, not even so much for that period, as
      for the period of political slavery, for the

    

      period that precedes political liberty. However, in this period the demand
      for the nationalisation of the land is much less expressive of
      the immediate tasks of the democratic movement in the meaning of a
      struggle against the serf-owning system. The demand for the establishment
      of peasant committees and for the restitution of the cut-off lands kindles
      this class struggle in the countryside directly and, consequently, cannot
      give occasion for any experiments in state socialism. The demand for the
      nationalisation of the land, on the other hand, to a certain extent
      diverts attention from the most striking manifestations and most
      outstanding survivals of serf-ownership. That is why our agrarian
      programme can and must be advanced at once as a means of stimulating the
      democratic movement among the peasants. However, to advance the demand for
      nationalisation of the land under the autocracy or even under a
      semi-constitutional monarchy would be quite wrong. For, while we lack
      firmly established and deep-rooted democratic political institutions, this
      demand will be much more likely to distract our minds towards absurd
      experiments in state socialism than to provide a stimulus “for the
      free development of the class struggle in the

      countryside.”[1]


      That is why we think that, on the basis of the present social system, the
      maximum demand in our agrarian programme should not go beyond the
      democratic revision of the Peasant Reform. The demand for nationalisation
      of the land, while quite valid in principle and quite suitable at certain
      moments, is politically inexpedient at the present moment.
    

      It is interesting to note that, in his desire to reach just such a maximum
      as nationalisation of the land, Nadezhdin has gone astray (partly owing to
      his decision to confine him self in the programme “to demands which
      the muzhik understands and needs”). Nadezhdin formulates the
      demand for nationalisation of the land as follows: “the conversion
      of

    

      state, royal, church, and landlords’ lands into public property, into a
      national fund to be allocated to the working peasantry on long-term leases
      and on the most advantageous terms.” The “muzhik” will, no
      doubt, understand this demand, but the Social-Democrat will probably
      not. The demand for nationalisation of the land is a demand of the
      Social-Democrat programme which is valid in principle only as a bourgeois
      and not as a socialist measure, for, as socialists, we demand the
      nationalisation of all the means of production. So long as we
      remain on the basis of bourgeois society we can demand only the transfer
      of ground rent to the state—a transfer which in itself far from
      retarding would accelerate the capitalist evolution of agriculture. It
      follows that, in the first place, a Social-Democrat, while supporting
      bourgeois nationalisation of the land, must by no means exclude the
      peasants’ land, as Nadezhdin has done. If we preserve a private
      system of economy on the land, merely abolishing private ownership of
      land, it would be utterly reactionary to exclude the small proprietor
      in this connection. In the second place, if such
      nationalisation took place, a Social-Democrat would resolutely oppose the
      leasing of national land “to the working peasantry” in
      preference to the agrarian capitalists. This preference would also be
      reactionary, given domination or preservation of the capitalist mode of
      production. If a democratic country undertook to carry out bourgeois
      nationalisation of the land, it would be the duty of that country’s
      proletariat to show no preference either for small or big leaseholders,
      but to demand unconditionally that every leaseholder observe the
      labour protection laws (on the maximum working day, health regulations,
      etc., etc.) and the laws governing rational cultivation of the land and
      care of livestock. In practice, the proletariat’s adoption of such a
      policy in the event of bourgeois nationalisation would of course be
      tantamount to hastening the victory of large-scale production over
      small-scale (in the same way as factory legislation speeds up that victory
      in industry).
    

      The desire to be “understood by the muzhik” at all costs has
      driven Nadezhdin into the jungle of a reactionary petty-bourgeois

      Utopia.[2]
   

    
 

      Thus, an analysis of objections to the demand for restitution of the
      cut-off lands convinces us that these objections are groundless. We must
      put forward the demand for the democratic revision of the Peasant Reform,
      or, to be precise, for the revision of the agrarian reforms contained in
      it. To determine the precise character, limits, and manner of carrying out
      this revision, we must demand the establishment of peasant committees
      which shall have the right to expropriate, redeem, exchange, etc., those
      cut-off lands in which survivals of the serf-owning system of economy are
      rooted.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]

      Kautsky very rightly remarked in one of his articles against Vollmar:
      “In Britain the advanced workers may demand nationalisation of the
      land. But what would he the outcome if, in a militarist and police state
      like Germany, all the land became state property (eine
      Domäne)? This sort of state socialism has been realised, at
      least, to a considerable degree, in Mecklenburg.” (“Vollmar und der
      Staatssozialimus”, Neue Zeit, 1891-92, X. 2, S. 710.)
    —Lenin

[2]

      As for Nadezhdin, he has in our opinion acted very inconsistently by
      demanding, in his outline of an agrarian programme, the conversion

   

into
      “public property” of all kinds of land, except peasants’
      land, and allocations from a “national (land) fund” for
      “long-term leases to the working peasantry.” In the first
      place, a Social-Democrat could not exclude peasant holdings from the
      general nationalisation of the land. Secondly, he would advocate
      nationalisation of the land only as a transition to large-scale communist,
      and not small individual, farming. Nadezhdin’s mistake is probably due to
      his decision to limit the programme to “demands which the muzhik
      understands (italcis [sic.] mine) and

      needs.”[4]
    —Lenin
 



[3]

“General Redistribution”—a slogan popular among the
      peasants of tsarist Russia and expressing their desire for a general
      redistribution of the land.
    



[4]

      The criticism of Nadezhdin’s opportunist views given on pages 140-41 of
      this volume (beginning with the words: “It is interesting to note
      that, in his desire to reach just such a maximum as nationalisation of the
      land, Nadezhdin has gone astray...” and ending with the words: “The
      desire to be ’understood by the mushik’ at all costs has driven Nadezhdin
      into the jungle of a reactionary petty-bourgeois Utopia”) was omitted by
      the Editorial Board when the article was first published in
      Zarya, No 4. Nor did Zarya print the footnote which
      Lenin wrote to replace the omitted text.
    

      In the present edition the text and footnote are given according to
      Lenin’s manuscript.
    

 
  

VI

|

VIII

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## VIII









Lenin: 1902/agrarian: VIII







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy



    

    VIII

      The fifth clause in our draft agrarian programme is closely bound up with
      the fourth. Clause 5 demands “empowerment of courts to reduce
      exorbitant rents and declare null and void all contracts entailing
      bondage.” Like Clause 4, it is directed against bondage; unlike Clause 4
      it demands, not a single act of revision and reform of the agrarian
      system, but constant revision of civic rights. This is entrusted
      to the “courts,” weaning, of course, not those miserable parodies of
      courts which form the “institute” of rural

      superintendents[2]
      (or even the Justices of the Peace, who are elected by the propertied
      classes from among property holders), but those courts referred to in
      § 16 of the preceding section of our draft programme.This § 116
      demands that “industrial courts be set up in all branches of the
      national economy.. ." (hence in agriculture as well) "... with
      equal representation of workers and employers.” Such composition of the
      courts would be a guarantee both of their democratic nature and free
      expression of the different class interests of the various sections of the
      rural population. Class antagonism would not be covered up with the fig

    

      leaf of rotten bureaucratism—that whited sepulchre for the remains
      of popular liberties—but would stand out openly and clearly to the
      general view, thereby rousing the country folk from their patriarchal
      slumber. The election of judges from among the local inhabitants would
      guarantee their being familiar with agrarian life in general and its local
      features in particular. For the masses of the peasants, who could not come
      under the heading of “workers” or “employers,” special
      rules would naturally be established to ensure equal representation of all
      elements of the rural population. Moreover, we, Social-Democrats, would
      categorically insist under all circumstances, first, on separate
      representation for the agricultural wage-workers, however few they may be,
      and, secondly, that economically weak peasants and prosperous peasants
      should if possible be represented separately (for confusion of these two
      categories, not only results in false statistics, but leads to the
      oppression and constraint of the former by the latter in all fields of
      life).
    

      The competence of these courts would be twofold: firstly, they would be
      empowered to reduce rents where they are “exorbitant.” This
      very wording in the programme recognises in oblique fashion how widespread
      this phenomenon is. The fact that the question of the level of rent would
      be examined by courts in open session and with both parties represented
      would be of enormous benefit, irrespective of what the court might
      decide. Reductions of rent (even though these reductions might be
      infrequent) would play their part in removing the remnants of
      serf-ownership: it is well known that in our countryside rent is more
      often of a serf-owning than a bourgeois nature; it is much more
      “money” rent (i.e., a modified form of feudal rent) than
      capitalist rent (i.e., the surplus over and above the profit of the
      employer). Reductions of rent would therefore directly help to replace
      serf-owning forms of farming by capitalist forms.
    

      Secondly, the courts would be empowered “to declare null and void
      all contracts entailing bondage.” The meaning of “bondage” is
      not defined here, since it would be wholly undesirable to hamper the
      elected judges in the application of this clause. The Russian muzhik knows
      only too well what bondage is! From the scientific standpoint this concept
      covers all contracts which entail elements of usury (winter

    

      hiring, etc.) or serfdom (labour rent for damage done by straying
      cattle, etc.).
    

      Clause 3, on the restitution of redemption payments to the people, is of a
      somewhat different nature. Here the doubts that Clause 4 evokes on the
      score of small property do not arise. On the other hand, the objectors
      point to both the practical infeasibility of this demand and the absence
      of a logical connection between this clause and the general section of our
      agrarian programme (=“the eradication of the remnants of the
      serf-owning system and the free development of the class struggle in the
      countryside”). Nevertheless, no one will deny that it is precisely the
      remnants of the serf-owning system that in their aggregate are the cause
      of the constant famines which affect millions of peasants and at once set
      Russia apart from all civilised nations. Even the autocracy has therefore
      been obliged more and more frequently to institute a special fund (utterly
      trifling, of course, and going more to line the pockets of embezzlers of
      state property and bureaucrats than for the relief of the famine-stricken)
      “for the cultural and charitable needs of the village communes.” We,
      too, cannot but demand, among other democratic reforms, that such a fund
      be established. That can scarcely be disputed.
    

      The question now arises, from what source should the sum required for this
      fund be obtained? So far as we can judge, a progressive income-tax might
      be suggested to us: the rates of taxation on the incomes of the rich
      should be raised for the purpose, and the sums obtained thereby used for
      this fund. It would be only fair for the country’s wealthiest citizens to
      contribute most for the maintenance of the famine-stricken and for
      expenditures on the greatest possible alleviation of calamities caused by
      famines. We would have nothing against such a measure either, which need
      not be specially mentioned in the programme since it is fully covered by
      the demand for a progressive income-tax, which is a separate item in the
      programme. But why confine oneself to this source? Why not try, in
      addition, to return to the people at least part of the tribute which
      yesterday’s slave- owners extracted, and are still extracting, from the
      peasants with the assistance of the police state? Is not this tribute most
      closely bound up with the present-day famines? And would not the
      demand to return this tribute render us the

    

      greatest service in spreading and intensifying the revolutionary
      indignation of the peasants against all feudal landlords and against
      bondage of every kind?
    

      But, then—the objection is raised—this tribute cannot
      be returned in full. Quite so (just as the cut-off lands cannot be
      restituted in full). But if one cannot get the whole debt back, why not
      take part of it? What objection can there be to a special land-tax on the
      big landed nobility who received land redemption loans? The number of such
      owners of latifundia (which occasionally even become entailed estates) is
      quite considerable in Russia, and it would be only fair to make them bear
      a special responsibility for famines among the peasantry. It will be even
      fairer to confiscate in full monasterial property and royal demesnes, as
      property most thoroughly steeped in traditions of serf-ownership and
      serving to enrich the most reactionary and socially most harmful drones,
      and at the same time to withdraw no small amount of land from civil and
      commercial circulation. Confiscation of such estates would therefore be
      wholly in the interests of all social

      development[1]

;

      it would be precisely the sort of partial bourgeois nationalisation of the
      land that could under no circumstances lead to the hocus-pocus of
      “state socialism.” It would be of direct and enormous political
      importance in strengthening the democratic institutions of the
      new Russia; and at the same time it would also provide additional
      funds for famine relief.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]

      With regard to the leasing of these confiscated estates, the
      Social-Democrats should by no means pursue a specifically peasant policy,
      but should at once pursue the policy outlined by us above In our
      objections to Nadezhdin.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

Rural superintendent (Zemsky Nachalnik)—an administrative
post instituted by the tsarist government in 1889 to strengthen the
authority of the landlords over the peasants. The rural superintendents
were appointed from among the local landed nobility and were granted
extensive powers, not merely administrative but also judicial.
    

 
  

VII

|

IX

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## IX









Lenin: 1902/agrarian: IX







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy



    

    IX

Finally, as to the first two clauses of our agrarian programme, there is
no need to dwell on them at length. “Abolition of land redemption
and quit-rent payments, as well as of all services now imposed on the
peasantry as a taxable social-estate” (Clause 1) is something that
is self-evident to every Social-Democrat. Moreover, no doubts arise as
to the practical feasibility of this measure, so far as we can
judge. The second clause demands “annulment of collective
liability and

    

      of all laws restricting the peasant...” (note: “peasant” and
      not “peasants”) “... in the free disposal of his land.” Here we
      must say a few words about the much-vaunted and memorable
      “village commune.” Actually, of course, the annulment of
      collective liability (Mr. Witte may manage to put this particular reform
      through before the revolution), the abolition of division into
      social-estates, freedom of movement, and the right for each individual
      peasant freely to dispose of his land will rapidly and inevitably bring
      about the removal of the burden of taxation and serf-bondage that the land
      commune to a three-fourths extent constitutes at the present time. But
      this result will only prove the correctness of our views on the village
      commune, prove how incompatible it is with the entire social and economic
      development of capitalism. The result will by no means follow from any
      particular measure recommended by us “against the village commune,”
      for we never have supported and never shall support a single
      measure aimed directly against this or that system of peasant land
      tenure. Moreover, we shall unreservedly defend the village commune as a
      democratic organisation of local government, as a co-operative or a
      neighbours’ association, against all encroachments on the part of the
      bureaucrats—encroachments which find such favour with opponents of
      the village commune in the camp of Moskovskiye

Vedomosti.[3]
      We shall never help any one to “destroy the village commune,” but we
      shall strive absolutely for the abolition of all institutions that run
      counter to democracy, irrespective of the effect of this abolition on
      the basic or partial reallotment of the land, etc.; that is where we
      differ fundamentally from the Narodniks—overt and covert, consistent
      and inconsistent, timid and bold—who, on the one hand, are “of
      course” democrats, and on the other, fear to resolutely and
      unequivocally define their attitude towards such elementary democratic
      demands as full freedom of movement, complete abolition
      of the social-estate nature of the peasant commune, and,
      consequently, utter annulment of collective liability, and
      abolition of all laws restricting the peasant in the free disposal of his

      land.[1]

 

      The objection may be raised that, by sanctifying the individual will of
      each particular peasant, the, latter measure will destroy the village
      commune, not only as a system of land reallotment, etc., but outright,
      even as-a co-operative neighbours’ association. Each individual peasant
      will have the right to demand, despite the will of the majority, that his
      land be allotted to him as a separate plot. Does this not run counter to
      the general tendency of all socialists to further the extension rather
      than the restriction of the right of the collective body over the
      individual?
    

      To this we reply that it does not at all follow from our formulation that
      every peasant must necessarily demand that a separate plot of land be
      allotted to him. What does follow is only liberty to sell the land;
      moreover, the preferential right of the commune members to purchase land
      that is being sold does not run counter to this liberty.
    

      The annulment of collective liability would turn all members of the
      peasant commune into free co-owners of a certain plot of land; as to what
      use they will then make of this plot, that is their business and will
      depend on common civil law and on whatever special agreements they enter
      into among themselves. With regard to extending the right of the
      collective body over the individual, such extension is upheld by the
      socialists only when It is in the interests of technical and social

      progress.[2]

      In this form, naturally, we too would uphold any appropriate law if only
      it referred not just to the small property-owners alone, or just to the
      peasants alone, but in general to all those who own land.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]

      This is the touchstone we should apply to the numerous radicals In Russia
      (and even revolutionaries, of Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii) who in
      this question are inclined to sit between two stools.
    —Lenin

[2]

      Kautsky, for instance, considers it correct to demand “the
      restriction of the rights of private property in land in the interests of
      1) demarcation of land holdings, abolishing strip-farming; 2) raising
      standards of agriculture; 3) preventing epidemics” (Die
      Agrarfrage, S. 437). Demands of this sort, which are fully justified,
      are not and should not be connected in any way with the peasant commune.
    —Lenin
 



[3]

Moskovskiye Vedomosti (Moscow Recorder)—one of the oldest
      Russian newspapers, published by Moscow University from 1756 (originally
      as a one-sheet paper). During 1863-87 it was published and edited by
      M. N. Katkov, an extreme reactionary and chauvinist, who was bitterly
      opposed to the least signs of progressive social thought and transformed
      the newspaper into a monarchist-nationalist organ voicing the views of the
      most reactionary sections of the landlords and clergy. From 1905
      Moskovskiye Vedomosti was one of the chief organs of the Black
      Hundreds. It was closed down at the end of 1917.
    

 
  

VIII

|

X

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## X









Lenin: 1902/agrarian: X







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Russian Social-Democracy



    

    X

      In conclusion, let us sum up the fundamental principles on which our
      agrarian programme is based. Anyone who has had occasion to engage in
      drawing up programmes or enter

    

      into the details of their drafting in other countries knows that one and
      the same thought can be formulated in the most diverse ways. What we hold
      important is that all the comrades to whom we are now submitting our draft
      for consideration should reach common ground, first and foremost, on the
      fundamental principles. Then this or that specific feature in the
      formulation will not be of decisive importance.
    

      We hold that the class struggle is the main factor also in the sphere of
      agrarian relationships in Russia. We base our entire agrarian policy (and,
      consequently, our agrarian programme as well) on unswerving recognition of
      this fact along with all consequences resulting from it. Our principal
      immediate aim is to clear the way for the free development of the class
      struggle in the countryside, the class struggle of the proletariat, which
      is directed towards attainment of the ultimate aim of the international
      Social-Democratic movement, the conquest of political power by the
      proletariat, and the laying of the foundations of a socialist society. By
      declaring the class struggle our guiding line in all “agrarian
      questions,” we resolutely and for all time dissociate ourselves from
      adherents, so numerous in Russia, of half-hearted and nebulous theories,
      such as “Narodnik,” “ethico-sociological,” “critical,”
      social-reformist, and whatever else they may be called!
    

      To clear the way for the free development of the class struggle in the
      countryside, it is necessary to remove all remnants of serfdom, which now
      overlie the beginnings of capitalist antagonisms among the rural
      population, and keep them from developing. And we are making a
      final attempt to help the peasantry sweep away all these remnants
      at a single decisive blow—“final” because developing Russian
      capitalism is itself spontaneously doing the very same work, is making for
      the very same goal, but making for it along its own peculiar road of
      violence and oppression, ruin and starvation. The transition from
      exploitation by the serf-owners to capitalist exploitation is inevitable,
      and it would be a harmful and reactionary illusion to attempt to hold it
      back or to “get round” it. But this transition is also
      conceivable in the form of the forcible overthrow of those heirs of the
      serf-owners who, relying on the tradition of the former power of the
      slaveowner, rather than on the “power of money,” are sucking the
      last

    

      drops of blood from the patriarchal peasantry. This patriarchal peasantry,
      which lives under a system of natural economy by the labour of its hands,
      is doomed to disappear, but there is no “necessity” or any
      “immanent” law of social and economic evolution that dooms it
      to endure the torment of being “ground down by taxes,” of floggings,
      or a long-drawn out, horribly protracted death by starvation.
    

      And so, without harbouring any illusions about it being possible for the
      small producers to thrive or even to lead a tolerable existence in a
      capitalist society (such as Russia is becoming to a greater and greater
      extent), we demand the complete and unconditional revolutionary and not
      reformative annulment and eradication of the survivals of serf-ownership;
      we hold that the lands which the government of the nobility cut off from
      the peasantry and which to this day still serve to keep the peasants in
      virtual bondage are peasants’ lands. Thus, we take our stand—by way
      of exception and by reason of the specific historical
      circumstances—as defenders of small property; but we defend it only
      in its struggle against what has come down from the “old order,” and
      only on condition that those institutions be abolished which retard the
      transformation of the patriarchal Oblomov

      villages,[1]

      frozen in their immobility, backwardness, and neglect, on condition of the
      establishment of complete freedom of movement, freedom to dispose of land,
      and the complete abolition of division into social-estates. We want to
      supplement democratic revision of the state and civil laws of Russia with
      democratic, revolutionary revision of the notorious “Peasant Re
      form.”
    

      Guided by these principles of agrarian policy, any Russian Social-Democrat
      who finds himself in the countryside will be able to see his way in the
      intricate maze of relationships there, and will be able to
      “adapt” his strictly consistent revolutionary propaganda and
      agitation to these relationships. He will not be caught napping by a
      possible movement in the peasantry (which already seems to have started
      here and there). He will not then limit himself to those demands on behalf
      of wage-workers in agriculture which are set forth in detail in the
      section on the immediate “working-class” demands of our
      programme, and which, of course, he will advance every where and at all

      times.Among 

      the peasantry too he will be

    

      able to give an impulse to the general democratic movement which (if it is
      destined to pass beyond the embryonic stage in our countryside) will begin
      with the struggle against the former serf-owners in the countryside, and
      end in an uprising against that most formidable and foul remnant of the
      serf-owning system known as the tsarist autocracy.
    
 *     *  * 

      P. S. This article was written before the outbreak of the peasant
      uprisings in the south of Russia in the spring of this

      year.[2]
      These events have fully confirmed the principles set forth in this
      article. As to the tactical tasks which are now presenting themselves more
      forcibly than ever to our Party in its “rural” work, we hope
      to deal with them next time.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

Oblomovka—the name of a village belonging to the landlord
      Oblomov. (See Note 51.) Here the word “Oblomoyka” is used to
      denote a Russian village in the days of tsarism.
    



[2]

      The reference is to the peasant movement in the Poltava and Kharkov
      gubernias at the end of March and beginning of April 1902—the first
      large-scale revolutionary action of Russian peasants at the beginning of
      the twentieth century. It was sparked by the desperate condition of the
      peasants in these gubernias, which became still worse in the spring of
      1902 owing to the crop failure of 1901 and the resulting famine. The
      peasants demanded a redistribution of the land, but in the 1902 movement
      they limited themselves in the main to seizing stocks of food and fodder
      on the landlords’ estates. In all, 56 estates in Poltava Gubernia and 24
      in Kharkov Gubernia were attacked. Troops were dispatched to crush the
      peasants. These reprisals by the tsarist government resulted in many
      peasants being killed, all the inhabitants of certain villages flogged,
      and hundreds of peasants condemned to varying terms of imprisonment. The
      peasants were forced to pay an indemnity of 800,000 rubles for
      “losses” caused to the landlords by the peasant disorders. In
      his pamphlet, To the Rural Poor (see pp. 424-30 of this volume),
      V. I. Lenin gave an analysis of the aims and character and causes of the
      defeat of the peasant movement in the Kharkov and Poltava gubernias, and
      the causes of its defeat.
    

 
  

IX

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to the Zemstvoists









Lenin: A Letter to the Zemstvoists







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to the Zemstvoists




Published:
Iskra, No. 18, March 10, 1902.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 151-159.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      We quote in full a hectographed letter addressed to Zemstvoists, which
      passed from hand to hand during the latest session of the Zemstvo
      Assemblies (it has regrettably only just come into our
      possession):
    


“Dear Sir,
      

“The grave situation in which Russia, the Russian people, and the
Russian Zemstvo find themselves today has prompted us to address this
letter to you, dear Sir, on the assumption that the ideas and intentions
herein expressed will meet with your sympathy.
      

“The long series of sad and distressing facts of which we have in
recent times been silent witnesses weighs like a dark cloud on the
public conscience, and every person of education is faced squarely with
the fateful question: is it possible to persist in abstaining from
political action and by remaining passive contribute to the growing
impoverishment and corruption of our native land?
      

“The chronic crop failures and the intolerable burden of taxation
in the form of land redemption payments, non-assessable taxes have
literally ruined the people, leading to its physical degeneration.
      

“The virtual denial to the peasantry of even the faintest semblance
of self-government, the petty tutelage of official and self-appointed
representatives of ’firm government,’ and the artificial state of mental
starvation in which the people is kept by the uninvited guardians of
’the foundations of Russian tradition and law’ are sapping its spiritual
powers, its initiative and energy.
      

“The productive forces of the country are being brazenly plundered
by men of business in this country and abroad, with the gracious
connivance of adventurers who are gambling with the destinies of our
country. In vain is the ’beneficent government’ trying to have a series
of contradictory and hastily concocted measures take the place of a
spirited and systematic struggle carried on by economic groups in the
country. Official ’patronage’ and ’concern’ are impotent in face of the
evil forerunners of Russia’s economic and financial bankruptcy:
agrarian, industrial, and financial crises—the brilliant results
of the policy of chance and gambling. The press is stifled and deprived
of any possibility to shed light on at least part of the crimes that are
hourly committed by the upholders of law and order, against the freedom

    

and honour of Russian citizens. Despotism, senseless and cruel, alone
raises its voice authoritatively and reigns over the boundless expanses
of our ravaged, humiliated, and outraged native land, nowhere meeting
with a fitting rebuff.
      

“With such a state of affairs, the government’s systematic mistrust for
the slightest manifestation of private or public initiative, the
activities of any kind of public associations, and in particular the
Zemstvo institutions—which the Russia of the sixties had hoped
would prove the corner-stone of a new realm—is quite natural. The
triumph ant bureaucracy has condemned the Zemstvo institutions to a
lingering death, and every year deals a new blow at their activities,
their significance and authority in the eyes of society and the people,
who scarcely distinguish between the Zemstvo and the bureaucratic
administration. The Zemstvo Assemblies have been converted into
bureaucratic social-estate councils, despite the clearly expressed
protest of all progressive groups in the country, and have lost all
connection with the mass of the Russian people. The Zemstvo Boards are
becoming annexes to the gubernatorial offices, and, losing in
independence, are gradually acquiring all the defects of a government
office. The Zemstvo election meetings have been reduced to a veritable
farce. The paucity of voters and their division into social-estate
groups, while depriving such meetings of the opportunity to serve as a
means for the expression, in the persons of the elected councillors, of
the various public interests, turn them into a battleground of petty and
personal ambitions.
      

“The range of Zemstvo activities is gradually but steadily being
restricted. The Zemstvo has been deprived of jurisdiction in the matter
of food supplies. In the matter of assessments the Zemstvo has become
the executor of the orders of government officials. In the sphere of
public education the role of the Zemstvo has been reduced to practically
nil. The Medical Regulations drawn up by the Goremykin Ministry, while
not abrogated formally, hang over the Zemstvo medical service like the
sword of Damocles. The dark shadow cast by the government’s instructions
to the school boards has to all appearances been dissipated. But the
Zemstvo is in no way guaranteed against a reappearance of this shadow,
this time, however, embodied in the form of a law which would finally
destroy the Zemstvo general schools. Contacts between the Zemstvo
institutions of the various gubernias, the need for which has become
proverbial, are confronted with new difficulties in the latest Circular
of the Ministry of the Interior on this subject. Every step of the
Zemstvo as a public institution comes up against an intricate cobweb of
numerous circulars from the various ministers, and the Zemstvoist is
obliged to spend no little time, energy and wit on the thankless task of
untangling this web, if he wants to give effect to this or that
measure. The notorious Article 87 of the Zemstvo Statutes, and
particularly its Clause 2, places the whole of Zemstvo activities under
the Governor’s supervision. Gubernatorial investigations of Zemstvo
Boards are becoming ever more frequent; through the permanent members of
the Gubernia Board for Zemstvo Affairs, the government is
unceremoniously placing the Zemstvo under open surveillance. By enacting
a law limiting the right of the Zemstvo to levy taxes, the government
openly admits its extreme mistrust of

    

the fundamental right of the Zemstvo—the right to impose local
taxes. Owing to the interference of the Police Department, the best
Zemstvo officials, both elected and employed, are forcibly torn away
from Zemstvo activities. In the near future, the ministerial projects of
control of the Zemstvo’s financial operations to be exercised by
officials of the State Control Board and of the regulation of the
activity of the Zemstvo Advisory Commissions will probably be made law.
      

“Not only are Zemstvo petitions being turned down, but they are not
even given consideration in accordance with the procedure established
for such cases and are casually rejected by the ministers on their own
authority. Under such conditions, it has become impossible to work in
the Zemstvo with an earnest belief in the fruitfulness of that work. And
we are now witnessing a process of constantly increasing impoverishment
of the Zemstvo forces and in particular of the Zemstvo executive
bodies—the Boards. People who are ardently devoted to the Zemstvo
cause are leaving the Zemstvo, having lost faith in the efficacy of the
work under the present conditions. And their places are being taken by
Zemstvoists of a new type, by opportunists who tremble in cowardly
fashion for the good name, the outward form of the Zemstvo institutions,
and who disgrace the latter by crawling and grovelling to the
administration. The result is an internal corruption of the Zemstvo that
is far worse than a formal abolition of self-government. The
government’s open campaign against the Zemstvo idea itself might lead to
widespread public indignation, which the bureaucrats fear so
greatly. But before our very eyes a camouflaged destruction of the
principle of self-government is taking place and, unfortunately, is not
meeting with organised resistance.
      

“With such a state of affairs, the comparative insignificance of
the material results of Zemstvo activities is by no means compensated by
its educational significance, and the almost forty years of work on the
part of the Zemstvo institutions directed towards developing civic
spirit, social consciousness, and initiative may be lost without a trace
for the immediate future. From this standpoint, the meek and humble
marking of time by the opportunist Zemstvoists only facilitates the
inglorious and futile death of the great idea of the Zemstvo
institutions. The only possible way to lead the Zemstvos out of the
impasse into which they have been led by the system of tutelage is to
fight energetically against the absurd idea that a consideration of
questions going beyond the bounds of the minor details of local life is
fraught with national disaster. This bugbear, which, of course,
threatens no danger to the people or the security of the state, this
idea, the absurdity of which is cynically acknowledged by its supporters
(see Witte’s confidential memorandum, ’The Autocracy and the Zemstvo’),
must be combated by the Zemstvo through open and bold consideration in
the Zemstvo Assemblies of questions of national importance which are
closely bound up with the needs and interests of the local
population. And the more comprehensively, the more fully and
energetically the Zemstvo Assemblies consider questions of this kind,
the more clearly will it be disclosed that public consideration of evils
affecting the people does not threaten the people with disaster, but, on
the contrary, averts it, that the muzzle which has at present been
placed on the

    

press is of benefit only to the enemies of the people, that police rule
over word and thought cannot create honest citizens, and that law and
freedom are not incompatible with each other. Public discussion of all
such questions in several Gubernia Zemstvo Assemblies simultaneously
will undoubtedly meet with the greatest sympathy on the part of all
sections of the people and rouse the public conscience to energetic
activity. If, however, the Zemstvo fails to react in any way to the
present critical condition of Russia, then of course Messrs. the
Sipyagins and Wittes, after having deprived the Zemstvo of its role of
representative of the interests of labour, will not hesitate to bring it
into final ’conformity’ with the general structure of the institutions
of the Empire. What forms this ’conformity’ will take, we, who know the
shrewdness and resourcefulness of the country’s present rulers, are
decidedly at a loss to imagine. After all, the Minister of the Interior
had sufficient effrontery, and displayed amazing contempt for the
’pre-eminent’ social-estate of the Em p ire in investing its chosen
representatives—the Marshals of the Nobility with the despicable
role of spies, whose duty was to keep the lecturers and the content of
popular lectures under surveillance.
      

“For the reasons outlined above, we are of the opinion that our
inactivity and further meek resignation to all the experiments to which
the bureaucracy is subjecting the Zemstvo and all Russia constitute, not
only a form of suicide, but a grave crime against our native land. How
groundless, how insensate are the tactics of opportunism—the sale
of one’s ’birthright’ for a ’mess of pottage’—has been shown us
sufficiently clearly by life: the autocratic bureaucracy, having first
appropriated our birthright, has now also taken away from us the ’mess
of pottage.’ Step by step we have been deprived of almost all our civic
rights; the forty years that have elapsed since the inception of the
’great reforms’ have brought us back to the same point from which we
departed forty years ago when we embarked on those reforms. Have we much
to lose now? how can we justify continued silence on our part? how can
it be explained except by shameful cowardice and an utter lack of all
sense of civic duty?
      

“As Russian citizens, and moreover Russian citizens in ’high
positions,’ we are in duty bound to defend the rights of the Russian
people, in duty bound to give a fitting reply to the autocratic
bureaucracy which is striving to crush the slightest manifestation of
liberty and independence In public life and to make abject slaves of the
whole Russian people. As Zemstvoists, we are especially obliged to
uphold the rights of the Zemstvo institutions, defend them against the
arbitrariness and despotism of the bureaucracy, and uphold their right
to independence an d the satisfaction in the broadest way of the needs
of all sections of the people.
      

“Let us then cease to be silent in the manner of school children
guilty of some misdemeanour; let us at last show that we are adult
citizens and let us demand what is our due—the claim to our ’birth
right,’ our civic rights.
      

“The autocratic bureaucracy never grants anything voluntarily but
only what it is compelled to grant, although it then tries to make a
show of ceding its ’rights’ solely out of magnanimity. If It happens

    

to grant more than it was compelled to, it immediately withdraws all
superfluous concessions, as was the case with our ’great reforms.’ The
government showed no concern for the workers until it was faced with a
serious ’labour movement’ in the form of demonstrations of many
thousands of workers; it thereupon hastened to enact ’labour
legislation,’ which, although sufficiently hypocritical, was
nevertheless designed to meet at least some of the demands of the
workers and to pacify these formidable masses. For decades the
government crippled our students, our sisters, brothers and children, by
forbidding the slightest criticism of the ’educational system’ it had
devised, and savagely suppressing student ’disorders.’
      

“But no sooner had these ’disorders’ turned into a mass strike,
than the academic machine came to a standstill, and the bureaucracy was
suddenly imbued with an ardent feeling of ’cordial concern’ for the
student youth; and those very demands to which only yesterday the sole
reply was the crack of Cossack whips are today proclaimed a government
programme for the ’reform of education.’
      

“Of course, there is no small dose of hypocrisy In this
metamorphosis too, and yet.... Yet there can be no doubt of the fact
that the ’bureaucracy’ has been compelled openly to recognise and make a
fairly substantial concession to public opinion. And we, like the whole
of Russian society, like the whole of the Russian people, can count on
the recognition and realisation of our rights only if we boldly, openly,
concertedly, and persistently demand these rights.
      

“In view of all these considerations, we have decided to address
the present letter to you, dear Sir, and to many other members of the
gubernia Zemstvos, with the appeal to help the present session of
Gubernia Zemstvo Assemblies raise, discuss, and adopt corresponding
decisions on the following questions:
      

“I. Reconsideration of the Statutes on Zemstvo Institutions and
their amendment along the following lines:
      

“a) the granting of equal suffrage to all groups of the population,
without distinction of social-estates, and with a considerable lowering
of the property qualification; b) the removal from the Zemstvo of
members representing social-estates as such; c) the Zemstvo to be freed
in all its activities from the tutelage of the administration, and to be
granted complete independence in all local affairs, on condition that it
submits to the laws of the country on the same basis as all other
persons and institutions; d) the jurisdiction of the Zemstvo to be
extended by granting it complete independence in attending to all local
interests and requirements insofar as they do not infringe on general
state interests; e) the repeal of the law limiting the right of the
Zemstvo to levy taxes; f) the Zemstvo to be granted the broadest rights
in the matter of spreading public education in every possible way;
moreover, the Zemstvo to be granted the right to supervise and improve
the educational as well as the economic aspect of this matter; g) the
abrogation of the above-mentioned Medical Regulations, which threaten
the Zemstvo medical service; h) food supply matters to be put back into
the hands of the Zemstvo, the latter also to be granted complete
independence in the organisation and conduct of its statistical and
assessment work; i) all Zemstvo business to be conducted

    

exclusively by elected Zemstvo people, who shall not be subject to
endorsement by the administration, still less be appointed against the
will of the Zemstvo Assemblies; j) the Zemstvo to be granted the right
to employ people exclusively at their own discretion without endorsement
by the administration; k) the Zemstvo to be granted the right freely to
discuss all questions affecting the state as a whole if they bear on
local interests and requirements, in addition to which all petitions of
the Zemstvo shall be considered without fail by higher government
institutions within a definitely designated period of time; l) all
Zemstvos to be granted the right to communicate with one an other as
well as to arrange congresses of Zemstvo representatives to consider
questions concerning all or several Zemstvos.
      

“II. Reconsideration and amendment of the Statutes on the Peasantry
with a view to granting them complete equality of rights with the other
social-estates.
      

“III. Revision of the taxation system with a view to equalising the
burden of taxation through progressive taxes on income derived from
property, and provided that certain minimum incomes be exempted from
taxation.
      

“It is likewise highly desirable that the following points be
raised and considered in the Zemstvo Assemblies:
      

“IV. The re-establishment everywhere of courts conducted by
Justices of the Peace, as well as the repeal of all laws restricting the
competence of trial by jury.
      

“V. The granting of greater freedom of the press; the necessity of
abolishing preliminary censorship; the revision of the censorship
regulations so as to indicate definitely and explicitly what may and
what may not be published; the prohibition of arbitrary action by the
administrative authorities in censorship matters, and the trying of all
cases of press law violations exclusively in open session of the general
courts.
      

“VI. Revision of existing laws and ministerial edicts concerning
measures to protect the security of the state; the elimination, in this
sphere, of secret ’judgement’ by the administrative authorities, and
open trial of all cases of this kind by general court procedure.
      

“Trusting that you will not refuse to assist in raising in your
Gubernia Zemstvo Assembly the general questions herein indicated, we
have the honour to request you to inform all Zemstvos as far as
possible, through councillors whom you know personally or who are known
to you, of any eventual decision of the Zemstvo Assembly. We likewise
hope that in most Zemstvos there will be a sufficient number of bold and
enterprising people who will succeed in getting the Zemstvo Assemblies
to adopt these demands. If we all present our just demands concertedly,
openly, and unequivocally, the bureaucracy will be compelled to yield,
as it always does when it encounters a rallied and enligtened [sic.]
force.
      

“Old Zemstvoists.”
      

 

      This is a very instructive letter, which shows how life itself is forcing
      even people who are little capable of struggle and who are most of all
      absorbed in practical routine to act against the autocratic
      government. And if this letter is compared, for instance, with such
      writings as Mr. R.N.S.’s foreword to the Witte

      Memorandum,[1]
      the former, in my opinion, makes the better impression.
    

      True, there are no “broad” political generalisations in the
      letter—but then its authors are not making
      “programmatic” declarations, but giving modest advice as to
      how to begin agitation in practice. They have not indulged in
      “flights of fancy” to the extent of speaking directly about
      political liberty, but then neither have they indulged in phrase-mongering
      about persons close to the throne who could possibly influence the
      tsar. Nor do they falsely extol the “acts” of Alexander II,
      but, on the contrary, there is derision of the “great reforms”
      (in quotation marks). They find in themselves the frankness and courage to
      rise resolutely against the “Zemstvo opportunists,” without fear of
      declaring war on the “shameful cowardice”, and without
      currying favour with the particularly backward liberals.
    

      We do not yet know what success has attended the appeal of the old
      Zemstvoists, but at any rate we think that their initiative deserves full
      support. The recent revival of the Zemstvo movement is in general an
      extremely interesting phenomenon. The authors of the letter them selves
      mention how the movement has spread: started by the workers, it has
      extended to the students and is now being taken up by Zemstvoists. All
      these three social elements are thus arranging themselves in proper
      succession in accordance with the diminishing order of their numerical
      strength, public alertness, social and political radicalism, and
      revolutionary determination.
    

      So much the worse for our enemy. The less revolutionary the elements that
      rise up against him, the better it is for us, unreserved opponents of the
      autocracy and of the existing economic system as a whole.
    

      Let us convey our greetings to the new protesters and, consequently, to
      our new allies. Let us help them.
    

      You can see that they are poor; they can only put out a small leaflet,
      issued in a worse form than the leaflets

    

      of the workers and students. We are rich. We shall publish it in printed
      form. We shall give publicity to this new slap in the face to the Obmanov
      tsars. This slap in the face is all the more remarkable, the more
      “respectable” the people are who deal it.
    

      You can see that they are weak; they have so little con tact with the
      people that their letter passes from hand to hand as if it were actually a
      copy of a private letter. We are strong. We can and must circulate this
      letter “among the people,” and primarily among the proletariat,
      which is prepared for and has already commenced the struggle for the
      freedom of the whole people.
    

      You can see that they are timid; they are only just beginning to extend
      the scope of their pure Zemstvo agitation. We are bolder than they are;
      our workers have already gone through the “stage” (a stage
      that was forced on them) of economic agitation alone. Let us set them an
      example of how to fight. For if the workers fought for a demand like the
      annulment of the “Provisional Rules,” in order to voice a protest
      against the autocracy, then the violation by the administration of even
      the faintest trace of what is nonetheless
      “sell-government” may constitute no less important
      ground!
    

      But here we are stopped short by all sorts of supporters of
      “economism,” overt and covert, conscious and unconscious. Who needs
      this support of the Zemstvoists by the workers? they ask us. Is it not the
      Zemstvoists alone? Is it not people who are perhaps dissatisfied only
      because the government favours the industrial capitalists more than the
      agricultural? Is it not the bourgeoisie alone, whose desires go no further
      than “the spirited struggle of the economic groups of the country”?
    

      Who needs it? Well, first of all, and more than all, the working class
itself. This “only really revolutionary class” of
present-day society would not be a revolutionary class in deed, if it
did not take advantage of every occasion for dealing a new blow
at its bitterest enemy. And the words about political agitation and
political struggle in our statements and programmes would be hollow
sounds, if we let slip the favourable opportunities for struggle that
present themselves when even former allies of this enemy (the men

    

      of the sixties) and in part also his present allies (the opportunist
      Zemstvoists and feudal-minded landlords) are beginning to quarrel with
      him.
    

      Let us then carefully follow Zemstvo developments, the rise and spread (or
      fall and ebb) of the new wave of protests. Let us try to acquaint the
      working class more fully with the history of the Zemstvo, with the
      government’s concessions to society in the sixties, with the lying
      speeches of the tsars and their tactics: first to grant a “mess of
      pottage” instead of the “birthright”—and then (on the
      basis of this retention of the “birthright”) to take away the mess
      of pottage itself. Let the workers learn to see through these old police
      tactics in all their manifestations. Such discernment is also
      indispensable in our struggle for our “birthright,” for the
      freedom of the proletariat to wage a struggle against all
      economic and social oppression. Let us tell the workers in the study
      circles about the Zemstvo and its attitude to the government; let us issue
      leaflets on the Zemstvo protests; let us work in such a way that to every
      insult the tsarist government offers to any Zemstvo that is at all honest
      the proletariat will be able to reply with demonstrations against the
      high-handed governors, the bashi-bazouk gendarmes, and the Jesuit
      censors. The party of the proletariat must learn to denounce and
      stigmatise every servant of the autocracy for every
      outrage and violence directed against any section of society, any nation
      or race.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      The reference is to “The Autocracy and the Zemstvo,” which
      P. B. Struve (under the pen-name of R. N. S.) wrote as a foreword to a
      “confidential memorandum” of S. Y. Witte, Minister of Finance,
      and which was published by Zarya in Stuttgart in 1901. This
      foreword was strongly criticised by Lenin in his work, “The
      Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism” (see
      present edition, Vol. 5).
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the Borba Group









Lenin: On the Borba Group







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Borba Group




Published:
Iskra, No. 18, March 10, 1902.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      page 160.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      K. N. You ask what the Borba group is. We know that several of
      its members have contributed to Zarya (two articles) and
      Iskra (3 reports, 2 articles and 1 commentary). Several articles
      they sent us were not published. They have now published a printed
      “declaration,” complaining of our “undemocratic”
      attitude and campaigning even... against a

      Personencultus[Personality
cult.–Ed.]!

      As a man of experience you will grasp what is at the bottom of it all from
      this one unparalleled and peerless word. And when Borba publishes
      its article against Where to Begin? about the rejection of which
      they also speak in the declaration—then even comrades who are
      absolutely inexperienced in Party affairs will under stand why we did not
      receive these contributors with open arms.
    

      As for “democracy,” see What Is to Be Done?, IV,

      e)[See present edition,
Vol. 5.–Ed.]:

      what is stated there about Rabocheye Dyelo applies to
      Borba as well.
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to the Northern League









Lenin: A Letter to the Northern League







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to the Northern League[2]
COMMENTS on the PROGRAMME of the NORTHERN LEAGUE




Written: Written in April 1902 

Published:

      First Published in 1923.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 161-171.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      First of all, it is necessary to note the principal defect of the
      “programme” in respect of form, namely, that it lumps
      together the fundamental principles of scientific socialism with the
      narrow, concrete tasks, not only of a particular moment, but even of a
      particular locality. This defect becomes at once apparent even from a
      glance at the contents of the fifteen paragraphs of the programme. Let us
      do that.
    

      § 1—aim of the working-class movement in general.
    

      § 2—the principal condition for achieving this aim.
    

      § 3—immediate political task of Russian Social-Democracy.
    

      § 4—attitude of Russian Social-Democracy to the liberals, etc.
    

      § 5—ditto.
 

      § 6—the concepts of “class” and “party”
      (a particular difference of opinion with the “economists”).
    

      § 7—practical tasks of agitation.
    

      § 8—significance of propaganda.
    

      § 9—demonstrations and manifestations.
    

      § 10—May Day celebrations.
    

      § 11—leaflets and demonstrations on
February 19.[3]


      § 12—economic struggle and social reforms.
    

      § 13—the necessity of an offensive as well as of a defensive
      struggle of the working class.
    

      § 14—active, not merely passive, role in strikes.
    

      § 15—strikes as the best means of struggle.
    

      It will easily be seen that these paragraphs, which deal with such varied
      matters, should have been divided up

    

      into separate sections (otherwise it may give rise to considerable
      misunderstandings among people unable to distinguish between fundamental
      principles and the practical tasks of the moment). It is not only inept
      but even utterly incorrect and ambiguous to place side by side a statement
      of the ultimate aim of socialism and a discussion with the “economists,”
      or a definition of the importance of strikes. What the Northern League
      should have done was first to make a clear statement of principle with
      regard to its convictions in, general, then to define the political tasks
      of the Party as the Northern League understands them, and, thirdly, to
      separate from these strictly programmatic theses the resolutions,
      of the organisation (the Northern League) on the problems of the practical
      movement (§§ 7-11 and 13- 15). A separate point should have been
      made of

      § 6,

      which defines the attitude of the Northern League to the differences of
      opinion among Russian Social-Democrats, while

      § 12 

      should have been included in the statement of principle (since the
      relation of the current struggle for petty improvements and reforms to the
      struggle for the ultimate aim is a general and not a specifically Russian
      question).
    

      After this general remark, I shall now proceed to analyse the individual
      paragraphs:
    

      § 1 outlines the general aims of Social-Democracy as a whole. These
      aims are stated extremely briefly and disjointedly. True, the programme of
      a local organisation ought not to go into details, which are
      indispensable for the programme of a party. Fully realising this
      and considering that it was a very useful and important decision on the
      part of the Northern League not to keep silent about the fundamental
      principles of Social-Democracy even in a programme of a local
      organisation, I would in that case deem it necessary only to add a
      statement outlining the fundamental principles in greater detail. In other
      words, it should have been indicated, for instance, that the Northern
      League bases itself on international scientific socialism (the
      international character of the movement is not indicated anywhere in the
      programme), and subscribes to the theory of “revolutionary Marxism.”
      In addition to this general statement of its principles, it would
      be possible to add a proposition like § 1, but by itself it (§
      1) is not sufficient.
    

    

      As an organisation affiliated to the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party, the Northern League should have declared its solidarity with the
      “Manifesto” ’of this Party; moreover, it would have been also
      useful to point to the solidarity of the Northern League at least with the
      draft programme of the Russian Social-Democrats prepared in the eighties
      by the Emancipation of Labour group. Such a statement, while leaving open
      the question of the modifications this draft requires, would more
      accurately define the Northern League’s stand in matters of
      principle. Here is the alternative: either you must yourselves
      draw up a complete account of all the fundamental principles of
      Social-Democracy (i.e., draw up the theoretical section of the
      Social-Democratic programme yourselves), or you must declare
      quite definitely that the Northern League subscribes to more or
      less well-known and established principles. The third way, the one chosen
      by the programme—to indicate the ultimate aim in an utterly
      disjointed manner—will not do.
    

      § 2 begins with an extremely inaccurate, ambiguous, and dangerous
      statement: “considering socialism to be the class interest of the
      proletariat.” These words identify, as it were, socialism with the
      “class interest of the proletariat.” And this identification is
      absolutely incorrect. Precisely at the present time, when an
      exceedingly narrow conception of the “class interests of
      the proletariat” has become extremely widespread, it is quite
      impermissible to present a formulation which, if it can be somehow
      acceptable, will be accepted only if the expression “class
      interest” is understood in an extremely broad
      sence. “Class interest” impels the proletarians to unite, to
      fight against the capitalists, to think about the prerequisites of their
      emancipation. “Class interest” makes them receptive to
      socialism. But socialism, as the ideology of the class struggle of the
      proletariat, is subject to the general conditions governing the inception,
      development, and consolidation of an ideology; in other words, it is
      founded on the sum total of human knowledge, presupposes a high level of
      scientific development, demands scientific work,.. etc., etc. Socialism is
      introduced by the ideologists into the proletarian class
      struggle, which develops spontaneously on the basis of capitalist
      relationships. The formulation of § 2,

    

      however, throws an altogether false light on the real relation of
      socialism to the class struggle. Moreover, § 2 does not speak of the
      class struggle. That is its second defect.
    

      § 3 defines absolutism inadequately (for example, it does not point
      to its connection with remnants of the serf-owning system), in places
      bombastically (“boundless”) and vaguely (“ignoring” the
      individual). Further, the conquest of political liberty (it
      should have been noted that the Northern League sets this task to the
      whole Party) is essential, not only for the full
      development of the workers’ class struggle; in one way or another it
      should have been pointed out that it is also essential in the interests of
      all social development.
    

      “The autocracy represents the interests of the ruling classes
      exclusively.”  This is inaccurate, or wrong. The autocracy satisfies
      certain interests of the ruling classes, maintaining itself
      partly by the inertness of the mass of the peasantry and the small
      producers in general, partly by balancing between conflicting interests,
      and constituting, to a certain extent, an independent organised political
      force. The wording of § 3 is especially impermissible in view of the
      fact that the absurd identification of the Russian autocracy with the rule
      of the bourgeoisie is extremely widespread in our country.
    

      “Incompatible with the principle of democracy.” What is the point of
      this when nothing has as yet been said about democracy? And does not the
      demand for the overthrow of the autocracy and the winning of political
      liberty express precisely the “principle” of democracy? This
      phrase will not do. Instead it should have been pointed out more precisely
      how consistent and determined we are (in comparison with the
      bourgeois democrats) in our understanding of the “principle of
      democracy”—for example, by describing in one way or another the idea
      and content of a “democratic constitution” or
      proclaiming our demand for a democratic republic as a matter of
      “principle.”
    

      § 4 is especially unsatisfactory. Instead of speaking about the
      “full” utilisation of “broad” liberty (as a matter
      of fact, this is just vague phrase-mongering, which could very well be
      replaced, and should be, by definite reference to a democratic republic
      and a democratic constitution,

    

      for “full” utilisation means consistent democracy)—
      instead of this, it was imperative to state that it is not
      only the working class that is interested in political
      liberty. Silence on this score is tantamount to opening the door wide to
      the worst forms of “economism,” and to forgetting our general
      democratic tasks.
    

      It is absolutely wrong to say that the realisation (??
      attainment, conquest) of political liberty is “just as”
      necessary to the proletariat as higher wages and a shorter working
      day. This is just what it is

      n o t,

      for this is a necessity of a different and

      f a r   m o r e   c o m p l e x

      order than the necessity for wage increases, etc. The difference between
      the two “necessities” may also be clearly seen from the fact,
      for instance, that the autocracy is prepared to grant (and actually
      does occasionally grant) improved conditions to individual sections
      or groups of the working class if only these sections will make
      their peace with absolutism. The sentence under analysis is absolutely
      impermissible, reflecting as it does an incredible vulgarisation of
      “economic” materialism, and debasement of Social-Democratic
      understanding to the level of sheer trade-unionism.
    

      Further. “In view of this”... should be deleted in view
      of what has been stated above . . . “in the impending
      struggle” (i.e., evidently the struggle against tsarism?)
      .. ."the Social-Democrats should come forward with a definite class
      programme and demands....” The class nature of our
      political programme and political demands is expressed
      precisely in the fact that they stand for complete and consistent
      democracy. If, however, one speaks about our entire programme in general,
      and not only about political demands, then its class nature should follow
      of itself from the very content of our programme. There is no point in
      speaking of a “definite” class programme; you
      yourselves must define, expound, express and formulate this class
      programme explicitly and with precision.
    

      “...Without subordination to the liberal programme.... This is simply
      ludicrous. We come forward as the fore most democratic party, and suddenly
      make the reservation that we do “not subordinate”!! Like children
      who have just been freed from “subordination”!
    

    

      Our “insubordination” to the liberals should be expressed, not
      in phrases about insubordination, but in the whole nature of our programme
      (and, of course, of our activity). It is precisely that
      conception of political tasks which identifies (or at least equates) the
      necessity for liberty with the necessity for wage increases, that

      e x p r e s s e s  

subordination of Social-Democracy to the liberals.
    

      The end of § 4 will not do either; it is criticised in all that has
      been said above.
    

      § 5 reduces our general attitude towards all democracy in general to
      mere collaboration with other parties in practical matters. That is too
      narrow. If such parties exist, they should have been named concretely (not
      in the programme, but in a special resolution of the congress), and the
      attitude towards the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Svoboda
      group,etc., should have been explicitly defined. If, however, it is a
      question, not of definite parties, but of the attitude towards other
      revolutionary (and opposition) trends in general, then the
      wording should have been expanded, in one way or another repeating the
      thesis of the Communist Manifesto about our support of every
      revolutionary movement against the existing

      system.[4]


      § 6 is out of place in the programme. It should have been transferred
      to a separate resolution and should have stated openly that it
      deals with the differences of opinion (or two trends) within the Russian
      Social-Democratic movement. This is more than “numerous
      misunderstandings.” The formulation of the differences of opinion is too
      narrow, for they are far from being limited to the confusion of
      class with party. There should have been a corresponding statement coming
      out resolutely and definitely against the “critics of Marxism,”
      “economism,” and limitation of our political tasks.
    

      As to the second part of § 6, since it is elucidated in
      other paragraphs (7, 14, and others), a criticism of it is given in the
      comments on these paragraphs.
    

      § 7, like all that follows (with the exception of § 12), should
      go into a separate resolution, but should not be a direct part of the
      programme.
    

      § 7 formulates the “task” of the League’s activity in a
      limited way. We must not only “develop the class-consciousness of
      the proletariat”, but also organise the latter into

    

      a political party—and then direct its struggle (both
      economic and political).
    

      The statement that the proletariat finds itself in “definite,
      concrete conditions” is superfluous. It should either be omitted or
      these conditions should be defined (but this should be done
      elsewhere in the programme).
    

      It is wrong to say that agitation is the “only” means of
      achieving our tasks. It is far from being the only means.
    

      It is inadequate to define agitation as “influence over broad
      sections of the workers.” The nature of this influence should be
      indicated. It is necessary to speak about political agitation
      more directly, resolutely, definitely and in greater detail: otherwise, by
      keeping silent about political agitation as such and devoting two whole
      para graphs (14 and 15) to economic agitation, the programme strays
      (unintentionally) into “economism.”  Special emphasis should have
      been placed on the necessity for agitation about all
      manifestations of political and economic, social and national oppression,
      irrespective of the class or section of the population affected by
      that oppression—the necessity (for Social-Democrats) to be in
      the forefront in all clashes with the government, and so on—and only
      then should the means of agitation (oral agitation, newspapers, leaflets,
      manifestations, etc., etc.) have been indicated.
    

      § 8 begins with superfluous repetition.
    

      “Recognises propaganda only to the extent,” etc. This is
      incorrect. Propaganda does not only have this significance; it is not only
      a means of “training agitators,” but also a means of spreading
      class-consciousness in general. The programme goes to the other
      extreme. If it was necessary to come out against propaganda which some
      people divorce too much from the tasks of agitation, it would have been
      better to say: “in propaganda it is particularly necessary
      not to lose sight of the task of training agitators,” or some thing to
      that effect. But all propaganda should not be reduced to the
      training of “experienced and capable agitators,” and the
      “training of only individual class-conscious workers” should
      not be simply “rejected.” We consider this inadequate, but we do not
      “reject” it. And the latter part of § 8 (from: “our
      attitude being one of rejection”) should therefore be deleted altogether.
    

    

      § 9. I fully agree with this paragraph in essence. Perhaps “in
      connection with the most varied events in public life and
      government measures...” should have been added.
    

      Instead of “the best means,” it would be more accurate to say:
      “one of the best means.”
    

      Only the end of this paragraph is unsatisfactory. Demonstrations and
      manifestations unite, and should unite, not only the workers
      (moreover, to say “unites” through manifestations is
      insufficient, since we also want to unite organisationally, directly and
      for all time, and not only for one particular
      occasion). "...Thereby developing in them....”  This is
      either inaccurate—class-consciousness cannot be developed by
      manifestations alone—or superfluous (it has already been
      said that it is one of the best means).
    

      It would be useful to add something about the need to organise
      manifestations, about their preparation, conduct, etc.
    

      In general, the absence in the programme of any reference to the necessity
      of devoting great attention to the matter of revolutionary
      organisation, in particular to setting up an all-Russian, militant
      organisation, is a great deficiency. Once reference is made to
      agitation, propaganda, strikes, and the like, it is quite inexcusable to
      say nothing about revolutionary organisation.
    

      § 10. It should have been added that in our country May Day must also
      become a demonstration against the autocracy, a demand for
      political liberty. Pointing to the international significance of the
      holiday is not enough. It must also be linked up with the struggle for the
      most vital national political demands.
    

      § 11. A very good idea, but expressed too restrictedly. Perhaps the
      words “among other things” should have been inserted, since
      demonstrations should be organised on the anniversary of the Commune as
      well, and on many other occasions; or “in particular” should
      have been inserted or else the impression may be created that
      demonstrations on other occasions are not necessary.
    

      Further. It is wrong to appeal on February 19 (in leaflets) only
      to the workers. Apart from the fact that in general we always appeal to
      the entire people and even to the whole world in our demonstrations and in
      the leaflets issued

    

      in connection with them, on February 19 in particular appeals should be
      addressed also to the peasantry. And if we are to appeal to the
      peasantry, that means we must draw up a Social-Democratic policy on the
      agrarian question. The programme does not touch on this question, and we
      quite understand that a local organisation may perhaps lack the time or
      the forces to deal with this. Nevertheless, it should certainly have at
      least been mentioned, in one way or another, in connection with one
      attempt or another to tackle it in Social-Democratic literature and in the
      practical activities of our

      movement.[1]


      The end of § 11 will not do (“only class
      force”—which class? The working class alone?). Should have been
      deleted.
    

      § 12. We neither can nor will help “in every way” to improve
      the conditions of the workers under the present circumstances. For instance, we
      cannot help in the

      Zubatov[5]
      fashion, and even if Zubatov corruption is involved we shall not do
      that. We fight only for such improvement of the workers’ conditions as
      will raise their capacity to wage the class struggle, i.e., when
      the improvement of conditions is not bound up with corruption of
      political consciousness, with police tutelage, with being tied down to a
      given locality, with subjugation to a “benefactor,” with a lowering
      of human dignity. etc., etc. Precisely in Russia, where the autocracy is
      so much inclined (and is becoming more and more inclined) to
      buy itself off from revolution with various hand-outs and sham
      reforms, it is our duty to draw a clear line of demarcation between
      ourselves and all sorts of “reformers.” We also fight for reforms,
      but by no means “in every way”; we fight for reforms
      only in Social-Democratic fashion, only in a revolutionary way.
    

      § 13 is omitted by decision of the congress. And it should have been
      omitted.
    

      § 14 formulates the content and the tasks of economic agitation in
      too narrow a way. The latter is not confined to strikes alone. We need
      “better conditions,” not only for the cultural development of the
      proletariat, but particularly for its revolutionary development. The
      “active

    

      role” of Social-Democrats in strikes does not end with encouraging
      the struggle for improvements in economic conditions. Strikes
      (like economic agitation in general) should always be used to
      encourage the revolutionary struggle for freedom and for
      socialism as well. Strikes should be used for political agitation
      also.
    

      § 15 is also most unsatisfactory. Strikes are not the
      “best” means of struggle, but only one of the means,
      and not always necessarily one of the best means. We must recognise the
      importance of strikes, make use of them and lead them at all
      times—but it would be all the more dangerous to exaggerate their
      importance, the more this has been done by the “economists.”
    

      What is said further about strikes is redundant: it has already been
      stated in § 14. A reference to leadership of the economic struggle in
      general would have been sufficient. This leadership may sometimes consist
      in deterring from strike action. The programme expresses itself in too
      absolute a fashion, and for this very reason too restrictedly. The
      programme should have spoken about the task in general, that of leading
      the economic struggle of the proletariat, of making it more organised and
      conscious, of organising workers’ trade unions and endeavouring to develop
      them into all-Russian organisations, of utilising every strike, every
      manifestation of economic oppression, etc., for the most widespread
      socialist and revolutionary propaganda and agitation.
    

      The end of § 15 limits the tasks of this agitation, making
      the use of political agitation depend, as it were, on action by the
      police, etc. Actually, however, we must try to use political agitation
      (and this is quite possible if the leaders are at all capable)
      before action by these “archangels,” and
      irrespective of that action. It should have been formulated more
      generally: “to take advantage of all and every opportunity for
      political agitation,” etc.
    

      The end of § 15 is also incorrect. It is the less fitting for us to
      speak of “general strikes,” the less opportunity we in Russia have
      of preparing them. And, in general, there is no reason for
      speaking specially about “general” strikes in
      programmes (remember the absurd “general strike” in the
      pamphlet, Who Will Carry Out the Political

Revolution?[6]
      After all, such misunderstandings are also possible). To

    

      declare that strikes are “the best means of developing
      class-consciousness” is also absolutely incorrect.
    

      As a whole, a serious revision of the programme would be highly
      desirable. In general it would also be desirable for the Northern League
      to take an active part both in the unification of revolutionary
      Social-Democracy in a party and in the preparation of the Party
      programme. For their part, the editors of Zarya and
      Iskra hope soon to acquaint the Northern League with their draft
      (most of which is already completed), and trust that the Northern League
      will co-operate in amending and circulating this draft and in preparing it
      for adoption by the entire Party.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      For instance, the attempts of the workers to stage demonstrations in
      connection with floggings of the peasants, etc.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

The Northern League of the R.S.D.L.P. or the Northern Labour
      League—a regional union of the Social-Democratic organisations in
      Vladimir, Yaroslavl, and Kostroma gubernias. It arose in 1900-01 on the
      initiative of 0. A. Varentsova and V. A. Noskov, who were exiled from
      Yaroslavl and Ivanovo-Voznesensk, went to live in Voronezh and, together
      with other exiled Social-Democrats (A. I. Lyubimov, L. Y. Karpov,
      A. A. and N. N. Kardashev, D. V. Kosterkin), there formed a group of the
      Iskra trend. Among those who also took part in the organisation
      of the Northern League were M. A. Bagayev, an Ivanovo-Voznesensk worker;
      N. N. Panin, a worker of the Putilov Factory, exiled to Siberia for taking
      part in the St. Petersburg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the
      Working Class; A. P. Dolivo-Dobrovoslky, and others. In the years 1901-05,
      the League guided the working-class movement in this industrial
      region. Its activities grew considerably after the Kineshma Conference,
      held in August 1901 of representatives of the Social-Democratic committees
      of Ivanovo Voznesensk, Vladimir, Yaroslavl, and Kostroma. At the League’s

   

      congress in Voronezh on January 1-5, 1902, it took final shape electing a
      Central Committee (Bagayev, Varentsova, Panin, and others) and adopting a
      programme, which V. I. Lenin criticised in his letter to the Northern
      League.
    

      From the outset the Northern League was linked with Iskra and
      shared the latter’s political line and plan of organisation (in the
      Iskra organisation’s report to the Second Congress of the
      R.S.D.L.P. it was pointed out that “of all the Party committees, the
      Northern League alone immediately entered into friendly relations with
      Iskra”). In an open letter published in No. 34 of Iskra
      on February 15, 1903, the League expressed complete solidarity with the
      programme of Iskra and Zarya and with Lenin’s hook,
      What Is to Be Done?, and recognised Iskra and
      Zarya as the leading organs of the R.S.D.L.P. The League was
      smashed by the secret police in the spring of 1902, but was quickly
      reformed, its representatives (V. A. Noskov, F. I. Shchekoldin,
      A. M. Stopani, A. I. Lyubimov) taking an active part in preparations for
      the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. The League’s delegates to the Second
      Congress (L. M. Knipovich and A. M. Stopani) adhered to the Leninist
      majority.
    

      After the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., the Northern Labour League
      was reconstituted as the Northern Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., the local
      committees becoming groups of the Northern Committee. At the conference of
      Northern organisations of the R.S.D.L.P. held in Kostroma in July 1905,
      the Northern Committee was abolished and the Ivanovo-Voznesensk,
      Yaroslavl, and Kostroma independent committees were formed.
    



[3]

      The reference is to the organisation of demonstrations on the anniversary
      of the 1861 Peasant Reform. Paragraph 11 of the Northern League’s
      programme stated that leaflets issued on this occasion should “point
      out to the workers that they could expect nothing from the autocratic
      government” and should “endeavour to destroy the illusion that
      the emancipation was the personal act of the tsar, an act of good will on
      his part.”
    



[4]

      Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Moscow, 1958, Vol. I, p. 65.
    



[5]

Zubatov—colonel of gendarmerie and chief of the Moscow
      Secret Police, on whose initiative a policy of “police
      socialism” was conducted in 1901-03. This consisted in the setting
      up of legal workers’ organisations intended to divert the workers from the
      political struggle against the autocracy. Through these organisations
      Zubatov attempted to direct the working-class movement towards the
      achievement of purely economic aims, and it was suggested to the workers
      that the tsarist government was prepared to help improve their economic
      conditions.
    

      The reactionary character of Zubatovism was unmasked by the revolutionary
      Social-Democrats, who made use of legal working-class organisations so as
      to draw the working masses into the

   

      struggle against the autocracy. As Lenin was to write later: “Thus
      the Zubatov movement oversteps its bounds and, started by the police in
      the interests of the police, in the interests of support for the
      autocracy, in the interests of corrupting the workers’ political
      consciousness, this movement turns against the autocracy, becomes an
      explosion of the proletarian class struggle” (see present edition,
      Vol. 8, “The St. Petersburg Strike”).
    

      Under the impact of the revolutionary movement in 1903, the tsar’s government
      was forced to liquidate the Zubatov organisations.
    



[6]

      The pamphlet, Who Will Carry Out the Political Revolution?, was
      written by A. A. Sanin and printed in 1899 in the symposium, The
      Proletarian Struggle, No. 1, published by the Urals
      Social-Democratic Group. The author of the pamphlet, who adopted the
      position of “economism,” denied the need to create an independent
      political party of the working class and maintained that a political
      revolution could be carried out by means of a general strike, without any
      preliminary organisation and preparation of the masses, and without an
      armed uprising.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Why the Social-Democrats Must Declare a Determined and Relentless War on the Socialist-Revolutionaries









Lenin: Why the Social-Democrats Must Declare a Determined and Relentless War on the Socialist-Revolutionaries







V. I.  

      Lenin
Why the Social-Democrats Must Declare a Determined and Relentless War on the Socialist-Revolutionaries




Written: Written in June-July 1902 

Published:

      First Published in 1923 in the magazine Prozhekior, No. 14.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 172-175.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      1) Because that trend in our social thought which goes by the name of
      “Socialist-Revolutionary” is in fact moving away, and has
      indeed moved away, from the only international theory of revolutionary
      socialism existing today, i.e., from Marxism. In the great split of
      international Social-Democracy into an opportunist wing (or,
      “Bernsteinian”) and a revolutionary wing, this trend has taken up an
      entirely indefinite and impermissibly irresolute position between two
      stools. Basing itself solely on the bourgeois and opportunist criticism of
      Marxism, it has pronounced the latter to have been “shaken”
      (Vestnik Busskoi Revolutsii, No. 2, p. 62), and promised, on its
      part, to “revise” Marxism anew, in its own way, but has done
      nothing whatever to fulfil this ominous promise.
    

      2) Because the Socialist-Revolutionary trend helplessly yields to the
      dominant tendency in Russian social and political thought which should be
      termed liberal Narodism. Repeating the error of the Narodnaya Volya and of
      old Russian socialism in general, the Socialist-Revolutionaries fail to
      see the sheer flabbiness and internal contradictions of this tendency;
      their independent creative contribution to Russian revolutionary thought
      is restricted to tacking revolutionary phrases on to the old testament of
      liberal Narodnik wisdom. Russian Marxism was the first to under mine the
      theoretical foundations of liberal Narodism, to lay bare its bourgeois and
      petty-bourgeois class con tent, and to have waged and continue to wage war
      against it, undeterred by the desertion of a swarm of critical
      (=opportunist) Marxists to the enemy camp. But the stand

    

      the Socialist-Revolutionaries have been holding in this war is (at
      best) one of hostile neutrality; here again they have seated
      themselves between two stools, between Russian Marxism (from which they
      have borrowed only a few paltry shreds) and quasi-socialist liberal
      Narodism.
    

      3) Because the Socialist-Revolutionaries, owing to their above-mentioned
      complete lack of principle in questions of international and Russian
      socialism, do not understand or do not recognise the only really
      revolutionary principle, that of the class straggle. They do not
      understand that only a party which fuses socialism with the
      Russian working-class movement being engendered with increasing
      force and on an increasing scale by the growth of Russian capitalism can
      be really revolutionary and truly socialist in Russia today. The attitude
      of the Socialist-Revolutionaries towards the Russian working-class
      movement has always been that of dilettante spectators, and when, for
      instance, that movement contracted the illness of “economism”
      (as a consequence of its amazingly rapid growth) the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, on the one hand, gloated over the mistakes made
      by people who were working at the new and difficult task of rousing the
      masses of the workers, and, on the other hand, put a spoke in the wheel of
      revolutionary Marxism when it launched and victoriously carried through
      the struggle against this “economism.” A half-hearted attitude
      towards the working-class movement inevitably leads in fact to aloofness
      from it, and owing to this aloofness the Socialist-Revolutionary Party has
      no social basis whatever. It does not rely upon any social class, for the
      term class cannot be applied to a group of unstable intellectuals who
      qualify their vagueness and lack of principle as “broadness.”
    

      4) Because by assuming a disdainful attitude towards socialist ideology
      and seeking to rely simultaneously and in an equal degree upon the
      intelligentsia, the proletariat, and the peasantry, the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party there by inevitably (whether it wants to or
      not) leads to the political and ideological enslavement of the Russian
      proletariat by Russian bourgeois democracy. A disdainful attitude towards
      theory, evasiveness, and shilly-shallying with regard to socialist
      ideology inevitably play into

    

      the hands of bourgeois ideology. As social strata comparable with
      the proletariat, the Russian intelligentsia and the Russian peasantry can
      serve as the mainstay only of a bourgeois-democratic
      movement. This is not only a consideration that stems necessarily from our
      teachings as a whole (which regard the small producer, for instance, as
      revolutionary only to the extent that he makes a clean break with the
      society of commodity economy and capitalism and places himself at the
      standpoint of the proletariat)—no, it is also an absolute fact which
      is already beginning to make itself felt. At the moment of the political
      revolution and on the day after this revolution, this fact will inevitably
      make itself felt with still greater force. Socialist-Revolutionarism is
      one of the manifestations of petty-bourgeois ideological instability and
      petty-bourgeois vulgarisation of socialism, against which Social-Democracy
      must and will always wage determined war.
    

      5) Because the practical demands of the programme which the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries have—I won’t say brought forward, but at
      least—outlined have already quite clearly revealed the enormous harm
      caused in practice by the unprincipled character of this trend. For
      example, their agrarian minimum programme as outlined in No. 8 of
      Revolutsionnaya

Rossiya[1]
      (perhaps it would be more correct to say: scattered among the time-worn
      premises of our Narodism?) in the first place misleads both the peasantry
      by promising it a “minimum”—socialisation of the
      land—and the working class by giving it an entirely wrong impression
      of the true nature of the peasant movement. Such frivolous promises only
      compromise a revolutionary party in general; in particular they compromise
      the teaching of scientific socialism concerning the socialisation of all
      means of production as our ultimate aim. Secondly, by including the
      support and development of co-operatives in their minimum programme, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries completely abandon the ground of revolutionary
      struggle and degrade their so-called socialism to the level of the most
      banal petty-bourgeois reformism. Thirdly, by opposing the demand of the
      Social-Democrats for the abolition of all the medieval fetters that bind
      our village commune, tie the muzhik to his allotment, deny him freedom of
      movement,

    

      and unavoidably entail his humiliation as member of his social-estate, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries have shown that they have not been able even to
      safeguard themselves against the reactionary doctrines of Russian
      Narodism.
    

      6) Because the Socialist-Revolutionaries, by including terrorism in their
      programme and advocating it in its present-day form as a means of
      political struggle, are thereby doing the most serious harm to the
      movement, destroying the indissoluble ties between socialist work and the
      mass of the revolutionary class. No verbal assurances and vows can
      disprove the unquestionable fact that present-day terrorism, as practised
      and advocated by the Socialist-Revolutionaries, is not connected in
      any way with work among the masses, for the masses, or together with
      the masses; that the organisation of terroristic acts by the Party
      distracts our very scanty organisational forces from their difficult and
      by no means completed task of organising a revolutionary workers’
      party; that in practice the terrorism of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries is nothing else than single combat, a
      method that has been wholly condemned by the experience of history. Even
      foreign socialists are beginning to become embarrassed by the noisy
      advocacy of terrorism advanced today by our
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. Among the masses of the Russian workers this
      advocacy simply sows harmful illusions, such as the idea that terrorism
      “compels people to think politically, even against their will”
      (Revolutsionnaya Rossiya, No. 7, p. 4), or that “more
      effectively than months of verbal propaganda it is capable of changing the
      views ...  of thousands of people with regard to the revolutionaries and
      the meaning [!!] of their activity,” or that it is capable of
      “infusing new strength into the waverers, those discouraged and
      shocked by the sad outcome of many demonstrations” (ibid.),
      and so on. These harmful illusions can only bring about early
      disappointment and weaken the work of preparing the masses for the
      onslaught upon the autocracy.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

Revolutsionnaya Ressiya (Revolutionary Russia)—an illegal
      news paper of the Socialist-Revolutionaries. It was published from the end
      of 1900 in Russia by the League of Socialist-Revolutionaries (No. 1, dated
      1900, actually appeared in January 1901); from January 1902 to December
      1905 it was published abroad (in Geneva) as the official organ of the
      party of Socialist-Revolutionaries.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Two Letters to I. I. Radchenko









Lenin: Two Letters to I. I. Radchenko







V. I.  

      Lenin
Two Letters to I. I. Radchenko




Published:
Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 176-185.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    
I

      Dear Friend,
    

      First of all, my heartiest congratulations to you (and your friends) on a
      tremendous success: the beginning of the reorganisation of the Local

      Committee.[2]
      This may be come a turning-point for our whole movement, and it
      is therefore of the utmost importance and urgency to carry through this
      reorganisation to the end. Take particular care of yourself, so
      that you should manage to complete it.
    

      Let me get down to business now. You ask me to help you with a concrete
      outline of a plan for local work in connection with all-Russian
      activities." In order to meet your request immediately, I am for the time
      being writing to express my personal opinion (so as not to delay matters
      by having to contact the other members of the Editorial Board, who are at
      present scattered in different places; they will possibly also send you a
      few words themselves later). I am not quite sure whether I understand your
      request correctly. My sources now are: your letter of June 21 and the
      letter of 2a

      3b[3]
      about the two meetings (you, 2a 3b, and Krasikov) with Vanya (the
      St. Petersburg

      League[4]).
      Judging from these sources (especially the latter), Vanya “now
      shares our views and frankly acknowledges the demerits of his former
      stand.” Proceeding from this, I shall continue to write, addressing myself
      both to you and to Vanya, and I leave it entirely to you to decide whether
      to transmit my letter to Vanya (and Manya=the Workers’

      Organisation[5])
      immediately or later, whether to give it in full or with certain
      amendments, which in case of necessity I

    

      likewise authorise you to make (informing us of all such amendments as far
      as possible, of course).
    

      Strictly speaking, I am of course unable to give you just now a
      “concrete outline of a plan for local work in connection with
      all-Russian activities”: it is impossible for me to do this without
      a number of detailed conferences both with Vanya and with
      Manya. All that I can offer is an outline of the practical steps that
      Vanya should take immediately and before all else, once he has become a
      new Vanya or wants to become so de facto. It seems to me that the
      steps planned by all of you at the second meeting with Vanya (and
      described in the letter of 2a 3b) are wholly correct. I fully agree that
      “the first thing to do is openly to declare oneself an adherent of
      certain views.” This is the very thing that must come first, and it can be
      done only by an open

      declaration.[6]
      I am fully aware of the fact that most or many of Vanya’s comrades (i.e.,
      the committees and their members) are strongly prejudiced against such
      open declarations or at least are unaccustomed to them. This trait is
      quite comprehensible from the angle of the stage of the movement that has
      already been passed and of the mistakes that have already been
      rejected. But just because Vanya holds such an important position, just
      because in the past he openly declared his old views, which were decidedly
      at variance with the Iskra views, just because of all this I
      would particularly earnestly advise the comrades (=Vanya) to overcome this
      feeling of estrangement and this prejudice. Hitherto our local work has
      suffered mostly from narrowness and isolation, from the reluctance of the
      local leaders to tackle actively and resolutely the job of
      working out general Party questions. Then let Vanya, as he comes over to
      the adherents of revolutionary Social-Democracy, break with this tradition
      at once and declare for all to hear that these are his
      fundamental theoretical views and organisational ideas
      and that he himself is now going to fight for the realisation of these
      ideas, urging all other committees to follow suit. This declaration will
      be of enormous importance both to Vanya and to the whole of Russia; it
      will be a big event in itself. We need not be afraid of offending
      Vanya’s old friends, who held different views; every shadow of offence
      will be removed by the very fact

    

      that Vanya himself will openly and frankly admit that
      circumstances and experience have convinced him of the erroneousness of
      the former theoretical views, tactical principles, and organisational
      plans, in one way or another bound up with “economism.” There will
      not be even the sem blance of an attack on these old views here, but
      merely an avowal of his own evolution. The frank straightfor
      wardness of this avowal will exert an influence on the actual
      unification of all Russian Social-Democrats and on the full cessation of
      the “polemics” between them, which will be ten times as great
      as a hundred protests against the “polemics.”
    

      And so, first and foremost, an open and printed decla ration (in a local
      bulletin or in Iskra, preferably in both). This step should
      absolutely not be delayed even for a single week, for without it
      all other steps may easily prove futile (arrests, etc.), while
      with it the new road would be estab lished at once.
    

      What should this declaration contain? If Vanya were to ask my comradely
      advice on this point (but not before he asked me, of course) I
      would reply:

      1) an express repudiation of his old views (theoretical, tactical, and
      organisational) with a most general description of these views (in one or
      two words, if possible).

      2) A declaration that he is joining the Iskra supporters,
      subscribes to its theoretical, tactical, and organisational views, and
      recognises it as the leading organ (N.B., the word
      “leading” does not at all mean that one necessarily has to
      agree with it in everything. It merely implies solidarity with the
      guiding principles of a certain organ. This declaration is
      fully compatible both with a reference to particular
      differences, should any exist, and with an intimation that I want the
      following changes and that I, now an Iskra supporter, will strive
      to effect them, and try to get these changes made in
      Iskra).

      3) Special emphasis on the demand for the unification or, more accurately,
      the actual restoration of a united all- Russian Social-Democratic
      Labour Party, by means of joint work, which should begin with a
      rallying about Iskra so as to convert it into an instrument of
      genuinely nation-wide agitation and which (the work) should lead to the
      creation of a militant all-Russian organisation, capable

    

      of launching a determined onslaught on the autocracy.

      4) An acknowledgement (already made, but not yet published by Vanya) of
      the need to reorganise the structure and functioning of Vanya and Manya
      (their relationships, etc.), an announcement (so to speak) of a revision
      of their structure.

      5) An acknowledgement of the need for closer links and fusion
      with the Russian Iskra

      organisation[7]
      so as to accomplish the tasks Vanya and this organisation will henceforth
      share.

      6) The assignment of one or several members (perhaps from Vanya and from
      Manya, etc.) of the St. Petersburg Committee for the matter of immediately
      beginning the practical realisation of the above-mentioned task, i.e.,
      fusion with Iskra and unification of the

      Party.[1]


      Of these six points, the sixth, of course, can by no means be made public,
      which may likewise be the case with some of the other points as well. The
      declaration could conclude with an ellipsis, and make the frank
      reservation that such and such (or “subsequent”) points cannot be
      made public for reasons of secrecy. But I repeat: if Vanya has really come
      over to our side he should not postpone this declaration for even a
      single week.
    

      It is at such a meeting of delegates from the St. Peters burg Committee
      with Sonya (the Russian Iskra organisation) and with the
      Iskra Editorial Board (abroad) that a really concrete plan will
      be prepared, not only for the reorganisation of work in St. Petersburg,
      but also for the actual unification of the Party, the constitution of an
      Organising Committee to prepare the Second Party Congress, etc., etc.,
      etc.
    

      Further, at your second meeting it was proposed that “before
      proceeding to carry out the above-mentioned plan [to send delegates abroad
      in July] a preliminary examination be made of the state of affairs in
      various areas of our vast fatherland so as to have a basis for discussion
      at the congress.” I consider this decision (I say so quite frankly) a
      mistake, and I would advise you to abandon it. It means delaying matters
      and dispersing your forces. Let us first achieve a single objective: let
      us (we and Vanya) reach

    

      an understanding among ourselves. This will already be equivalent
      to complete solidarity between Vanya and Sonya. And given this solidarity,
      the next practical task (a tour of Russia) will be accomplished
      by Vanya=+Sonya (+or=?) quite easily. But there is no sense in dispersing
      our efforts now: first (1) let us finally convince Vanya and
      Manya, then (2) publicly announce our standpoint, further (3)
      come to an immediate understanding with Iskra (abroad, where
      Iskra already has a whole file of material on the state of
      affairs in the various localities of our vast father land; don’t disdain
      this file, comrades!) and (4) with Sonya, and only then (5) tour Russia
      with the express practical aim of the actual unification of the
      work (and the convocation of a general Party congress).
    

      There, if you please, is a “concrete outline of a plan” of
      immediate practical tasks. If § 2 presents difficulties, § 3 can
      be moved to first place (this, of course, will entail some delay, but
      under certain circumstances an unavoidable delay). But both 2 and 3 must
      be insisted on at all costs. Moreover, it is of the utmost importance that
      the members of Vanya who are coming here should be invested with the
      fullest possible powers and that if possible there be two of them rather
      than one (although this really depends entirely on the local conditions,
      and of those you are in a better position to judge).
    

      I believe I can conclude with this. Please let me know your opinion as
      soon as possible: have I understood your request correctly? is my
      “concrete plan” feasible? etc. I am afraid that things are not
      yet so good and that Vanya is not yet a full adherent. What is
      particularly suspicious is that Manya has not yet been given What Is
      to Be

Done?[See present edition,
Vol. 5.—Ed.]

      It would be a good thing if you could meet with Vanya again in
      pleno (i.e., at a full session of the St. Petersburg
      Committee): this would be of the utmost importance in accurately
      establishing whether there are any opponents, just who they are, and
      what main points they advance. It would be of equal importance that you
      meet with Manya directly. You must hasten Vanya’s trip here (and it would
      be good for Manya to come too!)

      a s  

m u c h
    

      a s   p o s s i b l e   a n d   a t   a l l  
c o s t s

      (have them come straight to London; give them the London
      address without fail and also Meshcheryakov’s Belgian address for
      all eventualities). If you succeed in doing this, it will already be a
      great achievement guaranteeing that your work will bear fruit even if you
      are all arrested now. And don’t forget a contingency like that is quite
      possible, and that it is therefore imperative to accomplish the first
      real step (declaration, trip) as quickly as possible and without
      the slightest delay.
    

      If in fact Vanya unreservedly becomes one of us, then we
      shall hold the Second Party Congress within a few months and make
      Iskra a fortnightly or even a weekly organ of the Party. Try to
      convince Vanya that we haven’t the slightest intention of distracting him
      from local work, that St. Petersburg is a “locality”
      which is of direct importance to the whole of Russia as well,
      that the merger of Vanya with Sonya will greatly intensify local work, and
      will at the same time immediately lift the whole Party out of its
      semi-spectral state and raise it to the stage not only of reality, but
      also of a power of prime importance.
    

      Warmly shaking your hand,

      
      Yours,
    
Lenin

Written before July 3 (16), 1902
Published according to the manuscript
First Published in 1924, in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia, No. 3



    

    II

      Dear Friend,
    

      The news you sent us recently about the release of Vanya’s
      friends—the “allies” (=supporters of Rabocheye
      Dyelo)—again gives rise to some doubts in our mind. Will Vanya
      hold out now? At all events, put the question to him squarely, get a
      direct reply, and if it is in the negative make him feel ashamed of
      himself, using no uncertain language; in any case, let us know immediately
      how matters stand. If Vanya has again got (or even is about to get) out of
      our hands, it is all the more imperative that you devote trebled efforts
      to Manya, if possible to her directly; if not, through your new friends,
      the conversation with whom you have described to us in such detail and so
      interestingly.
    

      You should make it your business (if Vanya shows even the
      slightest signs of unreliability or evasiveness) to prepare the
      St. Petersburg Iskra-ists for war on the remnants of
      “economism.” Naturally, there is no need to say anything to them
      about this war, but all efforts must be put into preparing for it, and as
      far as possible on both flanks. That is, firstly, try to maintain your
      established personal relations with our friends in the intellectual half
      of Vanya, try to see them, influence them, make them feel ashamed, meet
      the young people among them, and prepare the

      Iskraists 

      to break with the waverers. The second flank—the workers—is
      far more important. Your study circle is excellent vantage-ground, and you
      must above all see to it that this circle develops, becomes conscious of
      and gives expression to its hostility towards Vanya. Try to supply this
      circle with What Is to Be Done? and to achieve (judging by your
      letter, this is not at all difficult) complete unanimity;
      moreover, you must particularly and emphatically stress the

    

      fact that What Is to Be Done? is levelled precisely and mainly
      against just this “St. Petersburg” type of people. Dot your
      i’s in your discussions with them, constantly referring to Vanya as a bad
      example, an example of what should not be done. I am more than ready to
      help you in any way I can—for instance, through a series of letters
      to the circle. First, let this circle become Iskra-ist
      consciously and in full, become consciously and unreservedly
      hostile to all of the old “St. Petersburg truck,” to Rabochaya
      Mysl, to Rabocheye Dyelo, and to all
      shilly-shallying. Then (and only then) we shall do the following:
      the declaration you advised Vanya to make and I wrote to you about in
      detail will be made, in somewhat altered form of course, by the circle,
      which will raise the “banner of insurrection” against Vanya’s
      “economists,” and announce a direct campaign for the purpose of
      winning all of Manya over to its side.
    

      I do not doubt for a moment that this, campaign will end in complete and
      rapid victory, and I consider that it is not this campaign which
      constitutes the main difficulty, but the matter of getting people to the
      point of embarking on an open campaign, of not slipping into compromises
      with Vanya once more, into making concessions to him, into
      procrastination, etc. Absolutely no compromises whatever, and
      ruthless war against the slightest remnants of
      “economism” and amateurishness—that, in my opinion, is
      the task you should set yourself in the circle. Better lose three months,
      half a year, or even more on preparations, and create a militant
      Iskra-ist circle rather than unite unprepared people with Vanya’s
      diplomats and cunctators.
    

      Make use of the fact that you have a free hand in the circle and pursue
      your policy resolutely, keeping people who are not entirely with you well
      at a distance.
    

      If you manage matters in this way, you will be independent of Vanya’s
      waverings and vacillations; you will have

      y o u r   o w n

      foothold. And if you occasionally have to manoeuvre in your dealings with
      Vanya, you must not resort to the slightest attempt at manoeuvring in the
      circle, but at all times maintain an attitude of
      irreconcilability towards Vanya there. Your tactics will then be
      quite simple: if Vanya comes closer to you, pat him on the head, but keep
      tight hold of the stick in your other

    

      hand, i.e., don’t conceal from him the fact that this is not enough, that
      it is necessary to come over the whole way and come in, and that a little
      will not satisfy you. If Vanya drifts away, don’t let him get away with a
      single mistake, with a single misstep. It should be one of your main tasks
      to fasten on to each of Vanya’s blunders, and make it a subject
      of merciless exposure and condemnation in the circle (and as far as
      possible in Iskra too from time to time).
    

      In a word, in your relations with Vanya hold steadfastly to the principle:
      I want peace with you and to that end I am preparing thoroughly for war
      against you.
    

      A piece of practical advice in conclusion. By nature Vanya is a diplomat
      and a pedant. He has now raised the question of alterations in the hovel
      and it is most likely that on the plausible pretext of this
      “revision of structure” he will drag things out, invent
      thousands of compromises, etc. Don’t fall for this bait. Mercilessly
      deride love of compiling rules. It is not a matter of rules, and whoever
      thinks it possible to draw up model rules on the basis of certain tactical
      and organisational ideas understands absolutely nothing at all and must be
      thoroughly hounded for this lack of understanding. If Vanya
      imagines that they will discuss the new rules from all angles, rewrite
      forty para graphs out of the fifty, and then “to a good feast and
      the wedding,” i.e., that the new work will then begin in accordance with
      the new rules—if he (as is obvious from everything) imagines this,
      then it means that he has discarded his old prejudices only in word and
      that actually he still retains hundreds of stupid ideas against which we
      must fight and fight again. Castigate pedantry and formalism, and point
      out that it is not a matter of rules but of 1) coming to an agreement on
      views, thinking them over thoroughly, and 2) of
      reaching mutual understanding in the practical work
      itself.
    

      With this as our standpoint, we snap our fingers at your (Vanya’s) game of
      rules and state flatly—who we are, what we want and how we work is
      something you know, and should know, not only from our publications, but
      also from personal meetings in Russia and abroad (such meetings are
      unavoidable in the revolutionary movement). If you do not care to go hand
      in hand with us, say so outright, don’t

    

      hedge, and bear in mind that we will wage a real war against all
      hedging. Don’t imagine that you will be able to conceal your hedging from
      us behind revisions of rules, and the like. But if you want to go hand in
      hand with us, get down to work at once, and then you will see
      that this work in connection with an all-Russian newspaper, on the paper
      and with it as a basis, will itself show what new forms are required, and
      will probably (and even undoubtedly) show that, given a genuine and live
      movement, these forms will take shape of themselves, without any
      rules. And when we are strong, we shall organise meetings and conferences
      four times a year in Russia and twice abroad (or vice versa,
      depending on circumstances), and all rules will be determined at these
      conferences (to put it more plainly—we shall send all rules to the
      devil).
    

      I warmly shake your hand, and I am waiting impatiently for your reply. Do
      my letters hit the nail on the head, i.e., do they give you what you want?
    
Yours,
Lenin

Written on July 9 (22), 1902
Published according to the manuscript
First Published in 1928 in V. I. Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol. V



 
Notes
 

[1]

      This (§ 6) has also already been settled de facto at your
      second meeting: sending comrades abroad for the purpose of coming to a
      final understanding.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

The Local Committee—the St. Petersburg Committee of the
      R.S.D.L.P.
    



[3]

2a 3b—the pseudonym of the Bolshevik P. N. Lepeshinsky, a
      member of the Organising Committee for the convocation of the Second
      Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
    



[4]

The St. Petersburg League—the St. Petersburg League of
      Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class, was organised by Lenin
      in the autumn of 1895 and united all the Marxist workers’ study circles in
      St. Petersburg. The League of Struggle was head ed by a Central Group,
      which was led by Lenin. The League of Struggle was the first in Russia to
      begin bringing about the union of socialism with the working-class
      movement, as well as the transition from propaganda of Marxism among a
      small group of advanced workers to political agitation among the broad
      masses of the working class.
    

      In December 1895 the tsarist government dealt the League of Struggle a
      severe blow: during the night of December 8-9 (20-21), 1895, a large
      number of the League’s leaders, with V. I. Lenin at their head, were
      arrested, and the first issue of the newspaper Rabocheye Dyelo
      (Workers’ Cause), which was ready for the press, was seized.
    

   

      From prison V.I. Lenin continued to guide the League’s activities: he
      helped it with advice, sent out letters and leaflets in cipher, wrote a
      pamphlet, On Strikes (which has not been discovered), and the
      “Draft and Explanation of a Programme for the Social-Democratic
      Party” (see present edition, Vol. 2, pp. 93-121).
    

      As Lenin put it, the League’s importance lay in its being the embryo of a
      revolutionary party based on the working-class movement and guiding the
      proletariat’s class struggle.
    

      The older members of the League who had escaped arrest took part in
      preparing for and conducting the First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. and in
      drafting the “Manifesto” published in the name of the
      Congress. However, the prolonged absence of the League’s founders serving
      terms of exile in Siberia, and, above all, of V. I. Lenin, facilitated the
      adoption of an opportunist policy by the “young”
      Social-Democrats, the “economists,” who from 1897, through the
      newspaper Rabochaya Mysl (Workers’ Thought), implanted the ideas
      of trade-unionism and Bernsteinism on Russian soil. From the second half
      of 1898 the most outspoken “economists”—the Rabochaya
      Mysl supporters—gained leadership of the League.
    



[5]

The Workers’ Organisation (for secrecy dubbed
      Manya)—an organisation of supporters of “economism,”
      which arose in St. Petersburg in the summer of 1900. In the autumn of the
      same year it merged with the League of Struggle for the Emancipation of
      the Working Class, and the St. Petersburg Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. was
      formed, consisting of two parts: the “Committee” proper and
      the “Committee of the Workers’ Organisation.” After the
      Iskra trend triumphed in the St. Petersburg Social-Democratic
      organisation (1902), the group of “economist”-influenced
      Social-Democrats broke away from the St. Petersburg Committee and re
      created an independent “Workers’ Organisation,” which existed until
      the beginning of 1904.
    



[6]

The Declaration of the St. Petersburg Committee of the
      R.S.D.L.P. on solidarity with Iskra and Zarya, and on
      their recognition as the leading organs of Russian Social-Democracy was
      published in leaf let form in July 1902, and later printed in
      Iskra, No. 26, October 15, 1902.
    



[7]

The Russian Iskra organisation (called Songa for
      secrecy) united Iskra supporters operating inside Russia. In the
      early period of its existence (February 1900-January 1902) the Russian
      Iskra organisation had not yet taken shape as an organised
      entity. The groups of Iskra’s supporters and “agents”
      (P. N. and

      0. 

      B. Lepeshinsky, P. A. Krasikov, A. M. Stopani, and others in Pskov;
      V. P. and M. G. Artsybushev, K. K. Gazenbush, and others in Samara;
      L. N. Radchenko, 5. 0. Tsederbaum, and others in Poltava; S. I. Radchenko
      in St. Petersburg; A. D. Tsurupa in Kharkov; N. E. Bauman in Moscow;
      I. V. Babushkin in Orekhovo-Zuyevo, and so on) were not at first united by
      any kind of centre operating

   

      in Russia, and maintained direct relations with the Iskra
      Editorial’ Board. But as Iskra’s influence increased, its Russian
      organisation more and more became the hub of the Russian Social-Democratic
      movement; there was a considerable increase in the volume of practical
      work carried out by the Iskra-ists (arranging stores of Party
      literature and its transport and distribution among the Social-Democratic
      organisations, collecting money and dispatching correspondence to
      Iskra, etc.). All this urgently required the formation of an
      all-Russian centre of the Iskra supporters’ activity, and the
      formation of a Russian Iskra organisation.
    

      V. I. Lenin gives the date of the founding of the Russian Iskra
      organisation as January 1902, when a congress of Iskra supporters
      working in Russia was held in Samara, with the active participation of
      G. M. and Z. P. Krzhizhanovsky, F. V. Lengnik, and others. The congress
      elected a Bureau and adopted the rules of the organisation, worked out
      tactical principles and defined the duties of the organisation’s
      members. “Your initiative,” wrote V. I. Lenin to the organisers of
      the congress, “has heartened us tremendously. Hurrah! That’s the
      right way! Reach out wider! And operate more independently, with greater
      initiative—you are the first to have begun in such a broad way that
      it means that the continuation, too, will be successful” (Lenin
      Miscellany VIII, p. 221).
    

      The Russian Iskra organisation played a prominent part in
      restoring actual unity in the R.S.D.L.P. With its members most active
      participation, an Organising Committee was formed in November 1902 to
      prepare and convene the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. The Russian
      Iskra organisation handed over its contacts and Iskra
      literature to the Organising Committee; it also placed at the Committee’s
      disposal Iskra supporters sent to work in Russia. At the same
      time the Russian Iskra organisation was not merged in the
      Organising Committee, but was preserved until the Second Congress of the
      R.S.D.L.P., chiefly for the purpose of influencing the Organising
      Committee, which included unstable and opportunist elements from among the
      Yuzhny Rabochy group (see Note 88) and members of the
      Bund.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Revolutionary Adventurism









Lenin: Revolutionary Adventurism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Revolutionary Adventurism




Published:
Iskra, No. 23, August 1, and No. 24, September 1, 1902.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 186-207.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    
I

      We are living in stormy times, when Russia’s history is marching on with
      seven-league strides, and every year sometimes signifies more than decades
      of tranquillity. Results of the half-century of the post-Reform period are
      being summed up, and the corner-stone is being laid for social and
      political edifices which will determine the fate of the entire country for
      many, many years to come. The revolutionary movement continues to grow
      with amazing rapidity—and “our trends” are ripening (and
      withering) uncommonly fast. Trends firmly rooted in the class system of
      such a rapidly developing capitalist country as Russia almost immediately
      reach their own level and feel their way to the classes they are related
      to. An example is the evolution of Mr. Struve, from whom the revolutionary
      workers proposed to “tear the mask” of a Marxist only one and
      a half years ago and who has now himself come forward without this mask as
      the leader (or servant?) of the liberal landlords, people who take pride
      in their earthiness and their sober judgement. On the other hand, trends
      expressing only the traditional instability of views held by the
      intermediate and indefinite sections of the intelligentsia try to
      substitute noisy declarations for rapprochement with definite
      classes, declarations which are all the noisier, the louder the thunder of
      events. “At least we make an infernal

      noise”[2]—such
      is the slogan of many revolutionarily minded individuals who have been
      caught up in the maelstrom of events and who have neither theoretical
      principles nor social roots.
    
 

      It is to these “noisy” trends that the
      “Socialist-Revolutionaries,” whose physiognomy is emerging more and
      more clearly, also belong. And it is high time for the proletariat to have
      a better look at this physiognomy, and form a clear idea of the real
      nature of these people, who seek the proletariat’s friendship all the more
      persistently, the more palpable it becomes to them that they cannot exist
      as a separate trend without close ties with the truly revolutionary class
      of society.
    

      Three circumstances have served most to disclose the true face of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. These are, first, the split between the
      revolutionary Social-Democrats and the opportunists, who are raising their
      heads under the banner of the “criticism of Marxism.” Secondly,
      Balmashov’s assassination of Sipyagin and the new swing towards terrorism
      in the sentiments of some revolutionaries. Thirdly and mainly, the latest
      movement among the peasantry, which has compelled such that are accustomed
      to sit between two stools and have no programme whatever to come out
      post factum with some semblance of a programme. We shall proceed
      to examine these three circumstances, with the reservation that in a
      newspaper article it is possible to give only a brief outline of the main
      points in the argument and that we shall in all likelihood return to the
      subject and expound it in greater detail in a magazine article, or in a

      pamphlet.[3]


      It was only in No. 2 of Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsti that the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries finally decided to come out with a theoretical
      statement of principle, in an unsigned editorial headed “The World
      Progress and Crisis of Socialism.” We strongly recommend this article to
      all who want to get a clear idea of utter unprincipledness and vacillation
      in matters of theory (as well as of the art of concealing this behind a
      spate of rhetoric). The entire content of this highly noteworthy article
      may be expressed in a few words. Socialism has grown into a world force,
      socialism (=Marxism) is now splitting as a result of the war of the
      revolutionaries (the “orthodox”) against the opportunists (the
      “critics”). We, Socialist-Revolutionaries, “of course”
      have never sympathised with opportunism, but we are over-joyed because of
      the “criticism” which has freed us from

    

      a dogma; we too are working for a revision of this dogma— and
      although we have as yet nothing at all to show by way of criticism (except
      bourgeois-opportunist criticism), although we have as yet revised
      absolutely nothing, it is nevertheless that freedom from theory which
      redounds to our credit. That redounds to our credit all the more because,
      as people free of theory, we stand firmly for general unity and vehemently
      condemn all theoretical disputes over principles. “A serious
      revolutionary organisation,” Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii (No. 2,
      p. 127) assures us in all seriousness, “would give up trying to
      settle disputed questions of social theory, which always lead to disunity,
      although this of course should not hinder theoreticians from seeking their
      solution”—or, more outspokenly: let the writers do the writing and
      the readers do the

      reading[4]
      and in the meantime, while they are busying themselves, we will rejoice at
      the blank left behind.
    

      There is no need, of course, to engage in a serious analysis of this
      theory of deviation from socialism (in the event of disputes proper). In
      our opinion, the crisis of socialism makes it incumbent upon any in the
      least serious socialists to devote redoubled attention to theory—to
      adopt more resolutely a strictly definite stand, to draw a sharper line of
      demarcation between themselves and wavering and unreliable elements. In
      the opinion of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, however, if such things as
      confusion and splits are possible “even among Germans,” then it is
      God’s will that we, Russians, should pride ourselves on our ignorance of
      whither we are drifting. In our opinion, the absence of theory deprives a
      revolutionary trend of the right to existence and inevitably condemns it,
      sooner or later, to political bankruptcy. In the opinion of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, however, the absence of theory is a most
      excellent thing, most favourable “for unity.”  As you see, we cannot
      reach agreement with them, for the fact of the matter is that we even
      speak different languages. There is one hope: perhaps they will be made to
      see reason by Mr. Struve, who also (only more seriously) speaks about the
      elimination of dogma and says that “our” business (as is the,
      business of any bourgeoisie that appeals to the proletariat) is not to
      disunite, but to unite. Will not the Socialist-Revolutionaries ever see,
      with the help of

    

      Mr. Struve, what is really signified by their stand of liberation
      from socialism for the purpose of unity, and unity on the occasion of
      liberation from socialism?
    

      Let us go over to the second point, the question of terrorism.
    

      In their defence of terrorism, which the experience of the Russian
      revolutionary movement has so clearly proved to be ineffective, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries are talking themselves blue in the face in
      asseverating that they recognise terrorism only in conjunction with work
      among the masses, and that therefore the arguments used by the Russian
      Social-Democrats to refute the efficacy of this method of struggle (and
      which have indeed been refuted for a long time to come) do not apply to
      them. Here something very similar to their attitude towards
      “criticism” is repeating itself. We are not opportunists, cry
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and at the same time they are shelving the
      dogma of proletarian socialism, for reason of sheer opportunist criticism
      and no other. We are not repeating the terrorists’ mistakes and are not
      diverting attention from work among the masses, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries assure us, and at the same time enthusiastically
      recommend to the Party acts such as Balmashov’s assassination of Sipyagin,
      although everyone knows and sees perfectly well that this act was in no
      way connected with the masses and, moreover, could not have been by reason
      of the very way in which it was carried out—that the persons who
      committed this terrorist act neither counted on nor hoped for any definite
      action or support on the part of the masses. In their naïveté,
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries do not realise that their predilection for
      terrorism is causally most intimately linked with the fact that, from the
      very outset, they have always kept, and still keep, aloof from the
      working-class movement, without even attempting to become a party of the
      revolutionary class which is waging its class struggle. Over-ardent
      protestations very often lead one to doubt and suspect the worth of
      whatever it is that requires such strong seasoning. Do not these
      protestations weary them?—I often think of these words, when I read
      assurances by the Socialist-Revolutionaries: “by terrorism we are
      not relegating work among the masses into the background."After all, these
      assurances come from the very people who have already

    

      drifted away from the Social-Democratic labour movement, which really
      rouses the masses; they come from people who are continuing to drift away
      from this movement, clutching at fragments of any kind of theory.
    

      The leaflet issued by the “Party of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries” on April 3,1902, may serve as a splendid
      illustration of what has been stated above. It is a most realistic source,
      one that is very close to the immediate leaders, a most authentic
      source. The “presentation of the question of terrorist
      struggle” in this leaflet “coincides in full” also
      “with the Party views,” according to the valuable testimony of
      Revolutsionnaya Rossiya (No. 7,
p. 24).[1]


      The April 3 leaflet follows the pattern of the terror ists’
      “latest” arguments with remarkable accuracy. The first thing
      that strikes the eye is the words: “we advocate terrorism, not in
      place of work among the masses, but precisely for and simultaneously with
      that work.” They strike the eye particularly because these words are
      printed in letters three times as large as the rest of the text (a device
      that is of course repeated by Revolutsionnaya Rossiya). It is all
      really so simple! One has only to set “not in place of, but together
      with” in bold type—and all the arguments of the
      Social-Democrats, all that history has taught, will fall to the
      ground. But just read the whole leaflet and you will see that the
      protestation in bold type takes the name of the masses in vain. The day
      “when the working people will emerge from the shadows” and
      “the mighty popular wave will shatter the iron gates to
      smithereens”—“alas!” (literally, “alas!”) “is
      still a long way off, and it is frightful

    

      to think of the future toll of victims!” Do not these words “alas,
      still a long way off” reflect an utter failure to under stand the
      mass movement and a lack of faith in it? Is not this argument meant as a
      deliberate sneer at the fact that the working people are already beginning
      to rise? And, finally, even if this trite argument were just as
      well-founded as it is actually stuff and nonsense, what would emerge from
      it in particularly bold relief would be the inefficacy of terrorism, for
      without the working people all bombs are power less, patently
      powerless.
    

      Just listen to what follows: “Every terrorist blow, as it were,
      takes away part of the strength of the autocracy and transfers [!] all
      this strength [!] to the side of the fighters for freedom.” “And if
      terrorism is practised systematically [!], it is obvious that the scales
      of the balance will finally weigh down on our side.” Yes, indeed, it is
      obvious to all that we have here in its grossest form one of the greatest
      prejudices of the terrorists: political assassination of itself
      “transfers strength”! Thus, on the one hand you have the theory of
      the transference of strength, and on the other— “not in place
      of, but together with”.... Do not these protestations weary them?
    

      But this is just the beginning. The real thing is yet to come. “Whom
      are we to strike down?” asks the party of the Socialist-Revolutionaries,
      and replies: the ministers, and not the tsar, for “the tsar will not
      allow matters to go to extremes” (!! How did they find that out??),
      and besides “it is also easier” (this is literally what they
      say!): “No minister can ensconce himself in a palace as in a
      fortress.” And this argument concludes with the following piece of
      reasoning, which deserves to be immortalised as a model of the
      “theory” of the Socialist-Revolutionaries. “Against the
      crowd the autocracy has its soldiers; against the revolutionary
      organisations its secret and uniformed police; but what will save it...”
      (what kind of “it” is this? The autocracy? The author has
      unwittingly identified the autocracy with a target in the person of a
      minister whom it is easier to strike down!) "... from individuals or
      small groups that are ceaselessly, and even in ignorance of one another
      [!!], preparing for attack, and are attacking? No force will be of avail
      against elusiveness. Hence, our task is clear: to remove every

    

      one of the autocracy’s brutal oppressors by the only means that has been
      left [!] us by the autocracy–death." No matter how many reams of paper
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries may fill with assurances that they are not
      relegating work among the masses into the background or disorganising it
      by their advocacy of terrorism—their spate of words cannot disprove
      the fact that the actual psychology of the modern terrorist is faithfully
      conveyed in the leaflet we have quoted. The theory of the transference of
      strength finds its natural complement in the theory of elusiveness, a
      theory which turns upside down, not only all past experience, but all
      common sense as well. That the only “hope” of the revolution
      is the “crowd”; that only a revolutionary organisation which
      leads this crowd (in deed and not in word) can fight against the
      police—all this is ABC. It is shameful to have to prove this. And
      only people who have forgotten everything and learned absolutely nothing
      could have decided “the other way about,” arriving at the fabulous,
      howling stupidity that the autocracy can be “saved” from the
      crowd by soldiers, and from the revolutionary organisations by the police,
      but that there is no salvation from individuals who hunt down
      ministers!!
    

      This fabulous argument, which we are convinced is destined to become
      notorious, is by no means simply a curiosity. No, it is instructive
      because, through a sweeping reduction to an absurdity, it reveals the
      principal mistake of the terrorists, which they share with the
      “economists” (perhaps one might already say, with the former
      representatives of deceased “economism”?). This mistake, as we have
      already pointed out on numerous occasions, consists in the failure to
      understand the basic defect of our movement. Because of the extremely
      rapid growth of the movement, the leaders lagged behind the masses, the
      revolutionary organisations did not come up to the level of the
      revolutionary activity of the proletariat, were incapable of marching on
      in front and leading the masses. That a discrepancy of this sort exists
      cannot be doubted by any conscientious person who has even the slightest
      acquaintance with the movement. And if that is so, it is evident that the
      present-day terrorists are really “economists” turned inside
      out, going to the equally foolish but opposite extreme. At a time when the
      revolutionaries are short of the forces and means to lead the
      masses,

    

      who are already rising, an appeal to resort to such terrorist acts as the
      organisation of attempts on the lives of ministers by individuals and
      groups that are not known to one another means, not only thereby
      breaking off work among the masses, but also introducing downright
      disorganisation into that work.
    

      We, revolutionaries, “are accustomed to huddling together in timid
      knots,” we read in the April 3 leaflet, “and even [N. B.] the new,
      bold spirit that has appeared during the last two or three years has so
      far done more to raise the sentiments of the crowd than of individuals.”
      These words unintentionally express much that is true. And it is this very
      truth that deals a smashing rebuff to the propagandists of terrorism. From
      this truth every thinking socialist draws the conclusion that it is
      necessary to use group action more energetically, boldly, and
      harmoniously. The Socialist-Revolutionaries, however, conclude:
      “Shoot, elusive individual, for the knot of people, alas, is still a
      long way off, and besides there are soldiers against the knot.”  This
      really defies all reason, gentlemen!
    

      Nor does the leaflet eschew the theory of excitative
      terrorism. “Each time a hero engages in single combat, this arouses
      in us all a spirit of struggle and courage,” we are told. But we know from
      the past and see in the present that only new forms of the mass
      movement or the awakening of new sections of the masses to independent
      struggle really rouses a spirit of struggle and courage in
      all. Single combat however, inasmuch as it remains single
      combat waged by the Balmashovs, has the immediate effect of simply
      creating a short-lived sensation, while indirectly it even leads to apathy
      and passive waiting for the next bout. We are further assured
      that “every flash of terrorism lights up the mind,” which,
      unfortunately, we have not noticed to be the case with the
      terrorism-preaching party of the Socialist-Revolutionaries. We are
      presented with the theory of big work and petty work. “Let not those
      who have greater strength, greater opportunities and resolution rest
      content with petty [!] work; let them find and devote themselves to a big
      cause—the propaganda of terrorism among the

      masses [!l, 

      the preparation of the intricate... [the theory of elusiveness is already
      forgotten!]... terrorist

    

      ventures." How amazingly clever this is in all truth: to sacrifice the
      Life of a revolutionary for the sake of wreaking vengeance on the
      scoundrel Sipyagin, who is then replaced by the scoundrel
      Plehve—that is big work. But to prepare, for instance, the
      masses for an armed demonstration—that is petty work. This very
      point is explained in No. 8 of Revolutsionnaya Rossiya, which
      declares that “it is easy to write and speak” of armed
      demonstrations “as a matter of the vague and distant future,”
      “but up till now all this talk has been merely of a theoretical
      nature.” How well we know this Language of people who are free of the
      constraint of firm socialist convictions, of the burdensome experience of
      each and every kind of popular movement! They confuse immediately tangible
      and sensational results with practicalness. To them the demand to adhere
      steadfastly to the class standpoint and to maintain the mass nature of the
      movement is “vague” “theorising.” In their eyes
      definitiveness is slavish compliance with every turn of sentiment and
      ... and, by reason of this compliance, inevitable helplessness at each
      turn. Demonstrations begin— and blood thirsty words, talk about the
      beginning of the end, flow from the lips of such people. The
      demonstrations halt— their hands drop helplessly, and before they
      have had time to wear out a pair of boots they are already shouting:
      “The people, alas, are still a long way off....” Some new outrage is
      perpetrated by the tsar’s henchmen—and they demand to be shown a
      “definite” measure that would serve as an exhaustive
      reply to that particular outrage, a measure that would bring
      about an immediate “transference of strength,” and they proudly
      promise this transference! These people do not understand that this very
      promise to “transfer” strength constitutes political
      adventurism, and that their adventurism stems from their lack of
      principle.
    

      The Social-Democrats will always warn against adventurism and ruthlessly
      expose illusions which inevitably end in complete disappointment. We must
      bear in mind that a revolutionary party is worthy of its name only when it
      quides [sic.] in deed the movement of a revolutionary class. We
      must bear in mind that any popular movement assumes an infinite variety of
      forms, is constantly developing new forms and discarding the old, and
      effecting modifications or new

    

      combinations of old and new forms. It is our duty to participate actively
      in this process of working out means and methods of struggle. When the
      students’ movement became sharper, we began to call on the workers to come
      to the aid of the students (Iskra, No.

      2[See present edition, Vol. 4,
pp. 414-19.—Ed.])

      without taking it upon our selves to forecast the forms of the
      demonstrations, without promising that they would result in an immediate
      transference of strength, in lighting up the mind, or a special
      elusiveness. When the demonstrations became consolidated, we began to call
      for their organisation and for the arming of the masses, and put forward
      the task of preparing a popular uprising. Without in the least denying
      violence and terrorism in principle, we demanded work for the preparation
      of such forms of violence as were calculated to bring about the direct
      participation of the masses and which guaranteed that participation. We do
      not close our eyes to the difficulties of this task, but will work at it
      steadfastly and persistently, undeterred by the objections that this is a
      matter of the “vague and distant future.” Yes, gentlemen, we stand
      for future and not only past forms of the movement. We give preference to
      long and arduous work on what promises a future rather than to an
      “easy” repetition of what has been condemned by the past. We shall
      always expose people who in word war against hackneyed dogmas and in
      practice hold exclusively to such moth-eaten and harmful commonplaces as
      the theory of the transference of strength, the difference between big
      work and petty work and, of course, the theory of single
      combat. “Just as in the days of yore the peoples’ battles were
      fought out by their leaders in single combat, so now the terrorists will
      win Russia’s freedom in single combat with the autocracy,” the April 3
      leaflet concludes. The mere reprinting of such sentences provides their
      refutation.
    

      Anyone who really carries on his revolutionary work in conjunction with
      the class struggle of the proletariat very well knows, sees and feels what
      vast numbers of immediate and direct demands of the proletariat (and of
      the sections of the people capable of supporting the latter) remain
      unsatisfied. He knows that in very many places, throughout vast areas, the
      working people are literally

    

      straining to go into action, and that their ardour runs to waste because
      of the scarcity of literature and leadership, the lack of forces and means
      in the revolutionary organisations. And we find ourselves—we see
      that we find our selves—in the same old vicious circle that has so
      long hemmed in the Russian revolution like an omen of evil. On the one
      hand, the revolutionary ardour of the insufficiently enlightened and
      unorganised crowd runs to waste. On the other hand, shots fired by the
      “elusive individuals” who are losing faith in the possibility
      of marching in formation and working hand in hand with the masses also end
      in smoke.
    

      But things can still be put to rights, comrades! Loss of faith in a real
      cause is the rare exception rather than the rule. The urge to commit
      terrorist acts is a passing mood. Then let the Social-Democrats close
      their ranks, and we shall fuse the militant organisation of
      revolutionaries and the mass heroism of the Russian proletariat into a
      single whole!
    

      In the next article we shall deal with the agrarian programme of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries.
    

II

      The Socialist-Revolutionaries’ attitude to the peasant movement is of
      particular interest. It is precisely in the agrarian question that
      representatives of the old Russian socialism, their liberal-Narodnik
      descendants, and also adherents of opportunist criticism who are so
      numerous in Russia and so vociferously pass assurances that on this score
      Marxism has already been conclusively disproved by the “critics,”
      have always considered themselves especially strong. Our
      Socialist-Revolutionaries too are tearing Marxism to shreds, so to speak:
      “dogmatic prejudices... outlived dogmas long since refuted by life
      ... the revolutionary intelligentsia has shut its eyes to the countryside,
      revolutionary work among the peasantry was forbidden by orthodoxy,” and
      much else in this vein. It is the current fashion to kick out at
      orthodoxy. But to what subspecies must one relegate those of the kickers
      who did not even manage to draw up an outline for an
      agrarian programme of their own before
    

      the commencement of the peasant movement? When Iskra
      sketched its agrarian programme as early as in No.

      3,[See present edition, Vol. 4,
pp. 420-28.—Ed.]

      Vestnik Russkoi
      Revolutsii could only mutter: “Given such a presentation of the
      question, still another of our differences is fading away”—what
      happened here is that the editors of Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii
      had the mishap of utterly failing to understand Iskra’s
      presentation of the question (the “introduction of the class
      struggle into the country side”). Revolutsionnaya Rossiya now
      belatedly refers to the pamphlet entitled The Next Question,
      although it contains no programme whatever, but only panegyrics on such
      “celebrated” opportunists as Hertz.
    

      And now these same people—who before the commencement of the
      movement were in agreement both with Iskra and with
      Hertz—come out, on the day following the peasant uprising, with a
      manifesto “from the peasant league [!] of the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party,” a manifesto in which you will not find a
      single syllable really emanating from the peasantry, but only a literal
      repetition of what you have read hundreds of times in the writings of the
      Narodniks, the liberals, and the “critics.” ... It is said that
      courage can move mountains. That is so, Messrs. the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, but it is not to such courage that your garish
      advertisement testifies.
    

      We have seen that the Socialist-Revolutionaries’ greatest
      “advantage” lies in their freedom from theory; their greatest
      skill consists in their ability to speak without saying anything. But in
      order to present a programme, one must nevertheless say something. It is
      necessary, for instance, to throw overboard the “dogma of the
      Russian Social-Democrats of the late eighties and early nineties to the
      effect that there is no revolutionary force save the urban proletariat.”
      What a handy little word “dogma” is! One need only slightly
      twist an opposing theory, cover up this twist with the bogy of
      “dogma”—and there you are!
    

      Beginning with the Communist Manifesto, all modern socialism
      rests on the indisputable truth that the proletariat alone is a
      really revolutionary class in capitalist society. The other
      classes may and do become revolutionary only in

    

      part and only under certain conditions. What, then, must one think of
      people who have “transformed” this truth into a dogma of the
      Russian Social-Democrats of a definite period and who try to convince the
      naive reader that this dogma was “based entirely on the belief that
      open political struggle lay far in the future”?
    

      To counter Marx’s doctrine that there is only one really revolutionary
      class in modern society, the Socialist-Revolutionaries advance the
      trinity: “the intelligentsia, the proletariat, and the peasantry,”
      thereby revealing a hope less confusion of concepts. If one sets the
      intelligentsia against the proletariat and the peasantry it means that one
      considers the former a definite social stratum, a group of per sons
      occupying just as definite a social position as is occupied by the
      wage-workers and the peasants. But as such a stratum the Russian
      intelligentsia is precisely a bourgeois and petty-bourgeois
      intelligentsia. With regard to this stratum, Mr. Struve is quite right in
      calling his paper the mouthpiece of the Russian intelligentsia. However,
      if one is referring to those intellectuals who have not yet taken
      any definite social stand, or have already been thrown off their
      normal stand by the facts of life, and are passing over to the side of the
      proletariat, then it is altogether absurd to contrapose this
      intelligentsia to the proletariat. Like any other class in modern society,
      the proletariat is not only advancing intellectuals from its own midst,
      but also accepts into its ranks supporters from the midst of all and
      sundry educated people. The campaign of the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      against the basic “dogma” of Marxism is merely additional
      proof that the entire strength of this party is represented by the handful
      of Russian intellectuals who have broken away from the old, but have not
      yet adhered to the new.
    

      The Socialist-Revolutionaries’ views on the peasantry are even more
      muddled. To take just the posing of the question: “What social
      classes in general [!]

      always 1!! 

      cling to the existing...

      Ithe 

      autocratic only? or bourgeois in general?]... order, guard it and do not
      yield to revolutionisation?" As a matter of fact, this question can be
      answered only by another question: what elements of the intelligentsia in
      general always cling to the existing chaos of ideas,

    

      guard it and do not yield to a definite socialist world out look? But the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries want to give a serious answer to an
      insignificant question. To “these” classes they refer, first,
      the bourgeoisie, since its “interests have been satisfied.” This old
      prejudice that the interests of the Russian bourgeoisie have already been
      satisfied to such a degree that we neither have nor can have bourgeois
      democracy in our country (cf. Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii, No. 2,
      pp. 132-33) is now shared by the “economists” and the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. Again, won’t Mr. Struve teach them some common
      sense?
    

      Secondly, the Socialist-Revolutionaries include among these classes the
      “petty-bourgeois strata” “whose interests are
      individualistic, undefined as class interests, and do not lend themselves
      to formulation in a reformative or revolutionary socio-political
      programme.” Whence this has come, the Lord alone knows. It is common
      knowledge that the petty bourgeoisie does not always and in general guard
      the existing order, but on the contrary often takes revolutionary action
      even against the bourgeoisie (specifically, when it joins the proletariat)
      and very often against absolutism, and that it almost always formulates
      programmes of social reform. Our author has simply come out with a
      “noisier” declaration against the petty bourgeoisie, in
      accordance with the “practical rule,” which Turgenev expressed
      through an “old fox” in one of his “Poems in
      Prose”: “Cry out most loudly against those vices you yourself
      feel guilty

      of.”[5]
      And so, since the Socialist-Revolutionaries feel that the only
      social basis of their position between two stools can be perhaps provided
      only by certain petty-bourgeois sections of the intelligentsia, they
      therefore write about the petty bourgeoisie as if this term does
      not signify a social category, but is simply a polemical turn of
      speech. They likewise want to evade the unpleasant fact of their failure
      to understand that the peasantry of today belongs, as a whole, to the
      “petty-bourgeois strata.” Won’t you try to give us an answer on this
      score, Messrs. the Socialist-Revolutionaries? Won’t you tell us why it is
      that, while repeating snatches of the theory of Russian Marxism (for
      example, about the progressive significance of peasant outside employment
      and tramping), you turn a blind eye to the fact that this same Marxism has

    

      revealed the petty-bourgeois make-up of Russian peasant economy? Won’t you
      explain to us how it is possible in con temporary society for
      “proprietors or semi-proprietors” not to belong to the
      petty-bourgeois strata?
    

      No, harbour no hopes! The Socialist-Revolutionaries will not reply; they
      will not say or explain anything bearing upon the matter, for they (again
      like the “economists”) have thoroughly learned the tactic of
      pleading ignorance when it comes to theory. Revolutsionnaya
      Rossiya looks meaningly towards Vestnik Russkoi
      Revolutsit—that is their job, they say (cf. No. 4, reply to
      Zarya), while Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii informs its
      readers of the exploits of the opportunist critics and keeps on
      threatening to make its criticism ever sharper. That is hardly enough,
      gentlemen!
    

      The Socialist-Revolutionaries have kept themselves pure of the baneful
      influence of modern socialist doctrines. They have fully preserved the
      good old methods of vulgar socialism. We are confronted by a new
      historical fact, a new movement among a certain section of the
      people. They do not examine the condition of this section or set
      themselves the aim of explaining its movement by the nature of that
      section and its relation to the developing economic structure of society
      as a whole. To them, all this is an empty dogma, outlived orthodoxy. They
      do things more simply: what is it that the representatives of the rising
      section themselves are speaking about? Land, additional allotments,
      redistribution of the land. There it is in a nutshell. You have a
      “semi-socialist programme,” “a thoroughly correct principle,”
      “a bright idea,” “an ideal which already lives in the
      peasant’s mind in embryo form,” etc. All that is necessary is to
      “brush up and elaborate this ideal,” bring out the “pure idea
      of socialism.” You find this hard to believe, reader? It seems incredible
      to you that this Narodnik junk should again be dragged into the light of
      day by people who so glibly repeat whatever the latest book may tell them?
      And yet this is a fact, and all the words we have quoted are in the
      declaration “from the peasant league” published in No. 8 of
      Revolutstonnaya Rossiya.
    

      The Socialist-Revolutionaries accuse Iskra of having prematurely
      tolled the knell of the peasant movement by describing it as the last
      peasant revolt. The peasantry,

    

      they inform us, can participate in the socialist movement of the
      proletariat as well. This accusation testifies to the confusion of thought
      among the Socialist-Revolutionaries. They have not even grasped that the
      democratic movement against the remnants of serf-ownership is one thing,
      and the socialist movement against the bourgeoisie is quite another. Since
      they have failed to understand the peasant movement itself, they have
      likewise been unable to under stand that the words in Iskra,
      which frightened them so, refer only to the former movement. Not only has
      Iskra stated in its programme that the small producers (including
      the peasants), who are being ruined, can and should participate in the
      socialist movement of the proletariat, but it has also defined the exact
      conditions for this participation. The peasant movement of today, however,
      is not at all a socialist movement directed against the bourgeoisie and
      capitalism. On the contrary, it unites the bourgeois and the proletarian
      elements in the peasantry, which are really one in the struggle against
      the remnants of the serf-owning system. The peasant movement of today is
      leading—and will lead—to the establishment, not of a socialist
      or a semi-socialist way of life in the countryside, but of a bourgeois way
      of life, and will clear away the feudal debris cluttering up the bourgeois
      foundations that have already arisen in our countryside.
    

      But all this is a sealed book to the Socialist-Revolutionaries. They even
      assure Iskra in all seriousness that to clear the way for the
      development of capitalism is an empty dogma, since the
      “reforms” (of the sixties) “did

      clear 1!] 

      full [!! I 

      space for the development of capitalism.” That is what can be written by a
      glib person who lets a facile pen run away with him and who imagines that
      the “peasant league” can get away with anything: the peasant
      won’t see through it! But kindly reflect for a moment, my dear author:
      have you never heard that remnants of the serf-owning system retard the
      development of capitalism? Don’t you think that this is even all but
      tautological? And haven’t you read somewhere about the remnants of
      serf-ownership in the present-day Russian countryside?
    

Iskra says that the impending revolution will be a bourgeois
      revolution. The Socialist-Revolutionaries object:

    

      it will be “primarily a political revolution and to a certain extent
      a democratic revolution.” Won’t the authors of this pretty objection try
      to explain this to us— does history know of any bourgeois
      revolution, or is such a bourgeois revolution conceivable, that is not
      “to a certain extent a democratic revolution”? Why, even the
      programme of the Socialist-Revolutionaries themselves (equalitarian tenure
      of land that has become social property) does not go beyond the limits of
      a bourgeois programme, since the preservation of commodity production and
      toleration of private farming, even if it is conducted on common land, in
      no way eliminates capitalist relationships in agriculture.
    

      The greater the levity with which the Socialist-Revolutionaries approach
      the most elementary truths of modern socialism, the more easily do they
      invent “most elementary deductions,” even taking pride in the fact
      that their “programme reduces itself” to such. Let us then
      examine all three of their deductions, which most probably will long
      remain a monument to the keen wit and profound socialist convictions of
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries.
    

      Deduction No. 1: “A large portion of the territory of Russia now
      already belongs to the state—what we need is that all the territory
      should belong to the people.” Our teeth are “now already” on
      edge from the touching references to state ownership of land in Russia
      contained in the writings of the police Narodniks (à la
      Sazonov, etc.) and the various

      Katheder-reformers.[6]
      “What we need” is that people who style themselves socialists
      and even revolutionaries should trail in the rear of these
      gentlemen. “What we need” is that socialists should lay stress
      on the alleged omnipotence of the “state” (forgetting even
      that a large share of the state land is concentrated in the uninhabited
      marginal regions of the country), and not on the class antagonism between
      the semi-serf peasantry and the privileged handful of big landowners, who
      own most of the best cultivated land and with whom the “state”
      has always been on the best of terms. Our Socialist-Revolutionaries, who
      imagine that they are deducing a pure idea of socialism, are in actual
      fact sullying this idea by their uncritical attitude towards the old
      Narodism.
    
 

      Deduction No. 2: “The land is now already passing from capital to
      labour—what we need is that this process be completed by the state.”
      The deeper you go into the forest, the thicker the

      trees.[A Russian saying.—Ed.]

      Let us take another step towards police Narodism; let us call on the
      (class!) “state” to extend peasant landownership in
      general. This is remarkably socialistic and amazingly revolutionary. But
      what can one expect of people who call the purchase and lease of land by
      the peasants a transfer “from capital to labour” and not
      transfer of land from the feudal-minded landlords to the rural
      bourgeoisie. Let us remind these people at least of the statistics on the
      actual distribution of the land that is “passing to labour”:
      between six- and nine-tenths of all peas ant-purchased land, and from
      five- to eight-tenths of all leased land are concentrated in the hands of
      one-filth of the peasant households, i.e., in the hands of a
      small minority of well-to-do peasants. From this one can judge whether
      there is much truth in the Socialist-Revolutionaries’ words when they
      assert “we do not at all count” on the well-to-do peasants but
      only on the “labouring sections exclusively.”
    

      Deduction No. 3: “The peasant already has land, and in most cases on
      the basis of equalitarian land distribution—what we need is that
      this labour tenure should be carried through to the end ... and culminate
      in collective agricultural production through the development of
      co-operatives of every kind.” Scratch a Socialist-Revolutionary and you
      find Mr.
V. V.![7]
      When it came to action, all the old prejudices of Narodism, which had
      safely preserved themselves behind shifty phrasing, crept to the surface
      at once. State ownership of the land—the completion by the state of
      the transference of the land to the peasantry—the village
      commune—co-operatives—collectivism— in this magnificent
      scheme of Messrs. Sazonov, Yuzov,

      N.—on,[8]
      the Socialist Revolutionaries, Hofstetter, Totomiants, and so on, and so
      forth—in this scheme a mere trifle is lacking. It takes account
      neither of developing capitalism, nor of the class struggle. But then how
      could this trifle enter the minds of people whose entire ideological
      luggage consists of Narodnik rags and smart patches of fashionable

    

      criticism? Did not Mr. Bulgakov himself say that there is no
      place for the class struggle in the countryside? Will the replacement of
      the class struggle by “co-operatives of every kind” fail to
      satisfy both the liberals and the “critics,” and in general all
      those to whom socialism is no more than a traditional label? And is it not
      possible to try to soothe

      naive 

      people with the assurance: “Of course, any idealisation of the
      village commune is alien to us,” although right next to this assurance you
      read some colossal bombast about the “colossal organisation of the
      mir peasants,” then bombast that “in certain respects no
      other class in Russia is so impelled towards a

      purely
      III 

      political struggle as the peasantry,” that peasant self-determination
      (!) is far broader in scope and in competence than that of the
      Zemstvo, that this combination of “broad” ... (up to the very
      boundary of the village?) ... “independent activity” with an
      absence of the “most elementary civic rights” “seems to
      have been deliberately designed for the purpose of ... rousing and

      exercising H] 

      political instincts and habits of social struggle.” If you don’t like all
      this, you don’t have to listen, but....
    

      “One has to be blind not to see how much easier it is to pass to the
      idea of socialising the land from the traditions of communal land tenure.”
      Is it not the other way round, gentlemen? Are not those people hopelessly
      deaf and blind who to this very day do not know that it is precisely the
      medieval seclusion of the semi-serf commune, which splits the peasantry
      into tiny unions and binds the rural proletariat hand and foot, that
      maintains the traditions of stagnation, oppression, and barbarism? Are you
      not defeating your own purpose by recognising the usefulness of outside
      employment, which has already destroyed by three-quarters the much-vaunted
      traditions of equalitarian land tenure in the commune, and reduced these
      traditions to meddling by the police?
    

      The minimum programme of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, based as it is on
      the theory we have just analysed, is a real curiosity. This
      “programme” includes two items:

      1) “socialisation of the land, i.e., its conversion into the
      property of the whole of society, to be used by the working people”;

      2) “the development among the peasantry of all possible types of
      public associations and economic co-operatives...

    

      [for a “purely” political struggle?].. .for the gradual
      emancipation of the peasantry from the sway of money capital ... [and
      subjugation to industrial?] ... and for the preparation of collective
      agricultural production of the future." Just as the sun is reflected in a
      drop of water, so is the entire spirit of the present-day
      “Social-Revolutionarism” reflected in these two items. In
      theory, revolutionary phrase mongering instead of a considered and
      integral system of views; in practice—helpless snatching at this or
      that modish petty expedient instead of participation in the class
      struggle—that is all they have to show. We must admit that it has
      required rare civic courage to place socialisation of the land
      alongside of co-operation in a minimum programme. Their
      minimum programme: Babeuf, on the one hand, and Mr. Levitsky, on the

      other.[9]
      This is inimitable.
    

      If it were possible to take this programme seriously, we should have to
      say that, in deceiving themselves with grandiloquent words, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries are also deceiving the peasants. It is deception
      to assert that “co-operatives of every kind” play a
      revolutionary role in present-day society and prepare the way for
      collectivism rather than strengthen the rural bourgeoisie. It is deception
      to assert that socialisation of the land can be placed before the
      “peasantry” as a “minimum,” as something just
      as close at hand as the establishment of co-operatives. Any socialist
      could explain to our Socialist-Revolutionaries that today the abolition of
      private ownership of land can only be the immediate prelude to its
      abolition in general; that the mere transfer of the land “to be used
      by the working people” would still not satisfy the proletariat,
      since millions and tens of millions of ruined peasants are no longer able
      to work the land, even if they had it. And to supply these ruined millions
      with implements, cattle, etc., would amount to the socialisation of all
      the means of production and would require a socialist revolution of the
      proletariat and not a peasant movement against the remnants of the serf
      owning system. The Socialist-Revolutionaries are confusing socialisation
      of the land with bourgeois nationalisation of the land. Speaking in the
      abstract, the latter is conceivable on the basis of capitalism too,
      without abolishing wage labour. But the very example of these same
      Socialist-Revolutionaries

    

      is vivid confirmation of the truth that to advance the demand for
      nationalisation of the land in a police state is tantamount to obscuring
      the only revolutionary principle, that of the class struggle, and bringing
      grist to the mill of every kind of bureaucracy.
    

      Not only that. The Socialist-Revolutionaries descend to outright reaction
      when they rise up against the demand of our draft programme for the
      “annulment of all laws restricting the peasant in the free disposal
      of his land.” For the sake of the Narodnik prejudice about the
      “commune principle” and the “equalitarian
      principle” they deny to the peasant such a “most elementary
      civic right” as the right freely to dispose of his land; they
      complacently shut their eyes to the fact that the village commune of today
      is hemmed in by its social-estate reality; they become champions of the
      police interdictions established and supported by the “state”
      ... of the rural superintendents! We believe that not only Mr. Levitsky
      but Mr.

      Pobedonostsev[10]
      too will not be very much alarmed over the demand for socialisation of the
      land for the purpose of establishing equalitarian land tenure, once this
      demand is put forth as a minimum demand alongside of which such things
      figure as co-operatives and the defence of the police system of keeping
      the muzhik tied down to the official allotment which supports him.
    

      Let the agrarian programme of the Socialist-Revolutionaries serve as a
      lesson and a warning to all socialists, a glaring example of what results
      from an absence of ideology and principles, which some unthinking people
      call freedom from dogma. When it came to action, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries did not reveal even a single of the three
      conditions essential for the elaboration of a consistent socialist
      programme: a clear idea of the ultimate aim; a correct understanding of
      the path leading to that aim; an accurate conception of the true state of
      affairs at the given moment or of the immediate tasks of that moment. They
      simply obscured the ultimate aim of socialism by con fusing socialisation
      of the land with bourgeois nationalisation and by confusing the primitive
      peasant idea about small-scale equalitarian land tenure with the doctrine
      of modern socialism on the conversion of all means of production

    

      into public property and the organisation of socialist production. Their
      conception of the path leading to socialism is peerlessly characterised by
      their substitution of the development of co-operatives for the class
      struggle. In their estimation of the present stage in the agrarian
      evolution of Russia, they have forgotten a trifle: the remnants of
      serf-ownership, which weigh so heavily on our country side. The famous
      trinity which reflects their theoretical views—the intelligentsia,
      the proletariat, and the peasantry—has its complement in the no less
      famous three-point “programme”—socialisation of the land,
      co-operatives, and attachment to the allotment.
    

      Compare this with Iskra’s programme, which indicates to the
      entire militant proletariat one ultimate aim, with out reducing it to a
      “minimum,” without debasing it so as to adapt it to the ideas of
      certain backward sections of the proletariat or of the small
      producers. The road leading to this aim is the same in town and
      countryside—the class struggle of the proletariat against the
      bourgeoisie. But besides this class struggle, another struggle is going on
      in our countryside: the struggle of the entire peasantry against the
      remnants of serf-ownership. And in this struggle the party of the
      proletariat promises its support to the entire peasantry and
      strives to provide its revolutionary ardour with a real objective, and
      guide its uprising against its real enemy, considering it dishonest and
      unworthy to treat the muzhik as though he were under tutelage or to
      conceal from him the fact that at present and immediately he can achieve
      only the complete eradication of all traces and remnants of the
      serf-owning system, and only clear the way for the broader and more
      difficult struggle of the entire proletariat against the whole of
      bourgeois society.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      True, Revolzststonnaya Rossiya does some juggling with this point
      also. On the one hand—“coincides in full,” on the other—a hint
      about “exaggerations.” On the one hand, Revolntsionnaya
      Rossiya declares that this leaflet comes from only “one
      group” of Socialist-Revolutionaries. On the other hand, it is a
      fact that the leaflet bears the imprint: “Published by the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party.” Moreover, it carries the motto
      of. this same Revolutsionnaya Rosaiga (“By struggle you will
      achieve your rights”). We appreciate that Revolutsionnaya Rossiya
      finds it disagreeable to touch on this ticklish point, but we believe that
      it is simply unseemly to play at hide-and-seek in such cases. The
      existence of “economism” was just as disagreeable to
      revolutionary Social-Democracy, but the latter exposed it openly, without
      ever making the slightest attempt to mislead anyone.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

“At least we make an infernal noise.” Words spoken by
      Repetilov, a character in Griboyedov’s well-known comedy, Wit Works
      Woe, Act IV, Scene 4.
    



[3]

      V. I. Lenin’s intention “to return in a magazine article, or in a
      pamphlet” to a more detailed exposition of the arguments against the
      programmatic views and tactics of the Socialist-Revolutionaries remained
      unfulfilled. The following is the preliminary material for the intended
      pamphlet: “Extract from an Article Against the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries” (December 1902) (see pp. 287-88 of this
      volume), “Outline of a Pamphlet Against the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries” (spring 1903) (see Proletarskaya
      Revolutsia, 1939, No. 1, pp. 22-28), and “Outline of an Article
      Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries” (first half of July 1903)
      (see pp. 464-65 of this volume).
    



[4]

“Let the writers do the writing and the readers do the
reading”—a sentence from M. Y. Saltykov-Shchedrin’s
Miscellaneous Letters,  Letter One.
    



[5]

      The reference is to one of Turgenev’s Poems in Prose—“A
      Rule of Life” (see I. S. Turgenev, Collected Works,
      Russ. ed., Vol. 8, 1956, p. 464).
    



[6]

Katheder-reformers, Katheder-Socialists—representatives of
      a trend in bourgeois political economy, which arose in Germany in the
      seventies and eighties of the nineteenth century. Under the guise of
      socialism the Katheder-Socialists advocated from the university chairs
      (Katheder in German) bourgeois-liberal
      reformism. Katheder-Socialism was motivated by the exploiting classes’
      fear of the spread of Marxism and the growth of the working-class
      movement, and also by the efforts of bourgeois ideologists to find fresh
      means of keeping the working people in subjugation.
    

      Representatives of Katheder-Socialism (Adolf Wagner, Gustav Schmoller,
      Lorenz Brentano, Werner Sombart, and others) asserted that the bourgeois
      state stands above classes and is capable of reconciling the hostile
      classes and of gradually introducing “socialism,” without affecting
      the interests of the capitalists and, as far as possible, with due account
      of the working people’s demands. They proposed giving police regulation of
      wage-labour the force of law and reviving the medieval guilds. Marx,
      Engels and Lenin exposed the reactionary nature of Ketheder-Socialism,
      which in Russia was spread by the “legal Marxists.”
    



[7]

V. V. (pseudonym of V. P. Vorontsov)—one of the ideologists
      of liberal Narodism in the eighties and nineties of the nineteenth
      century.
    



[8]

N.—on or Nikolai—on (pseudonym of
      N. F. Danielson)—one of the ideologists of liberal Narodism in the
      eighties and nineties of the nineteenth century.
    



[9]

Babeuf (1760-1797)—revolutionary Communist and leader of
      the French bourgeois revolution at the end of the eighteenth century. He
      organised a secret society, which in 1796 tried to over throw the power of
      the exploiting classes.
    

Levitsky—liberal Narodnik, founder of agricultural artels in
      Kherson Gubernia in the nineties of the nineteenth century.
    



[10]

Pobedonostsev—reactionary tsarist statesman,
      Procurator-General of the Synod, actually head of the government and chief
      inspirer of the savage feudal reaction under Alexander III. He continued
      to play a prominent part under Nicholas II.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to the Moscow Committee









Lenin: A Letter to the Moscow Committee







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to the Moscow Committee




Written: Written on August 11 (24), 1902 

Published:

      First Published in 1922 in P. N. Lepshinsky’s book At the Turning-Point.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 208-210.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      Dear Comrades,
    

      We have received your letter expressing your gratitude to the author of
What Is to Be Done? and informing us of the decision to
allocate 20

      per cent[I.e., of the Moscow Party Committee’s
fund.—Ed. ]

      to Iskra. I thank you heartily for this expression of sympathy
      and solidarity. It is all the more valuable for an author of illegal
      publications because of the fact that in his work he is completely cut off
      from his readers. Each exchange of ideas, each report of the impression
      any article or pamphlet produces on the various groups of readers is of
      particular importance to us, and we shall be very grateful, not only for
      letters dealing with the work in the strict sense of the word, not only
      for contributions to the press, but also for Letters which make the author
      feel that he is not cut off from the reader.
    

      We published your decision to credit 20 per cent to Iskra in
      No. 22 of Iskra. However, we did not venture to publish your
      thanks to Lenin, since for one thing you mentioned that separately,
      without saying that you would like to see it in print. And for another,
      the wording of your message of thanks did not seem suitable for the
      press. But please do not think we attach no importance to publication of
      the committees’ declarations on their solidarity with certain views. On
      the contrary, this is of special importance, particularly now
      when all of us are thinking of the unification of revolutionary
      Social-Democracy. It would be highly desirable for the Moscow Committee to
      express its solidarity with my book in the form of a statement,
      which

    

      would immediately appear in Iskra. It is high time that the
      committees came out with an open announcement of their Party stand,
      breaking with those tactics of tacit agreement which prevailed in the
      “third period.” This is the general argument in favour of an open
      declaration. In particular, I, for example, have been accused in the
      press (by the Borba group, in its

      Listok[Literally, a one-sheet
newspaper.—Ed.])

      of wanting to turn the Editorial Board of Iskra into the Russian
      Central Committee, of wanting to “order” “agents”
      about, etc. This is downright distortion of what is said in What Is to
      Be Done?, but I have no desire to keep on reiterating in the press:
      “you are distorting.” Those who should begin to speak up are, I
      think, the functionaries in Russia, who know very well that the
      “orders” of Iskra go no further than advice and an
      expression of opinion, and who see that the
      organisational ideas propounded in What Is to Be Done?
      reflect the vitally urgent and burning question of the actual
      movement. I think that these functionaries should themselves demand to be
      heard and loudly declare how they regard this question, how their
      experience in work leads them to agree with our views on the
      organisational tasks.
    

      We understand, and naturally could understand, your expression of
      gratitude for What Is to Be Done? only in the sense that this
      book has provided you with answers to your own questions, that
      through first-hand acquaintance with the movement you have
      yourselves arrived at the conviction that bolder, more
      widespread, more unified, and more centralised work is needed,
      more closely consolidated about a single, central newspaper—a
      conviction which is also set forth in this book. And this being so, once
      you have really become convinced of this, it is desirable that the commit
      tee should say so openly and emphatically, urging the other committees to
      work together with it in the same direction, following the same
      “line,” setting itself the same immediate tasks with regard to Party
      organisation.
    

      We hope, comrades, that you will find it possible to read this letter to a
      general meeting of the whole commit tee, and will inform us of your
      decision on the questions indicated. (In parenthesis, let me add that the
      St. Petersburg

    

      Committee has also sent us an expression of solidarity, and is now
      considering a similar statement.)
    

      Did you have enough copies of What Is to Be Done??  Have the
      workers read it, and what is their reaction?
    

      I warmly shake the hands of all the comrades, and wish them full success.
    

      Yours,
 
Lenin

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Preface to the Second Edition of the Pamphlet, The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats









Lenin: Preface to the Second Edition of the Pamphlet, The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
Preface to the Second Edition of the Pamphlet, The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats




Published:

      First Published in December 1902 in the pamphlet issued by the League of Russian Social-Democracy Abroad.

      Published according to the text in the pamphlet.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 211-216.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      Exactly five years have passed since the writing of the present pamphlet,
      which is now appearing in its second edition to meet our agitational
      requirements. In this brief period such tremendous progress has been made
      by our young working-class movement and such profound changes have taken
      place in the position of Russian Social-Democracy and in its strength that
      it may perhaps appear strange that the need should arise for an old
      pamphlet simply to be republished. Can it be that in 1902 the “tasks
      of the Russian Social-Democrats” have not changed in the least as
      compared with 1897?  Has, then, the author himself, who at that time
      summed up what was still the “first experience of his Party
      activity, gone no step further in his views on this score?
    

      These (or similar) questions will probably arise in the mind of many a
      reader, and to answer them we must refer to the pamphlet, What Is to
      Be Done?, and supplement some of the remarks made there. This
      reference is necessary so as to show how the author presented his views on
      Social-Democracy’s present-day tasks, and supplement what is said
      there (pp. 31-32, 121,

      138[See present edition,
Vol. 5.—Ed.])

      about conditions obtaining when the pamphlet, which is now republished,
      was being written, and about its relation to that particular
      “period”

    

      in the development of Russian Social-Democracy. In all, I named four such
      periods in the above-mentioned pamphlet (What Is to Be Done?),
      the last of which referred “to the sphere of the present and,
      partly, of the future”; the third period was termed that of the
      domination (or, at least, the wide spread) of the “economist”
      trend, beginning with 1897-98; the second period was the name given to the
      years 1894-98, and the first to the years 1884-94. In the second period,
      in contrast to the third, we see no disagreements among the
      Social-Democrats themselves. At that time Social-Democracy was
      ideologically united, and it was then that an attempt was made to achieve
      the same unity in practice, in organisation (the formation of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party). At that time the main attention of the
      Social-Democrats was centred not on clearing up and deciding various
      internal Party questions (as was the case in the third period), but on the
      ideological struggle against the opponents of Social-Democracy, on the one
      hand, and on the development of practical Party work, on the other.
    

      There was no such antagonism between the theory and the practice of the
      Social-Democrats as existed in the period of “economism”.
    

      The pamphlet in question reflects the specific features of the then
      situation and “tasks” of Social-Democracy. It calls for deeper
      and more widespread practical work, seeing no obstacles” whatever to
      this in lack of clarity on any of the general views, principles, or
      theories, seeing no difficulty (at that time there was none) in combining
      the political struggle with the economic. It addresses its explanations of
      principles to adherents of the Narodnaya Volya and the Narodnoye

      Pravo,[1]
      who are opposed to Social-Democracy, in an endeavour to dispel the
      misunderstandings and prejudices which keep them away from the new
      movement.
    

      So, at the present time, when the “economist” period is
      evidently coming to an end, the Social-Democrats’ stand is again the same
      as it was five years ago. Of course, the tasks now confronting us are
      incomparably more complicated, as a result of the immense growth of the
      movement during this time, but the principal features of the present
      reproduce, on a broader base and on a larger scale, the

    

      specific features of the “second” period. The variance between
      our theory, programme, tactical tasks, and practical activities is
      disappearing in proportion to the disappearance of “economism.” We
      can and must boldly call again for deeper and more widespread practical
      work, since the theoretical premises for this work have already been
      created to a large extent. We must again devote particular attention to
      non-Social-Democratic illegal trends in Russia, and here we are again
      confronted with trends which in essence are the very same as those of the
      first half of the 1890s—only much more developed, organised, and
      “mature.”
    

      While discarding their old vestments, the adherents of the Narodnaya Volya
      have transformed themselves into “Socialist-Revolutionaries,”
      indicating, as it were, by this very name that they have stopped in
      mid-stream. They have broken away from the old (“Russian”
      socialism), but have not yet adhered to the new (Social-Democracy). The
      only theory of revolutionary socialism known to contemporary mankind,
      i.e., Marxism, has been relegated by them to the archives on the basis of
      bourgeois (“Socialists”!) and opportunist (-"Revolutionaries"!)
      criticism. In practice an absence of ideology and principles leads them to
      “revolutionary adventurism,” which finds expression in a number of
      ways; their endeavours to place on a par such social sections and classes
      as the intelligentsia, the proletariat, and the peasantry; their noisy
      advocacy of “systematic” terrorism; their remarkable agrarian
      minimum programme (socialisation of the land, co-operatives, and
      attachment to the allotment. See Iskra, Nos. 23 and

      24[See pp. 186-207 of this
volume.—Ed.]);

      their attitude towards the liberals (see Revolutsionnaya Rossiya,
      No. 9, and. Mr. Zhitlovsky’s review of

      Osvobozhdeniye[2]
      in No. 9 of Sozialistische

Monatshefte[3]),
      and much else with which we shall most probably have to deal more than
      once. In Russia there are still so many social elements and conditions
      fostering the instability of the intellectuals, evoking in
      radically-minded individuals a desire to combine the outmoded and outworn
      with the lifeless vogue of the day, and hindering their making common
      cause with the proletariat and its class struggle, that the Russian
      Social-Democrats will have yet to reckon

    

      with a trend or trends similar to that of the
      “Socialist-Revolutionaries” until the time comes when
      capitalist evolution and the sharpening of class contradictions will cut
      the ground from under their feet.
    

      The Narodnoye Pravo followers, who in 1897 were at least just as vague
      (see below, pp.

      2O-22[See present edition, Vol. 2,
pp. 344-45.—Ed.])

      as the present-day Socialist-Revolutionaries, very quickly disappeared
      from the scene as a consequence of this. But their “sober”
      idea— that of completely separating from socialism the demand for
      political liberty—has not died, and could not have died, for in
      Russia liberal democratic trends are very strong and are constantly
      becoming stronger among the most diverse sections of the big and petty
      bourgeoisie. For this reason the liberal Osvobozhdeniye, which
      wants to group around itself the representatives of the bourgeois
      opposition in Russia, has become the legitimate heir of the Narodnoye
      Pravo, and its definite, consistent, and mature continuator. And just as
      the withering and decay of the old, pre-Reform Russia, the patriarchal
      peasantry, and the old type of intelligentsia, who can be equally
      enthusiastic over the village commune, agricultural co-operatives, and
      “elusive” terrorism, are inevitable, so too is it inevitable
      for the propertied classes of capitalist Russia, the bourgeoisie, and the
      petty bourgeoisie, to grow and mature, with their sober liberalism, which
      is beginning to realise that it does not pay to maintain a dull-witted,
      barbarian, and costly autocratic government that offers no defence against
      socialism—with their demand for European forms of class struggle and
      class domination, with their innate (in the period of the awakening and
      growth of the proletariat) ambition to conceal their bourgeois class
      interests by denying the class struggle in general.
    

      We thus have reason to be grateful to the liberal land-owning gentry who
      are endeavouring to found a “Zemstvo constitutional party.” Let us
      first begin with the least important thing: we are grateful to them for
      removing Mr. Struve from Russian Social-Democracy, completing his
      metamorphosis from a quasi-Marxist into a liberal, helping us by a living
      example to demonstrate to one and all the real

    

      meaning of Bernsteinism in general and of Russian Bernsteinism in
      particular. Secondly, by striving to turn diverse sections of the Russian
      bourgeoisie into conscious liberals, Osvobozhdeniye will help us
      to hasten the conversion of more and more masses of workers into conscious
      socialists. There has been so much rambling, liberal-Narodnik
      quasi-socialism in our country that the new liberal trend is clearly a
      step forward in comparison. It will now be a simple matter to give the
      workers a vivid demonstration of the Russian liberal and democratic
      bourgeoisie, to show the need for an independent political party of the
      working class that would be part of international Social-Democracy; it
      will now be a simple matter to call on the intellectuals to make their
      stand absolutely clear: liberalism or Social-Democracy; half-way theories
      and trends will very quickly be ground down between the mill stones of
      these two growing and mounting “opposites.” Thirdly, and this of
      course is most important, we shall be grateful to the liberals if
      through their opposition they will undermine the alliance between the
      autocracy and certain sections of the bourgeoisie and intelligentsia. We
      say “if” because by flirting with the autocracy, extolling
      peaceful cultural work, and by their war against “tendentious”
      revolutionaries, etc., the liberals are undermining not so much the
      autocracy, as the struggle against the autocracy. By steadily and
      uncompromisingly exposing all the half-heartedness of the liberals, all
      their attempts to flirt with the government, we shall be nullifying the
      effects of this treacherous aspect of the liberal-bourgeois gentle men’s
      political activity and paralysing their left hands while ensuring the
      greatest results from the work of their right hands.
    

      Thus, both the Narodnaya Volyn and the Narodnoye Pravo have made great
      strides in developing, defining, and giving shape to their actual
      aspirations and their actual nature. The struggle which in the first half
      of the 1890s took place among narrow circles of revolutionary youth is now
      reviving as a decisive struggle of mature political trends and real
      political parties.
    

      In view of this, the new edition of the Tasks may perhaps prove useful
      also because it will remind the Party’s

    

      young members of its recent past, will show how the Social-Democrats came
      to occupy that position among the other trends which has only now become
      fully defined, and will help give a clearer and more distinct picture of
      the essentially identical but more complex “tasks” of the
      present.
    

      The Social-Democrats are now faced with the urgent task of putting an end
      to all dissension and wavering in their midst, of closing their ranks, and
      merging organisationally under the banner of revolutionary Marxism, of
      concentrating all their efforts so as to unite all Social-Democrats
      engaged in practical work, extend and deepen their activity, while at the
      same time devoting serious attention to explaining to the broadest
      possible masses of intellectuals and workers the real significance of the
      two above-mentioned trends, with which Social-Democracy has long had to
      reckon.
    

      August 1902.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

Narodnoye Pravo (People’s Right)—an illegal organisation of
      Russian democratic intellectuals founded in the summer of 1893, its
      initiators including 0. V. Aptekman, A. I. Bogdanovich,

   

      A. V. Gedeonovsky, M. A. Natanson, and N. S. Tyutchev who had formerly
      belonged to the Narodnaya Volya. The members of the Narodnoye Pravo set
      themselves the aim of uniting all opposition forces to fight for political
      reforms. The organisation issued two programme documents,
      “Manifesto,” and “An Urgent Question.” In the spring of 1894
      it was smashed by the tsarist government. Lenin’s estimation of the
      Narodnoye Pravo as a political party is to be found in his “What the
      ’Friends of the People’ Are and How They Fight the Social-Democrats”
      (see present edition, Vol. 1, pp. 129-332), and “The Tasks of the
      Russian Social-Democrats” (see present edition, Vol. 2,
      pp. 323-51). Most of the members of the Narodnoye Pravo subsequently
      joined the Socialist-Revolutionary Party.
    



[2]

Osvobozhdeniye (Emancipation)—a fortnightly magazine
      published abroad from June 18 (July 1), 1902, to October 18 (31), 1905,
      under the editorship of P. B. Struve. Arising out of the opposition
      Zemstvo movement, Osvobozhdeniye was in fact the illegal organ of
      the Russian liberal bourgeoisie and consistently advocated the ideas of
      moderate-monarchist liberalism. In 1903 the League of Emancipation
      developed around the magazine (taking definite shape in January 1904), and
      continued to exist until October 1905. Together with the
      Zemstvo-constitutionalists, the Osvobozhdeniye group formed the
      nucleus of the Cadet Party—the chief bourgeois party in
      Russia—which was formed in October 1905.
    



[3]

Sozialistische Monatshefte (Socialist Monthly)—a magazine,
which was the chief organ of the opportunists of German Social-Democracy
and one of the organs of international opportunism. During the 1914-18
imperialist world war, it took the stand of social-chauvinism. It was
published in Berlin from 1897 to 1933.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Draft of a New Law on Strikes









Lenin: The Draft of a New Law on Strikes







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Draft of a New Law on Strikes




Published:
Iskra, No. 24, September 1, 1902.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 217-226.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      We have come into possession of a new confidential document—the
      memorandum of the Ministry of Finance “On a revision of articles in
      the law which make strikes and breaches of contract of hire punishable,
      and on the desirability of instituting workers’ organisations for purposes
      of mutual aid.” In view of the length of this memorandum and the need to
      acquaint the broadest possible sections of the working class with it, we
      are publishing it as a separate

      pamphlet.[1]
      At present, however, we shall give a brief review of the contents of this
      interesting document and point out its importance.
    

      The memorandum begins with a short survey of the his tory of our factory
      legislation, mentioning the Laws of June 3, 1886 and June 2,

      1897,[2]
      and then proceeds to the question of the abolition of criminal liability
      for leaving employment and for striking. The Ministry of Finance is of the
      opinion that the threat of arrest or imprisonment for a worker’s leaving
      work without permission or for a number of workers downing tools by
      agreement among them selves, fails in its purpose. Experience has shown
      that this does not ensure the maintenance of public order; this threat
      merely embitters the workers, convincing them of the injustice of the
      law. The enforcement of these laws is very difficult “in view of the
      extreme burdensomeness of instituting hundreds and sometimes thousands of
      proceedings” if every worker who leaves his job is to be tried, and
      also in view of the fact that it is unprofitable for the factory owner to
      lose workers if the latter are imprisoned for going on strike. Making
      strikes a criminal offence leads to inordinately

    

      zealous interference by the police, which does more harm than good,
      bringing the employers more difficulties and trouble than relief. The
      memorandum proposes the complete abolition of the individual worker’s
      liability for leaving a factory of his own accord, or for participating in
      peace able strikes (unattended by violence or breaches of public law and
      order, etc.). Following the example of legislation abroad, penalties
      should be imposed only for “violence, threats, or
      defamation [!]  practised by any employer or worker against the
      person or property of a third person with the object of compelling the
      latter, despite his free and lawful intentions, to work or to abstain from
      working” on certain terms. In other words, instead of criminal
      liability for participation in strikes the proposal is to make it a crime
      to interfere with “persons desiring to work.”
    

      As to the mutual aid societies, the Ministry of Finance complains of
      arbitrariness on the part of the administrative authorities (which, it
      claims, is particularly noticeable in Moscow where the Society of

      Mechanics[3]
      even claimed the right to “mediate” between workers and
      management), and demands legislative enactment of proper regulations for
      such societies and assistance in their organisation.
    

      Thus, the general spirit of the new memorandum of the Ministry of Finance
      is undoubtedly liberal, and its main point is the proposal to abolish
      criminal liability for participation in strikes. We shall not analyse the
      contents of the entire “Bill” in detail here (it will be more
      convenient to do so after the memorandum has been published in full), but
      shall merely call the reader’s attention to the nature and significance of
      this liberalism. The proposal to give the workers a certain right to
      strike and to organise is nothing new, not only in our liberal publicist
      writings but even in projects coming from official government
      commissions. In the early sixties, the Stackelberg Commission, which
      revised factory and artisan regulations, proposed that factory courts
      elected from among the workers and the employers be set up and that some
      freedom of organisation be granted the workers. In the eighties the
      commission charged with drafting a new criminal code proposed the
      abolition of criminal liability for participation in strikes. However, the
      present draft of the Ministry of

    

      Finance differs substantially from the earlier projects, and this
      difference will remain an extremely important sign of the times even if
      the proposed new draft is pigeon-holed like all others before it. This
      essential difference consists in the fact that the new draft rests on an
      incomparably sounder foundation; in it you sense, not only the voice of a
      few progressive theorists and ideologists of the bourgeoisie, but the
      voice of an entire section of practical industrialists. This is no longer
      the liberalism of “humane” government officials and professors
      alone; it is the home-bred, native liberalism of the Moscow merchants and
      manufacturers. Let me say frankly that this fact fills my heart with a
      lofty patriotic pride: the twopenny-halfpenny liberalism of the merchant
      means much more than the shilling liberalism of the government
      official. And what is most interesting in the memorandum is not the
      nauseating talk about freedom of contract and the interests of the state,
      but the practical considerations of the manufacturers, which break right
      through the traditional juridical arguments.
    

      This is intolerable! We’re fed up! Keep out of it!—is what the
      Russian manufacturer is saying to the Russian police through the medium of
      the author of the ministerial memorandum. Just listen indeed to the
      following line of reasoning:
    

      “To the police authorities, who find support in the vagueness and
      ambiguity of the existing law, every strike comes not as a natural
      economic phenomenon, but invariably as a breach of public law and
      order. If, however, a calmer attitude existed with regard to stoppages of
      work at factories, and strikes were not made synonymous with breaches of
      public order, it would be much easier to ascertain the true causes of
      such, to separate lawful and justifiable grounds from those that are
      unlawful and untenable and to take the necessary steps towards peaceful
      agreement between the two parties. Given a more normal state of affairs
      such as this, restrictive and repressive measures would be resorted to
      only when disorder was patently in evidence.” The police do not go into
      the reasons for a strike; they are concerned solely with cutting
      It short, to which end they resort to one of two methods: either they
      force the workers (by arrests, deportation, and other measures “up
      to and including

    

      the use of armed force”) to return to work, or they prompt the employers
      to make concessions. “It cannot be said that either of these methods
      suits” Messrs. the Manufacturers: the former “embitters the
      workers,” the latter “confirms the workers in the extremely harmful
      belief that a strike is the surest way of getting what they want in every
      case.” “The history of strikes during the last decade affords many
      illustrations of the harm resulting from the efforts to suppress the
      resulting complications rapidly and at any cost. Hurriedly made arrests
      have at times so incensed workers who were completely calm until then that
      Cossacks .had to be brought into action, and after that of course any
      satisfaction even of the legitimate demands of the strikers was out of the
      question. On the other hand, cases of prompt satisfaction of the workers’
      unlawful demands by means of pressure upon the manufacturers did not fail
      to evoke similar strikes in other industrial enterprises where it became
      necessary to resort to military force rather than to a system of
      concessions, which is sometimes entirely incomprehensible to the workers
      and strengthens their conviction that the authorities are unjust and
      despotic towards them...." That the police should ever satisfy even
      unlawful demands of the workers by means of pressure upon the
      manufacturers—that of course is a fancy of the Messrs. the
      Capitalists, who want to say that in some cases they themselves, after
      some bargaining with the strikers, would concede less than they have to
      concede under the pressure of the grim prospect of “breaches of
      state law and order." The memorandum has a dig at the Ministry of the
      Interior, which in its circular letter of August 12, 1897, “issued
      without agreement with the Ministry of Finance” (that is where the
      crux of the matter lies!), prescribes both arrest and deportation in every
      strike and demands that every case connected with strikes be dealt with as
      required by the emergency regulations. “The higher administrative
      authorities,” continues the memorandum, setting forth the complaints of
      the manufacturers, “go still further [than the law] and flatly
      regard all [italics in the original] cases of strikes as matters
      of state importance.... Actually, however, every strike (of course if not
      accompanied by violence) is a purely economic phenomenon, which is quite
      natural and in no way jeopardises

    

      public law and order. In these cases law and order should be maintained in
      the same way as during popular festivities, celebrations, performances,
      and like occasions.”
    

      This is the language of genuine Manchester Liberals, who proclaim that the
      struggle between capital and labour is a purely natural phenomenon, who
      with remarkable frankness put on a par “trade in commodities”
      and “trade in labour” (elsewhere in the memorandum), demand
      non interference by the state, and assign to this state the role of night
      (and day) watchman. And, what is of particular importance, the Russian
      manufacturers have been compelled to adopt this liberal standpoint by none
      other than our workers. The working-class movement has spread so greatly
      that strikes have really become “natural economic phenomena. The
      workers’ struggle has assumed such stubborn forms that interference by the
      police state, which prohibits all manifestations of this struggle, has
      really begun to prove harmful, not only to the workers (to whom it has, of
      course, never brought anything but harm), but even to the manufacturers
      themselves, on whose behalf this interference was practised. The workers
      actually deprived the police prohibitions of all force, but the police
      continued (and in an autocratic state could not but continue) to interfere
      and, feeling their impotence, kept going from side to side: from armed
      force to concessions, from savage reprisals to blandishments. The less
      effective police intervention proved, the more keenly did the
      manufacturers feel the arbitrariness of the police, the more
      inclined they were to believe that it did not pay them to support
      this arbitrariness. The conflict between a certain section of the big
      industrialists and the all-powerfull police became more and more intense,
      assuming particularly acute forms in Moscow, where the system of flirting
      with the workers had flourished most luxuriantly. The memorandum openly
      complains of the Moscow authorities, who were carrying on a dangerous game
      with workers’ conferences and the workers’ mutual aid society in the
      engineering industry. In order to decoy the workers it became necessary to
      grant the council of this society a certain right of mediation—and
      the manufacturers immediately began to kick. “At first this
      council,” the memorandum says at

    

      their dictation, “applied to the Factory Inspectorate, but, seeing
      that the latter did not recognise its right to act as mediator, a role
      which it had assumed on its own, it began to turn to the Chief of Police,
      who not only accepts the tendered statements, but acts on them in due
      course, thus sanctioning the rights which the council has arrogated to
      itself.” The manufacturers are protesting against particular
      administrative decrees and demand the legislative enactment of a new
      system.
    

      True, the manufacturers’ liberalism has not ventured so far beyond the
      extremely narrow limits of their specific interests; their hostility to
      police arbitrariness is limited to individual cases of police excesses
      which are not to their advantage, and is not levelled against the
      mainstays of bureaucratic despotism. But, by aggravating the class
      antagonisms in the capitalist countries, the economic development of
      Russia and of the whole world will foster the growth of this hostility,
      provide greater grounds for it, and intensify it. The proletariat’s
      strength lies precisely in the growth of its numbers and its solidarity as
      a result of the very process of economic development, while the interests
      of the big and petty bourgeoisie become more and more scattered and
      divided. To take into account this “natural” advantage of the
      proletariat, the Social-Democrats must closely watch all clashes of
      interests among the ruling classes, using these clashes, not only in order
      to gain practical advantages for one section or another of the working
      class, but also for the purpose of enlightening the en tire working class,
      for the purpose of deriving a useful lesson from each new social and
      political incident.
    

      The practical advantage which the workers stand to gain from the revision
      of the law proposed by the liberal manufacturers is too obvious to be
      dwelt on at length. It is an undoubted concession to a growing force, an
      abandonment by the enemy of one of his positions, which the revolutionary
      proletariat has practically captured already and which the more far-seeing
      leaders of the hostile army no longer care to defend. Of course, this is
      no big concession: first of all, it is ridiculous even to think that
      real freedom, the right to strike, is possible without political
      liberty. The police still retain the right to make arrests

    

      and to deport without trial, and will retain that right so long as the
      autocracy continues to exist. And the retention of this right means
      preservation of nine-tenths of the police interference, the outrages, and
      the high-handedness, which are beginning to disgust even the
      manufacturers. Secondly, even in the narrow sphere of factory legislation
      itself, the Ministry of Finance is taking a very timid step forward,
      copying the German Bill which the German workers have dubbed the
      “Hard Labour”

      Bill,[4]
      and preserving special penalties “for violence, threats, or
      defamation” In connection with the contract of hire, as if
      general penal laws covering these of fences did not exist! But
      the Russian workers will know how to utilise even this small concession so
      as to strengthen their positions, to intensify and extend their great
      struggle for the emancipation of working humanity from wage slavery.
    

      As to the useful lesson taught us by the new memorandum, we must note
      primarily that the protest of the manufacturers against the medieval
      strike law affords us a small and particular example of the general
      incompatibility of interests between the developing bourgeoisie and
      moribund absolutism. This should give food for thought to those people who
      (like the Socialist-Revolutionaries) have hither to timidly shut their
      eyes to the elements of bourgeois opposition in Russia and who
      continue to reiterate as of old that the “interests” (in
      general!) of the Russian bourgeoisie are satisfied. It turns out that
      police arbitrariness clashes now with some, now with other interests of
      even those sections of the bourgeoisie that are most directly
      protected by the tsarist police and are threatened
      directly with material loss by any loosening of the fetters placed on
      the proletariat.
    

      It turns out that a real revolutionary movement disorganises the
      government, not only directly by the fact that it enlightens, rouses, and
      unites the exploited masses, but also indirectly by the fact that it cuts
      the ground from under antiquated laws, destroys the faith in the autocracy
      even of those who would seem to be its confederates, increases
      “family squabbles” among these confederates, and replaces
      firmness and unity in the camp of the enemy by dissension and
      wavering. But in order to achieve such results one condition is
      required,which our Socialist-Revolutionaries have

    

      never been able to grasp: it is necessary that the movement should be
      truly revolutionary, i.e., that it should rouse to a new life ever broader
      sections of the really revolutionary class, that it should actually
      refashion the spiritual and political make-up of this class, and through
      it, of all those who come in contact with it. If the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries grasped this truth, they would understand what
      practical harm is wrought by their ideological poverty and the unprin
      cipledness of their approach to the fundamental problems of socialism;
      they would understand that it is not the forces of the government but
      those of the revolution that are disorganised by people who preach that
      against the crowd the autocracy has its soldiers and against
      organisations— the police, whereas individual terrorists who remove
      ministers and governors are truly elusive.
    

      The new “step” by the executive board of the manufacturers’
      henchmen affords us still another useful lesson. This lesson is that we
      must be able to make practical use of any liberalism, even of the
      twopenny-halfpenny variety, and that at the same time we must be on our
      guard lest this liberalism corrupt the masses with its false presentation
      of questions. An example is Mr. Struve, an interview with whom we could
      put under the heading: “How the liberals want to teach the workers
      and how the workers should teach the liberals.” In No. 4 of
      Osvobozhdeniye, which has begun publication of the memorandum
      under analysis, Mr. Struve tells us, among other things, that the new
      draft is an expres sion of “statesmanship,” which, be says, will
      scarcely succeed in breaking through the wall of arbitrariness and sense
      lessness. No, Mr. Struve. It was not “statesmanship” that
      advanced the new strike Bill, but the manufacturers. This Bill has
      appeared, not because the state “recognised” the basic
      principles of civil law (the bourgeios “liberty and equality”
      of employers and workers), but because the abolition of criminal liability
      for participation in strikes has become ad vantageous to the
      manufacturers. The juridical formulations and wholly conclusive
      reasons now assigned by the Ministry of Finance “itself”
      (Osvobozhdeniye, No. 4, p. 50) existed long ago in Russian
      publications and even in the reports of government commissions, but it all
      remained buried in oblivion until the captains of industry raised
      their voices,

    

      after the workers had shown them in practice how absurd the old
      laws were. We stress the decisive importance of the manufacturers’
      advantages and interests not because we believe that this diminishes the
      importance of the govern ment schemes—on the contrary, we have
      already stated that this raises their importance in our eyes. But the
      proletariat must learn above all to look at things squarely and soberly in
      its struggle against the whole of the present-day system, to lay bare the
      real causes behing “lofty acts of state,” and to expose
      unremittingly the false and high sounding bombast about
      “statesmanship,” etc., to which the sly police officials give
      utterance deliberately, and the learned liberals short-sightedly.
    

      Further, Mr. Struve advises the workers to be “restrained” in
      their agitation for the abolition of criminal liability for participation
      in strikes. “The more restrained it [this agitation] will be in
      form,” Mr. Struve preaches, “the greater its significance will be.”
      The workers should cordially thank this former socialist for such
      advice. This is the traditional

      Molchalin[5]
      wisdom of the liberals—to preach restraint at the very time when the
      government has just begun to waver (on some particular question). More
      restraint is needed so as not to hinder implementation of the incipient
      reform, so as not to raise apprehensions, and to make use of the
      propitious moment when the first step has already been taken (a memorandum
      has been drawn up!) and when some government department’s recognition of
      the necessity for reforms gives “irrefutable [?] proof both to the
      government and to society [!] of the justice and timeliness” (?)  of
      these reforms. This is how Mr. Struve reasons with regard to the draft
      under discussion, and this is how the Russian liberals have always
      reasoned. However this is not bow the Social-Democrats reason. Just look,
      they say, even some manufac turers have already begun to understand that
      the European forms of the class struggle are better than Asiatic police
      tyr anny. Our stubborn fight has forced even the manufacturers to doubt
      the omnipotence of the myrmidons of the autocracy. Forward, then, more
      boldly! Spread more widely the glad tidings of irresolution in the enemy
      camp; take advantage of the slightest sign of wavering on the part of the
      enemy so as to increase your demands rather than “restrain”
      them in

    

      the Molchalin manner. Against the debt the government owes to the people,
      they want to pay you one kopek in every hundred rubles. Use payment of
      this kopek in order to demand in louder and louder terms the whole sum, to
      completely discredit the government and prepare our forces to deliver a
      decisive blow at it.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      V. I. Lenin is referring to the pamphlet, The Autocracy and
Strikes. The Memorandum of the Ministry of Finance on Permitting
Strikes, published in 1902 in Geneva by the League of Russian
Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad.
    



[2]

The Law of June 3(15), 1886 (“Regulations on Supervision of
      the Enterprises of the Factory Industry and on Relations Between Factory
      Owners and Workers”) was passed under the influence of the working-class
      movement in the Moscow, Vladimir, and Yaroslavl gubernias and, in
      particular, the famous Morozov strike of 1885. The chief feature of the
      Law of June 3, 1886, was the certain restriction it placed on the
      arbitrary right of factory owners to exact fines from the workers (hence
      it became known as the “Law on Fines”). Lenin gave a detailed
      analysis and criticism of this law in the pamphlet, Explanation of the
      Law on Fines Imposed on Factory Workers (see present edition, Vol. 2,
      pp. 29-72).
    

The Law of June 2(14), 1897 (“On the Duration and
      Distribution of Working Hours in Enterprises of the Factory Industry”)
      introduced, for the first time in Russian history, legislative limitation
      of

   

      the working day for part of the workers in large-scale industry. Like the
      Law of June 3, 1886, it was passed under the influence of the
      working-class movement in the nineties of the nineteenth century,
      particularly the mass strikes of the St. Petersburg workers in
      1895-96. V. I. Lenin’s pamphlet, The New Factory Law, gives an
      analysis and criticism of the Law of June 2, 1897 (see present edition,
      Vol. 2, pp. 267-315).
    



[3]

The Society of Mechanics (officially the Society for Mutual Aid
      of Workers Engaged in Mechanical Production) was formed in Moscow in May
      1901 with the participation of the secret police. Its rules were confirmed
      by the Governor-General of Moscow on February 14, 1902. The formation of
      the Society was one of the attempts made to implant “police
      socialism,” Zubatovism (see Note 62), in order to divert the workers from
      the revolutionary struggle. The demagogic flirting of the police with the
      workers and, in particular, the attempts made by Zubatov agents, who
      controlled the Society of Mechanics, to assume the right to mediate in
      conflicts between employers and workers, evoked dissatisfaction among
      Moscow factory owners and protests from the Ministry of Finance, which
      reflected their interests. Under the impact of the growing working-class
      movement, the role of the Society, like that of other Zubatov
      organisations, dwindled away after 1903.
    



[4]

      The reference is to the so-called “Hard Labour” Bill
      (Zuchthaus vorlage) introduced in the German Reichstag in 1899 on
      the insistence of the employers and Emperor Wilhelm II. The Bill imposed
      from one to five years of prison or a fine of up to 1,000 marks on anyone
      who “by violence, threats, insults or a declaration of
      dishonesty” helped workers take part in unions and agreements, in
      cited them to strike or tried to oppose strike-breaking. Under pressure
      from the working-class movement, the “Hard Labour” Bill was
      turned down in the Reichstag on November 20, 1899, by the votes of the
      Left parties and the Centre party.
    



[5]

Molchalin—a 

      character in Griboyedov’s play, Wit Works Woe, a careerist and
      lickspittle.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to the Editors of Yuzhny Rabochy









Lenin: A Letter to the Editors of Yuzhny Rabochy







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to the Editors of Yuzhny Rabochy[1]




Written: Written on September 3 (16), 1902 

Published:

      First Published in 1924 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia, No. 3.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 227-230.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      Dear Comrades,
    

      Your detailed letter has greatly gladdened us all. Please send us the
      promised supplement as soon as possible, and write oftener. We hope soon
      to send one of the comrades to you for more detailed and final talks;
      meanwhile we shall confine ourselves to the most important points.
    

      You are right a thousand times over when you say that we must unite as
      soon as possible, indeed immediately, in a single all-Russian
      organisation, whose aim would be to prepare the ground for ideological
      unity among the committees and for the practical, organisational unity of
      the Party. We, for our part, have already taken a number of fairly
      important steps in this direction, thanks to the fact that the
      St. Petersburg Committee has come over fully to the Iskra point
      of view, published a statement to this effect, and de facto
      (this, of course, is strictly entre

nous[Between us.—Ed.])

      merged with the Iskra organisation in Russia, and given its
      members very influential places in the committee’s central group. If we
      succeed in getting the same complete solidarity and complete fusion with
      the South, the actual unification of the Party will be three-quarters on
      the way to accomplishment. This must be pushed ahead as fast as
      possible. We are taking steps immediately, first, to see to it that
      members of the Iskra organisation in Russia visit you for the
      purpose of coming to an agreement; second, to establish connections here
      with Chernyshov. For your part, hurry up the release (or publication in
      Iskra) of your statement of

    

      principles, fully defining your position in the Party, and take all steps
      towards actual fusion with the Iskra organisation in Russia.
    

      In conclusion, a few words on the questions you have raised. Regarding the
      peasantry and the agrarian programme, we are not clear on precisely what
      you find unsatisfactory in our draft agrarian programme and what changes
      you would like. Let us know this more concretely. Have you seen No. 4 of
      Zarya with the article on the agrarian

      programme? [See pp. 107-50 of this
volume.—Ed.]

      In general, your remarks about the mistakes made by Iskra show
      how important it is for us to communicate more frequently and regularly so
      as to achieve complete harmony. We have so devilishly few forces that only
      the closest unity of all Social-Democrats can ensure us success
      in the struggle against both the “adventurers” and the
      government. And yet we hitherto knew almost nothing about your standpoint,
      for instance, or about your practical work—is that normal? Besides,
      is it normal that you, for instance, are now taking steps on your own to
      establish permanent transport connections, while we are doing it likewise
      on our own? (Let us know in greater detail what steps you are taking, how
      and where, what are the means you have, etc.) This same circumstance,
      i.e., the shortage of forces, should be taken into account in considering
      the question of a special press organ, of continuing the publication of
      Yuzhny Rabochy, of changing it to Russky Rabochy. We
      must weigh all aspects of the matter with the utmost care. Just consider
      where we are to get the forces for two papers, when we know very well that
      we have not enough even for one. Won’t you be giving St. Petersburg (the
      non-Iskra-ist elements in St. Petersburg) a stimulus to publish
      Rabochaya Mysl also as an “explanatory,” popular, etc.,
      paper? And this at a time when St. Petersburg is preparing to discontinue
      Rabochaya Mysl and at last get down to real work on
      Iskra. Won’t your efforts to arrange regular contributions to
      Iskra from Russia suffer as a result of your plans—and you
      know that without this collaboration Iskra cannot become a
      genuine Party organ; don’t forget either that, except for you, we have
      practically no one in view for this work. And if the Iskra-ists

    

      don’t take this in hand, who will do so, and when? Finally, thrash out
      more thoroughly the question of whether the purposes of explanatory,
      propagandist, popular literature meant for the “average
      worker” (as you put it) are compatible with the purposes of a
      newspaper. That there must be literature specially designed for the
      average worker and the masses is indisputable; but this can be only in the
      form of leaflets and pamphlets, since it is impossible for a
      newspaper properly to explain every question to the aver age
      worker. For this we must begin from the beginning, with the ABC,
      and go straight through to the end, carefully and thorougly examining all
      aspects of a question. A newspaper would scarcely be in a position to do
      this even if it were as sured of ideal conditions with regard to literary
      forces. Don’t forget, lastly, that what you do, whether you desire it or
      not, will be of all-Russian importance, and that all talk, notions, and
      theories about special papers “for the
      intelligentsia” and “for the workers” may play a most
      pernicious part, not only irrespectively of your desires, but even despite
      anything you may do to counteract it personally. After all, there is only
      a handful like you among the Russian Social-Democrats, while among the
      mass of the Russian Social-Democrats there is still a very great deal of
      narrow-mindedness of all kinds. We do not, of course, intend to limit
      ourselves to these cursory remarks on a question of such importance, but
      we only ask you not to unduly hasten your decision, and to discuss the
      matter from all angles. We consider it even desirable to preserve
      a separate group (the Editorial Board of Yuzhny Rabochy) at least
      until the Party congress, but this group should not be in a hurry with its
      paper.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

Yuzhny Rabochy (Southern Worker)—a Social-Democratic news
      paper, published illegally from January 1900 to April 1903 by a group of
      this name. Twelve numbers were issued. I. K. Lala yants, A. Vilensky
      (“Ilya”), 0. A. Kogan (Yermansky), B. S. Tseitlin (Batursky),
      E. Y. and E. S. Levin, V. N. Rozanov, and others were at various times
      editors and contributors.
    

Yuzhny Rabochy started as the “Ekaterinoslav Workers’ News
      paper” (the subtitle of the first two issues), and soon became an
      influential “organ of the working-class movement in South Russia.”
      The location of the newspaper’s print-shop was continually changed, being
      at different times in Ekaterinoslav, Sine lensk, Kishinev, Nikolayev, and
      elsewhere....
    


Yuzhny Rabochy opposed “economism” and terrorism and
      upheld the need to develop a mass revolutionary movement. But, in
      opposition to the Iskra plan of creating in Russia a centralised
      Marxist party round an all-Russian political newspaper, the Yuzhny
      Rabochy group put forward a plan for restoring the R.S.D.L.P. by
      creating regional Social-Democratic associations. A practical attempt to
      realise this plan was made through convocation of the conference of
      committees and organisations of the R.S.D.L.P. in South Russia in December
      1901, at which the League of Southern Committees and Organisations of the
      R.S.D.L.P. was formed, with Yuzhny Rabochy as its organ. The
      attempt proved impracticable (as was the entire organisational plan of
      Yuzhny Rabochy) and after the mass police raids in the spring of
      1902, the League disintegrated. In August 1902, those members of
      Yuzhny Rabochy’s Editorial Board who were at large entered into
      negotiations with the Iskra Editorial Board on joint work to
      restore the unity of Russian Social-Democracy. The declaration of the
      Yuzhny Rabochy group on solidarity with Iskra (published
      in Iskra, No. 27, November 1, 1902, and in Yuzhny
      Rabochy, No. 10, December 1902) was of great importance in
      consolidating the Social-Democratic forces in Russia. In November 1902,
      the Yuzhny Rabochy group, together with the Russian
      Iskra organisation, the St. Petersburg Committee of the
      R.S.D.L.P. and the Northern League of the R.S.D.L.P. participated in
      restoring the Organising Committee and in its activities in convening the
      Second Party Congress.
    

      The Yuzhny Rabochy group conducted extensive revolutionary work
      in Russia, but at the same time it displayed opportunist tendencies in
      deciding the question of the attitude to the liberal bourgeoisie and to
      the peasant movement, and hatched a separatist plan to set up an
      all-Russian newspaper parallel to Iskra.
    

      At the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., the Yuzhny Rabochy
      delegates adopted a “Centre” position (Lenin called the
      representatives of the Centre “opportunist middlemen”). The Second
      Congress decided to dissolve the Yuzhny Rabochy group as well as
      all separate Social-Democratic groups and organisations.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to a Comrade on Our Organisational Tasks









Lenin: A Letter to a Comrade on Our Organisational Tasks







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to a Comrade on Our Organisational Tasks[4]




Written: Written in September 1902 

Published:

      First Published in 1902 in a hectograph edition.

      Published according to the text of the pamphlet printed by the Central Committee, R.S.D.L.P., 1904.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 231-252.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    
    


 

      Dear Comrade,
    

      It is with pleasure that I accede to your request for a criticism of your
      draft for the “Organisation of the St. Petersburg Revolutionary
      Party.” (Most likely you meant the organisation of the work of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party in St. Petersburg.) The question you have
      raised is so important that all members of the St. Peters burg Committee,
      and even all Russian Social-Democrats in general, should take part in its
      discussion.
    

      First of all, let me express my complete agreement with your explanation
      of the unsuitableness of the former (“league type,” as you term it)
      organisation of the “League.” You refer to the lack of serious
      training and revolutionary education among the progressive workers, to the
      so-called elective system, which Rabocheye Dyelo supporters are
      championing so proudly and stubbornly on the grounds of
      “democratic” principles, and to the workers’ alienation from
      active work.
    

      That precisely is the case: 1) the lack of serious training and
      revolutionary education (not only among the workers, but among the
      intellectuals as well), 2) the misplaced and immoderate application of the
      elective principle, and 3) the workers’ alienation from active
      revolutionary work— that is where the main shortcoming of
      the St. Petersburg organisation and of many other local organisations of
      our Party really lies.
    

      I fully share your basic view on the organisational tasks, and also
      subscribe to your organisational plan, so far as I understand its general
      outlines from your letter.
    

      Specifically, I wholly agree with you that special stress should be laid
      on the tasks connected with the work on an all-Russian scale and with the
      work of the Party as a whole;

    

      in your draft this is expressed in Clause One, which reads: “The
      newspaper Iskra, which has permanent correspondents among the
      workers and close contact with the work within the organisation, is the
      leading centre of the Party (and not only of a committee or a
      district).” I should merely like to remark that the newspaper can and
      should be the ideological leader of the Party, evolving
      theoretical truths, tactical principles, general organisational ideas, and
      the general tasks of the whole Party at any given moment. But only a
      special central group (let us call it the Central Committee, say) can be
      the direct practical leader of the movement, maintaining
      personal connections with all the committees, embracing all the
      best revolutionary forces among the Russian Social-Democrats, and
      managing all the general affairs of the Party, such as the
      distribution of literature, the issuing of leaflets, the allocation of
      forces, the appointment of individuals and groups to take charge of
      special undertakings, the preparation of demonstrations and an uprising on
      an all-Russian scale, etc. Since the strictest secrecy of organisation and
      preservation of continuity of the movement is essential, our Party can and
      should have two leading centres: a C.O. (Central Organ) and a
      C. C. (Central Committee). The former should be responsible for
      ideological leader ship, and the latter—for direct and practical
      leadership. Unity of action and the necessary solidarity between these
      groups should be ensured, not only by a single Party programme, but also
      by the composition of the two groups (both groups, the C.O. and
      the C.C., should be made up of people who are in complete harmony with one
      another), and by the institution of regular and systematic joint
      conferences. Only then will the C.O., on the one hand, be placed beyond
      the reach of the Russian gendarmes and assured of consistency and
      continuity, while, on the other hand, the C.C. will always be at one with
      the C.O. on all essential matters and have sufficient freedom to
      take direct charge of all the practical aspects of the
      movement.
    

      For this reason it would be desirable that Clause One of the Rules
      (according to your draft) should not only indicate which Party organ is
      recognised as the leading organ (that, of course, is necessary), but
      should also state that the given local organisation sets itself the task
      of working actively

    

      for the creation, support, and consolidation of those central
      institutions without which our Party cannot exist as a party.
    

      Further, in Clause Two, you say that the committee should “direct
      the local organisation” (perhaps it would be better to say:
      “all local work and all the local organisations of the Party”;
      but I shall not dwell on details of formulation), and that it should
      consist of both workers and intellectuals, for to divide them into two
      committees is harmful. This is absolutely and indubitably correct. There
      should be only one committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party, and it should consist of fully convinced Social-Democrats who
      devote themselves entirely to Social-Democratic activities. We should
      particularly see to it that as many workers as possible become fully
      class-conscious and professional revolutionaries and members of the

      committee.[1]

      Once there is a single and not a dual committee, the matter of
      the committee members personally knowing many workers is of
      particular importance. In order to take the lead in whatever goes on in
      the workers’ midst, it is necessary to be able to have access to all
      quarters, to know very many workers, to have all sorts of channels, etc.,
      etc. The committee should, therefore, include, as far as possible, all the
      principal leaders of the working-class movement from among the
      workers themselves; it should direct all aspects of the local
      movement and take charge of all local institutions, forces and
      means of the Party. You do not say how the committee should be set
      up—most likely, here too we shall agree with you that it is scarcely
      necessary to have special regulations about this; how to set up the
      committee is a matter for the Social-Democrats on the spot to
      decide. However, it should perhaps be pointed out that new members should
      be added to the committee by decision of a majority (or two-thirds, etc.)
      of its members, and that the committee should see to it that its list of
      contacts is placed in hands that are reliable (from the revolutionary
      standpoint) and safe (in the political sense), and that it prepares
      candidate-members

    

      in advance. When we have the C.O. and the new committees
      should be set up only with their co-operation and their consent. As far as
      possible, the committees should not have very many members (so that they
      consist of well-educated people, each well versed in the technique of his
      particular branch of revolutionary activity), but at the same time they
      should include a sufficient number to take charge of all aspects
      of the work, and to ensure full representation and binding
      decisions. Should it hap pen that the number of members is fairly large
      and that it is hazardous for them to meet frequently, it might then be
      necessary to select from the committee a special and very small
      executive group (consisting of, say, five, or even fewer
      persons), which should without fail include the secretary and those most
      capable of giving practical guidance to the work as a whole. It is
      particularly important that candidate-members be provided for
      this group so that the work should not have to stop in case of
      arrests. The activities of the executive group, its membership, etc.,
      should be subject to approval by a general meeting of the committee.
    

      Further,

alter 

      the committee, you propose the following institutions under it: 1)
      discussion meetings (conferences of the “best”
      revolutionaries), 2) district circles with 3) a propagandists’ circle
      attached to each of these, 4) factory circles, and 5) “meetings of
      representatives” of delegates from the factory circles of a given
      district. I fully agree with you that all further institutions
      (and of these there should be very many and extremely diversified ones,
      besides those mentioned by you) should be subordinated to the committee,
      and that it is necessary ·to have district groups (for the very big
      cities) and factory groups (always and everywhere). But I do not quite
      agree with you, it seems, on several details. For instance, with regard to
      “discussion meetings” I think that these are wholly
      unnecessary. The “best revolutionaries” should all be on
      the committee, or engaged in special work (printing, transport,
      agitational tours, the organisation, say, of a passport bureau, or of
      combat squads to deal with spies and agents provocateurs, or of
      groups in the army, etc.).
    

      “Conferences” will be held in the committee and in each
      district, in each factory, propagandist, trade (weavers, mechanics,

    

      tanners. etc.), student, literary, etc., circle. Why should conferences be
      made a special institution?
    

      Further. You quite justifiably demand that the opportunity to write to
      Iskra directly should be given to “every one who wants it."
      Only “directly” should not be understood to mean that
      “everyone who wants it” should be given access to the
      editorial office or its address, but that it should be obligatory to hand
      over (or forward) to the editors letters from all who so desire.
      The addresses should, of course, be made known to a fairly wide
      circle; however, they should not be given to everyone who wants them,
      but only to revolutionaries who are reliable and known for their ability
      to observe the conditions of secrecy—perhaps even not to one person
      in each district, as you suggest, but to several. It is also necessary
      that all who take part in our work, each and every circle, should have
      the right to bring their decisions, desires and requests to the
      attention of the committee, as well as of the C.O. and C.C. If we
      ensure this, then all conferences of Party functionaries will
      have the benefit of full in formation, without instituting
      anything so cumbersome and contrary to the rules of secrecy as
      “discussion meetings." Of course, we should also endeavour to
      arrange personal conferences of the greatest possible number of
      all and sundry functionaries—but then here everything hinges on the
      observance of secrecy. General meetings and gatherings are possible in
      Russia only rarely and by way of exception, and it is necessary to be
      doubly wary about allowing the “best revolutionaries” to
      attend these meetings, since it is easier in general for agents
      provocateurs to get into them and for spies to trail some participant
      of the meeting. I think that perhaps it would be better to do as follows:
      when it is possible to organise a big (say, 30 to 100 people) general
      meeting (for instance, in the summer-time in the woods, or in a secret
      apartment that has been specially secured for this purpose), the committee

      shou]d 

      send one or two of the “best revolutionaries” and make
sure that the meeting is attended by the proper people, i.e., for
example, that invitations should be extended to as many as possible of
the reliable members of the factory circles, etc. But these meetings
should not officially go on record; they should not be put in the Rules,
or held regularly; matters should not be arranged in

    

      such a way that everyone who attends the meeting knows everyone else
      there, i.e., knows that everyone is a “representative” of a
      circle, etc.; that is why I am opposed, not only to “discussion
      meetings” but also to “meetings of representatives.” In place
      of these two institutions I would propose a rule to the following
      effect. The committee must see to the organisation of big meetings of as
      many people as possible who are practical participants in the movement,
      and of the workers in general. The time, place, and occasion for the
      meeting and its composition are to be determined by the committee, which
      is responsible for the secret arrangement of such affairs. It is
      self-evident that the organisation of workers’ gatherings of a less formal
      character at outings, in the woods, etc., is in no way restricted by
      this. Perhaps it would be even better not to say anything about this in
      the Rules.
    

      Further, as regards the district groups, I fully agree with you that it is
      one of their most important tasks to organise the distribution of
      literature properly. I think the district groups should for the main part
      act as intermediaries between the committees and the factories,
      intermediaries and even mostly couriers. Their chief task should
      be the proper distribution of the literature received from the committee
      in accordance with the rules of secrecy. This is an extremely important
      task, for if we secure regular contact between a special district group of
      distributors and all the factories in that district, as well as
      the largest possible number of workers’ homes in that district,
      it will be of enormous value, both for demonstrations and for an
      uprising. Arranging for and organising the speedy and proper delivery of
      literature, leaflets, proclamations, etc., training a network of agents
      for this purpose, means performing the greater part of the work
      of preparing for future demonstrations or an uprising. It is too late to
      start organising the distribution of literature at a time of unrest, a
      strike, or turmoil; this work can be built up only gradually, by making
      distributions obligatory twice or three times a month. If no
      newspapers are available, leaflets may and should be distributed, but the
      distributive machine must in no case be allowed to remain idle. This
      machine should be brought to such a degree of perfection as to make it
      possible to inform and mobilise, so to speak,

    

      the whole working-class population of St. Petersburg over night. Nor is
      this by any means a Utopian aim, provided there is a systematic
      transmission of leaflets from the centre to the narrower intermediary
      circles and from them to the distributors. In my opinion, the functions of
      the district groups should not be extended beyond the bounds of purely
      intermediary and transmission work, or, to put it more accurately, they
      should be extended only with the utmost caution—otherwise this can
      only increase the risk of discovery and be injurious to the integrity of
      the work. Of course, conferences to discuss all Party questions will take
      place in the district circles as well, but decisions on all
      general questions of the local movement should be made only by the
      committee. The district groups should be permitted to act independently
      only on questions concerning the technical aspect of transmission and
      distribution. The composition of the district groups should be determined
      by the committee, i.e., the committee appoints one or two of its
      members (or even comrades who are not on the committee) as delegates to
      this or that district and instructs them to establish a district
      group, all the members of which are likewise installed in office, so
      to speak, by the committee. The district group is a branch of the
      committee, deriving its powers only from the latter.
    

      I now pass on to the question of propagandists’ circles. It is hardly
      possible to organise such circles separately in every district owing to
      the scarcity of our propagandist forces, and it is hardly
      desirable. Propaganda must be carried on in one and the same spirit by the
      whole committee, and it should be strictly centralised. My idea of the
      matter is therefore as follows: the committee instructs several of its
      members to organise a group of propagandists (which will be a branch of
      the committee or one of the institutions of the committee). This
      group, using for the sake of secrecy the services of the district
      groups, should conduct propaganda throughout the town, and in all
      localities “within the jurisdiction” of the committee. If
      necessary, this group may set up subgroups, and, so to say, entrust
      certain of its functions to the latter, but all this can be done only with
      the sanction of the committee, which must always and unconditionally
      possess the right of detailing its delegate to any

    

      group, subgroup, or circle which has any connection at all with the
      movement.
    

      The same pattern of organisation, the same type of branches of the
      committee or its institutions, should be adopted for all the various
      groups serving the movement—students’ groups in the higher and
      secondary schools; groups, let us say, of supporters among government
      officials; transport, printing, and passport groups; groups for arranging
      secret meeting places; groups whose job it is to track down spies; groups
      among the military; groups for supplying arms; groups for the organisation
      of “financially profitable enterprises,” for example, etc. The whole
      art of running a secret organisation should consist in making use of
      everything possible, in “giving everyone something to do,”
      at the same time retaining leadership of the whole movement, not
      by virtue of having the power, of course, but by virtue of authority,
      energy, greater experience, greater versatility, and greater talent. This
      remark is made to meet the possible and usual objection that strict
      centralisation may all too easily ruin the movement if the centre
      happens to include an incapable person invested with
      tremendous power. This is, of course, possible, but it cannot be obviated
      by the elective principle and decentralisation, the application of which
      is absolutely impermissible to any wide degree and even altogether
      detrimental to revolutionary work carried on under an autocracy. Nor can
      any rules provide means against this; such means can be provided only by
      measures of “comradely influence,” beginning with the resolutions of
      each and every subgroup, followed up by their appeals to the C.O. and the
      C.C., and ending (if the worst comes to the worst) with the
      removal of the persons in authority who are absolutely
      incapable. The committee should endeavour to achieve the greatest possible
      division of labour, bearing in mind that the various aspects of
      revolutionary work require various abilities, and that sometimes a person
      who is absolutely useless as an organiser may be invaluable as an
      agitator, or that a person who is not good at strictly secret work may be
      an excellent propagandist, etc.
    

      Incidentally, while on the subject of propagandists, I should like to say
      a few words in criticism of the usual practice of overloading
      this profession with incapable people

    

      and thus lowering the level of propaganda. It is sometimes the habit among
      us to regard every student as a propagandist without discrimination, and
      every youngster demands that he should “be given a circle,”
      etc. This must be countered, because it does a great deal of harm. There
      are very few propagandists whose principles are invariably
      consistent and who are really capable (and to become such one must put in
      a lot of study and amass experience); such people should therefore be
      specialised, put wholly on this kind of work, and be given the utmost
      care. Such persons should deliver several lectures a week and be sent to
      other towns when necessary, and, in general, capable propagandists should
      make tours of various towns and cities. But the mass of young beginners
      should be given mainly practical assignments, which are somewhat neglected
      in comparison with the students’ conduct of circles, which is
      optimistically called “propaganda.” Of course, thorough training is
      also required for serious practical enterprises; nevertheless, work in
      this sphere can more easily be found for “beginners” too.
    

      Now about the factory circles. These are particularly important to us: the
      main strength of the movement lies in the organisation of the workers at
      the large factories, for the large factories (and mills) contain
      not only the predominant part of the working class, as regards numbers,
      but even more as regards influence, development, and fighting
      capacity. Every factory must be our fortress. For that every
      “factory” workers’ organisation should be as secret internally
      as “ramified” externally, i.e., in its outward relationships,
      it should stretch its feelers as far and in as many directions as any
      revolutionary organisation. I emphasise that here, too, a group of
      revolutionary workers should necessarily be the core, the leader, the
      “master.” We must break completely with the traditional type of
      purely labour or purely trade-union Social-Democratic organisation,
      including the “factory” circles. The factory group,
      or the factory (mill) committee (to distinguish it from other groups of
      which there should be a great number) should consist of a very small
      number of revolutionaries, who take their instructions and
      receive their authority to carry on all Social-Democratic work in the
      factory directly from the committee. Every member of the factory
      committee should regard himself as an

    

      agent of the committee, obliged to submit to all its orders and to observe
      all the “laws and customs” of the “army in the
      field” which he has joined and from which in time of war he has no
      right to absent himself without official leave. The composition of the
      factory commitee is therefore a matter of very great importance, and one
      of the chief duties of the committee should be to see to the proper
      organisation of these subcommittees. This is how I picture it: the
      committee instructs certain of its members (plus, let us say, certain
      workers who for some reason or other have not been included in the
      committee, but who can be very useful by reason of their experience,
      knowledge of people, intelligence, and connections) to organise factory
      subcommittees everywhere. This group consults with the district
      representatives, arranges for a number of meetings, thoroughly checks
      candidate-members of the factory subcommittees, subjects them to close
      cross-examination, where necessary puts them to the test, endeavouring
      personally to examine and verify the largest possible number of
      candidate-members of the sub committee of the factory in question, and,
      finally, submits a list of members for each factory circle to the
      committee for approval, or proposes that authority be given to some
      designated worker to set up, nominate or select a complete
      subcommittee. In this way, the committee will also deter mine which of
      these agents is to maintain contact with it and how the contact
      is to be maintained (as a general rule, through the district
      representatives, but this rule may be supplemented and modified). In view
      of the importance of these factory subcommittees, we must see to it as far
      as possible that every subcommittee is in possession of an
      address to which it can direct its communication to the C.O. and of a
      repository for its list of contacts in some safe place (i.e.,
      that the information required for the immediate re establishment of the
      subcommittee in the event of arrests is transmitted as regularly and as
      fully as possible to the Party centre, for safekeeping in a place where
      the Russian gendarmes are unable to get at it). It is a matter of course
      that the transmission of addresses must be determined by the committee at
      its own discretion and on the basis of the facts at its disposal, and not
      on the basis of some non existent right to a “democratic”
      allocation of these addresses.

    

      Finally, it is perhaps not superfluous to mention that it may sometimes be
      necessary, or more convenient, to confine ourselves to the
      appointment of one agent from the

      commit tee 

      (and an alternate for him) instead of a factory subcommittee consisting of
      several members. As soon as the factory subcommittee has been formed it
      should proceed to organise a number of factory groups and circles with
      diverse tasks and varying degrees of secrecy and organisational form, as,
      for instance, circles for delivering and distributing literature (this is
      one of the most important functions, which must be organised so as to
      provide us with a real postal service of our own, so as to possess tried
      and tested methods, not only for distributing literature, but also for
      delivering it to the homes, and so as to provide a definite knowledge of
      all the workers’ addresses and ways of reaching them); circles for reading
      illegal literature; groups for tracking down

      spies[2]

;

      circles for giving special guidance to the trade-union movement and the
      economic struggle; circles of agitators and propagandists who know how to
      initiate and to carry on long talks in an absolutely legal way
      (on machinery, inspectors, etc.) and so be able to speak safely and
      publicly, to get to know people and see how the land lies,

      etc.[3]

      The factory subcommittee should endeavour to embrace the whole factory,
      the largest possible number of the workers, with a network of all kinds of
      circles (or agents). The success of the subcommittee’s activities should
      be measured by the abundance of such circles, by their accessibility to
      touring propagandists and, above all, by the correctness of the regular
      work done in the distribution of literature and the collection of
      information and correspondence.
    
 

      To sum up, the general type of organisation, in my opinion, should be as
      follows: a committee should be at the head of the entire local movement,
      of all the local Social-Democratic activities. From it should stem the
      institutions and branches subordinate to it, such as, first, the
      network of executive agents embracing (as far as possible) the whole
      working-class mass and organised in the form of district groups
      and factory (mill) subcommittees. In times of peace this network will be
      engaged in distributing literature, leaflets, proclamations and the secret
      communications from the committee; in times of war it will organise
      demonstrations and similar collective activities. Secondly, the committee
      will also branch out into circles and groups of all kinds serving the
      whole movement (propaganda, transport, all kinds of underground
      activities, etc.). All groups, circles, subcommittees, etc., should enjoy
      the status of committee institutions or branches of a committee. Some of
      them will openly declare their wish to join the Russian Social-Democratic
      Labour Party and, if endorsed by the committee, will join the Party, and
      will assume definite functions (on the instructions of, or in agreement
      with, the committee), will undertake to obey the orders of the Party
      organs, receive the same rights as all Party members, and be regarded as
      immediate candidates for membership of the committee, etc. Others will not
      join the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, and will have the status
      of circles formed by Party members, or associated with one Party group or
      another, etc.
    

      In all internal matters, members of all these circles
      are of course on an equal footing, as are all members of a committee. The
      only exception will be that the right of personal contact with
      the local committee (as well as with the G.C. and the C.O.) will be
      reserved solely to the person (or persons) appointed for that purpose by
      the committee. In all other respects, this person will be on an equal
      footing with the rest, who will also have the right to present statements
      (but not in person) to the local committee and to the C.C. and C.O. It
      follows that the exception indicated will not at all be an infraction of
      the principle of equality, but merely a necessary concession to the
      absolute demands of secrecy. A member of a committee who fails to transmit

    

      a communication of his “own” group to the committee, the
      C.C. or the C.O., will be guilty of a direct breach of Party
      duty. Further, the degree of secrecy and the organisational form of the
      various circles will depend upon the nature of the functions: accordingly,
      the organisations will be most varied (ranging from the “strictest,”
      narrowest, and most restricted type of organisation to the “freest,”
      broadest, most loosely constituted, and open type). For instance,
      strictest secrecy and military discipline must be maintained in the
      distributing groups. The propagandists’ groups must also maintain secrecy,
      but be under far less military discipline. Workers’ groups for reading
      legal literature, or for organising discussions on trade-union needs and
      demands call for still less secrecy, and so on. The distributing groups
      should belong to the R.S.D.L.P. and know a certain number of its members
      and functionaries. The groups for studying labour conditions and drawing
      up trade-union demands need not necessarily belong to the
      R.S.D.L.P. Groups of students, officers, or office employees engaged in
      self-education in conjunction with one or two Party members
      should in some cases not even be aware that these belong to the Party,
      etc. But in one respect we must absolutely demand the maximum
      degree of organisation in all these branch groups, namely, that every
      Party member belonging to such a group is formally responsible for the
      conduct of work in the group and is obliged to take every measure
      in order that the composition of each of these groups, the whole
      mechanism of its work, and the content of that work should be
      known as fully as possible to the C.C. and the C.O. That
      is necessary in order that the centre may have a complete picture
      of the whole movement, that the selection for various Party posts may be
      made from the widest possible circle of people; that all groups of a
      similar nature throughout Russia may learn from one another (through the
      medium of the centre), and that warning may be given in the event of the
      appearance of agents provocateurs or suspicious characters—
      in a word, that is absolutely and vitally necessary in all cases.
    

      How is it to be done? By submitting regular reports to the committee, by
      transmitting to the C.O. as much of the contents as possible of as large a
      number of reports as possible, by arranging that members of the C.C. and
      the local

    

      committee visit the various circles, and, finally, by making it
      obligatory to hand over the list of contacts with these circles,
      i.e., the names and addresses of several members of each circle, for
      safekeeping (and to the Party bureau of the C.O and the C.C.). Only when
      reports are submitted and contacts transmitted will it be possible to say
      of a Party member belonging to a given circle that he has done his duty;
      only then will the Party as a whole be in a position to learn
      from every circle that is carrying on practical work; only then will
      arrests and dragnets lose their terror for us, for if contacts are
      maintained with the various circles it will always be easy for a delegate
      of our G.G. to find substitutes immediately and have the work
      resumed. The arrest of a committee will then not destroy the whole
      machine, but only remove the leaders, who will always have candidates
      ready. And let it not be said that the transmission of reports and
      contacts is impossible because of the need to maintain secrecy: once there
      is the desire to do so, it is always, and will always, be
      possible to hand over (or forward) reports and contacts, so long as we
      have committees, a C.C. or a C.O.
    

      This brings us to a highly important principle of all Party organisation
      and all Party activity: while the greatest possible
      centralisation is necessary with regard to the ideological and
      practical leadership of the movement and the revolutionary
      struggle of the proletariat, the greatest possible
      decentralisation is necessary with regard to keeping the Party centre
      (and therefore the Party as a whole) informed about the movement,
      and with regard to responsibility to the Party. The leadership of
      the movement should be entrusted to the smallest possible number of the
      most homogeneous possible groups of professional revolutionaries with
      great practical experience. Participation in the movement should extend to
      the greatest possible number of the most diverse and heterogeneous groups
      of the most varied sections of the proletariat (and other classes of the
      people). The Party centre should always have before it, not only exact
      information regarding the activities of each of these groups, but also the
      fullest possible information regarding their composition. We must
      centralise the leadership of the movement. We must also (and for that
      very reason, since without information centralisation is impossible)
      as far as possible

    

      decentralise responsibility to the Party on the part of its
      individual members, of every participant in its work, and of every circle
      belonging to or associated with the Party. This decentralisation is an
      essential prerequisite of revolutionary centralisation and an
      essential corrective to it. Only when centralisation has been
      carried through to the end and when we have a C.O. and a C.C., will it be
      possible for every group, however small, to communicate with
      them—and not only communicate with them, but to do so
      regularly as a result of a system established by years of
      experience—only then will the possibility of grievous consequences
      resulting from an accidentally unfortunate composition of a local
      committee be eliminated. Now that we are coming close to actual unity in
      the Party and to the creation of a real leading centre, we must well
      remember that this centre will be powerless if we do not at the
      same time introduce the maximum of decentralisation both with
      regard to responsibility to the centre and with regard to keeping it
      informed of all the cogs and wheels of the Party machine. This
      decentralisation is nothing but the reverse side of the division of
      labour which is generally recognised to be one of the most urgent
      practical needs of our movement. No official recognition of a given
      organisation as the leading body, no setting-up of a formal C.G. will make
      our movement really united, or create an enduring militant Party, if the
      Party centre continues to be cut off from direct practical work
      by the local committees of the old type, i.e., by committees such as are,
      on the one hand, made up of a regular jumble of persons, each of whom
      carries on all and every kind of work, without devoting himself to some
      definite type of revolutionary work, without assuming responsibility for
      some special duty, without carrying through a piece of work to the end,
      once it has been undertaken, thoroughly considered and prepared, wasting
      an enormous amount of time and energy in radicalist noise-making, while,
      on the other hand, there is a great mass of students’ and workers’
      circles, half of which are altogether unknown to the committee, while the
      other half are just as cumbersome, just as lacking in specialisation, just
      as little given to acquiring the experience of professional
      revolutionaries or to benefiting from the experience of others, just as
      taken

    

      up with endless conferences “about everything,” with elections and
      with drafting rules, as the committee itself. For the centre to be able to
      work properly, the local committees must reorganise themselves;
      they must become specialised and more “business-like”
      organisations, achieving real “perfection” in one or another
      practical sphere. For the centre not only to advise, persuade, and argue
      (as has been the case hitherto), but really conduct the orchestra, it is
      necessary to know exactly who is playing which fiddle, and where and how;
      where and how instruction has been or is being received in playing each
      instrument; who is playing out of tune (when the music begins to jar on
      the ear), and where and why; and who should be transferred, and how and
      where to, so that the discord may be remedied, etc. At the present
      time—this must be said openly—we either know nothing about the
      real internal work of a committee, except from its proclamations
      and general correspondence, or we know about it from friends or good
      acquaintances. But it is ridiculous to think that a huge Party, which is
      capable of leading the Russian working-class movement and which is
      preparing a general onslaught upon the autocracy, can limit itself to
      this. The number of committee members should be cut down; each of them,
      wherever possible, should be entrusted with a definite, special and,
      important function, for which he will be held to account; a special, very
      small, directing centre must be set up; a network of executive agents must
      be developed, linking the committee with every large factory, carrying on
      the regular distribution of literature and giving the centre an exact
      picture of this distribution and of the entire mechanism of the work;
      lastly, numerous groups and circles must be formed, which will undertake
      various functions or unite persons who are close to the Social-Democrats,
      who help them and are preparing to become Social-Democrats, so that the
      committee and the centre may be constantly informed of the activities (and
      the composition) of these circles—these are the lines along which
      the St. Petersburg, and all the other committees of the Party, should be
      reorganised; and this is why the question of Rules is of so little
      importance.
    

      I have begun with an analysis of the draft Rules in order to bring out the
      drift of my proposals more clearly. And as

    

      a result it will, I hope, have become clear to the reader that in fact it
      would perhaps be possible to get along without Rules,
      substituting for them regular reports about each circle and every aspect
      of the work. What can one put in the Rules? The committee guides the work
      of everyone (this is clear as it is). The committee elects an executive
      group (this is not always necessary, and when it is necessary it is not a
      matter of Rules but of informing the centre of the composition of
      this group and of the candidate-members to it). The committee distributes
      the various fields of work among its members, charging every member to
      make regular reports to the committee and to keep the G.O. and
      C.C. informed about the progress of the work (here, too, it is more
      important to inform the centre of whatever assignments have been made than
      to include in the Rules a regulation which more frequently than
      not will go by the board because of scarcity of our forces). The
      committee must specify exactly who its members are. New members are added
      to the committee by co-optation. The committee appoints the district
      groups, factory subcommittees and certain groups (if you wish to enumerate
      them you will never be done, and there is no point approximately in
      enumerating them in the Rules; it is sufficient to inform the centre about
      their organisation). The district groups and subcommittees organise the
      following circles.... It would be all the less useful to draw up such
      Rules at present since we have practically no general Party experience
      (and in many places none whatever) with regard to the activities of the
      various groups and subgroups of this sort, and in order to acquire such
      experience what is needed is not Rules but the organisation of Party
      information, if I may put it in this way. Each of our local organisations
      now spends at least a few evenings on discussing Rules. If instead, each
      member would devote this time to making a detailed and well-prepared
      report to the entire Party on his particular function, the work
      would gain a hundredfold.
    

      And it is not merely because revolutionary work does not always lend
      itself to definite organisational form that Rules are useless. No,
      definite organisational form is necessary, and we must endeavour to
      give such form to all our work as far as possible. That is
      permissible to a much greater

    

      extent than is generally thought, and achievable not through Rules but
      solely and exclusively (we must keep on reiterating this) through
      transmitting exact information to the Party centre; it is only then that
      we shall have real organisational form connected with real responsibility
      and (inner-Party) publicity. For who of us does not know that
      serious conflicts and differences of opinion among us are
      actually decided not by vote “in accordance with the Rules,” but by
      struggle and threats to “resign”? During the last three or four
      years of Party life the history of most of our committees has
      been replete with such internal strife. It is a great pity that this
      strife has not assumed definite form: it would then have been much more
      instructive for the Party and would have contributed much more to the
      experience of our successors. But no Rules can create such useful
      and essential definiteness of organisational form; this can be done solely
      through inner-Party publicity. Under the autocracy we can have no
      other means or weapon of inner-Party publicity than keeping the Party
      centre regularly informed of Party events.
    

      And only after we have learned to apply this inner-Party publicity on a
      wide scale shall we actually be able to amass experience in the
      functioning of the various organisations; only on the basis of such
      extensive experience over a period of many years shall we be able to draw
      up Rules that will not be mere paper Rules.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      We must try to get on the committee revolutionary workers who have the
      greatest contacts and the best “reputation” among the mass of
      the workers.
    —Lenin

[2]

      We must get the workers to understand that while the killing of spies,
      agents provocateurs, and traitors may sometimes, of course, be
      absolutely unavoidable, it is highly undesirable and mistaken to make a
      system of it, and that we must strive to create an organisation which will
      be able to render spies innocuous by exposing them and tracking
      them down. It is impossible to do away with all spies, but to create an
      organisation which will ferret them out and educate the
      working-class masses is both possible and necessary.
    —Lenin

[3]

      We also need combat groups, in which Workers who have had military
      training or who are particularly strong and agile should be enrolled, to
      act in the event of demonstrations, in arranging escapes. from prison,
      etc.
    —Lenin
 



[4]

A Letter to a Comrade on Our Organisational Tasks was a reply to
      a letter from the St. Petersburg Social-Democrat A. A. Shneyerson
      (Yeryoma) criticising the way Social-Democratic work was organised in that
      city.
    

      After the arrest of V. I. Lenin and his close associates in December 1895,
      the “economists” gradually gained control of the League of
      Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class. Unlike the
      revolutionary Marxists, who fought for the creation of an under ground and
      centralised organisation of revolutionaries, the “economists”
      derogated the significance of political struggle and came out for creation
      of a broad working-class organisation based on the elective principle and
      pursuing the primary aim of immediate defence of the workers’ economic
      interests, formation of mutual aid banks, and the like. The
      “economists’\thinspace" long control of the League of Struggle

   

      left an imprint on its organisational structure too: its working-class
      membership (the so-called Workers’ Organisation) was artificially
      separated from the intellectual members. The League’s clumsy organisation
      was more adapted for a trade-union form of struggle than for leadership of
      the workers’ mass revolutionary struggle against the autocracy and the
      bourgeoisie. The struggle between the Iskra-ists and the
      “economists” which developed in the St. Petersburg organisation
      culminated in the St. Petersburg Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. going over to
      the Iskra stand in the summer of 1902.
    

      “Two questions were raised,” it was reported in Iskra’s
      No. 30 of December 15, 1902, “at a meeting held in the outskirts of
      St. Petersburg in June, which was attended by workers
      representing all five wards of the Workers’ Organisation (who
      comprised the highest body of the then Workers’ Organisation). These
      questions were: 1) the two trends in Russian Social-Democracy: the old
      ’economist’ trend, which hitherto obtained in St. Petersburg, and the
      revolutionary, as represented by Iskra and Zarya, and 2)
      principles of organisation (so-called ’democratism’ or an ’organisation of
      revolutionaries’). On both issues all the workers came out
      unanimously against ’economism’ and ’democratism’ and in favour
      of the Iskra trend.”
    

      To reconstruct the St. Petersburg League of Struggle in the spirit of
      Iskra organisational principles, a committee was set up composed
      of representatives of the Iskra organisation, the Workers’
      Organisation, and the St. Petersburg Committee. However, the
      “economists,” headed by Tokarev, stated that they disagreed with the
      St. Petersburg Committee’s decision on support for the Iskra
      stand, formed the so-called Workers’ Organisation’s Committee, and
      launched a struggle against the Iskra-ists. The latter, with the
      support of the workers, were able to retain their positions and fortify
      their standing in the St. Petersburg organisation.
    

A Letter to a Comrade, in which Lenin developed and gave concrete
      shape to his plan for the Party’s organisation, was received in
      St. Petersburg at the height of the struggle against the
      “economists.” It was hectographed, copied by hand, and distributed
      among St. Petersburg Social-Democrats. In June 1903 it was illegally
      published by the Siberian Social-Democratic League under the title of
      On Revolutionary Work in the Organisations of the R.S.D.L.P. (A Letter
      to a Comrade). This Letter was published by the R.S.D.L.P.’s
      Central Committee as a separate pamphlet, with a preface and postscript by
      Lenin, who also prepared the pamphlet for the press. The Letter
      was widely distributed in Social-Democratic organisations, police archives
      for 1902-05 revealing that it was found during police raids in Moscow,
      Riga, Rostov-on-Don, Nakhichevan, Nikolayev, Krasnoyarsk, Irkutsk, and
      elsewhere.
    

      The Archives of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C.P.S.U.’s
      Central Committee contain only the first manuscript page of the
      Letter, with the following inscription in Lenin’s hand: “To
      the St. Petersburg Committee in general and to Comrade Yeryoma in
      particular (from Lenin).”
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Political Struggle and Political Chicanery









Lenin: Political Struggle and Political Chicanery







V. I.  

      Lenin
Political Struggle and Political Chicanery




Published:
Isrka, No. 26, October 15, 1902.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 253-261.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      At present

      it

      seems that the home policy of the Russian Government can least of all he
      accused of insufficient resoluteness and clarity. The fight against the
      enemy at home is in full swing. Hardly ever has there been a time when
      fortresses, prisons, police stations, and even private homes and
      apartments temporarily converted into lock-ups have been so crammed with
      persons under arrest. There is no room for all those who have been seized;
      it is impossible to send all the exiles to Siberia by the usual
      “means of transportation,” without equipping extraordinary
      “expeditions”; there are neither the forces nor the means for
      instituting a uniform regime for all prisoners, and the wholly arbitrary
      behaviour of the distraught and tyrannical local authorities especially
      rouses the indignation of the prisoners and drives them to protest,
      struggle, and hunger-strikes. The higher authorities, however, while
      leaving it to the small fry to deal with the internal enemies already in
      custody, are zealously continuing their labours to “improve”
      and reorganise the police with a view to striking further against the very
      roots and branches. It is war pure and simple, and it is not only be
      coming apparent to ever greater masses of the Russian population, but is
      actually being more or less directly felt by them. The vanguard of police
      and gendarmerie flying squads are slowly but surely followed by the heavy
      artillery of the law. Take the laws of the preceding month, and the first
      things to strike you are the new ukases which destroy the last vestiges of
      Finland’s liberties, and in addition, perhaps, the extensive law on mutual
      aid societies for the nobility. The first of these measures completely
      under mines the independence of the Finnish courts and

      Senate,

    

      making

      it

      possible for the Governor-General to know every thing, to control
      everything, i. e., actually converting Finland into one of those numerous
      Russian provinces which enjoy no rights and are abased. From now on,
      remarks Finlandskaya Gazeta, the police-controlled government
      newspaper, there is hope for the “harmonious” activity of all
      local institutions.... I am at a loss to say whether this is a malicious
      sneer at an unarmed foe who has been dealt a most foul and deliberate
      blow, or unctuous twaddle in the spirit of “Judas”

      Golovlyov.[2]


      The second of the laws mentioned above is the latest offspring of the same
      Select Committee for Affairs of the Nobility, which has already blessed
      the fatherland with the looting of Siberian lands (“the imposition of
      landed proprietorship in

      Siberia”).[3]
      At a time of severe commercial and industrial crisis and complete
      impoverishment in the countryside, when millions of workers and peasants
      are prey to hunger, malnutrition, and distress, it is of course impossible
      even to imagine a better way of using the people’s money than for
      hand-outs to the unfortunate landed gentry. First, the government will
      grant to each mutual aid society for the nobility a certain lump sum
      (“at the discretion of His Majesty the Emperor”!), and, secondly,
      over a period of ten years it will grant them as much again as members of
      the local nobility will themselves contribute. The societies will assist
      those who have difficulty in paying interest on loans. The gentlemen of
      the nobility need have no compunction about accepting loans when they have
      been shown such an easy way of getting money for payments from the pockets
      of the people.
    

      And as if deliberately to sum up this policy of persecution, violence, and
      plunder, to generalise and consecrate it, there came the tsar’s addresses
      to the nobility, Zemstvoists, peasants, and workers (in Kursk and
      St. Peters burg). The tsar thanked the nobility for the service it had
      rendered him, service “dictated by conscience rather than by fear,”
      and promised to display ceaseless concern in the promotion of landed
      proprietorship, “which constitutes the age-old pillar of law and
      order and of the moral strength of Russia.” To the Zemstvoists the tsar
      said nothing at all either about a pillar, or about the moral strength of

    

      Russia,

      or about service dictated by conscience rather than by fear. He
      told them briefly and plainly that their “mission is to organise
      local efforts in the sphere of economic requirements,” and that only if
      they bore this in mind, only if they discharged this mission successfully,
      could they be assured of his graciousness. This was an absolutely definite
      answer to the constitutional yearnings of the Zemstvoists, a direct
      warning (or, to be more exact, challenge) to them, a threat to withhold
      his “graciousness” in the event of the slightest transgression
      on their part beyond the bounds of “local efforts in the sphere of
      economic requirements.”
    

      Further, to the peasants the tsar openly expressed censure for the
      “disturbances” and the “plunder of estates,” describing
      as “merited punishment” the brutal beating and torture of the
      muzhiks who had risen in hunger and

      desperation,. 

      and recalling the words of Alexander III, who had en joined them to
      “obey the Marshals of the Nobility.”  Lastly, to the workers the
      tsar spoke neither more nor less than “about enemies,” his
      enemies, who should also be the enemies of the workers.
    

      And so, the noblemen are the faithful servants and the age-old pillar of
      law and order. The Zemstvoists (or Zemstvo noblemen?) get a warning. The
      peasants too are censured and are commanded to obey the noblemen. The
      workers are faced squarely with the question of enemies.
      Instructive speeches. It is instructive to compare them, and it would be
      most desirable to acquaint as many people as possible both with the exact
      text and the real meaning of these speeches, through the medium of
      proclamations, leaflets, and talks in study circles and at
      meetings. Simple explanatory notes to the text of these speeches would
      serve as splendid material for agitation among the most unenlightened part
      of the most backward sections of the working class, the small

      traders.and 

      manufacturers, and the peasantry. And not only the “ignorant,” but
      also many an enlightened and educated Russian citizen would also benefit
      by careful pondering over the tsar’s speeches—especially from among
      the liberals in general and among the Zemstvoists in particular. It is not
      often that one hears from the lips of royalty such an explicit avowal,
      confirmation, and declaration of war at home: war

    

      of the various classes of the population, war against domestic
      enemies. And an open avowal of war is an excellent remedy against all and
      sundry forms of political chicanery, i.e., attempts to gloss over, evade
      and hush up the war, or attempts to constrict and dwarf its nature.
    

      The political chicanery to which we refer is exhibited both by the
      government and the peaceful opposition, and occasionally even by the
      revolutionaries (although it is true that in the case of the latter it
      assumes a special form which does not resemble the former). On the part of
      the government it is deliberate enticement, bribery, and corruption, in
      short, a system that has come to be known as “Zubatovism.” Promises of
      more or less extensive reforms, actual readiness to carry out the tiniest
      fraction of what has been promised, and the demand to refrain from
      political struggle in return for this—such is the essence of
      Zubatovism. Now even some of the Zemstvoists already see that the parleys
      between Mr. Plehve, Minister of the Interior, and Mr. D. N. Shipov
      (Chairman of the Moscow Zemstvo Board) constitute the beginning of
      “Zemstvo Zubatovism.” Plehve promises to deal “more
      favourably” with the Zemstvo (cf. Osvobozhdeniye, No. 7),
      promises to convene a conference of chair men of Zemstvo Boards early next
      year for “settling all questions concerning the functioning of
      Zemstvo institutions,” demanding in return that the Zemstvoists “say
      nothing about representation in the higher government bodies.” It would
      appear that the matter is as clear as can be: the promise is most
      indefinite, while the demand is such that, if it is complied with, the
      Zemstvoists’ yearnings cannot be realised. Against this political deceit,
      trickery, and corruption there is only one remedy: merciless exposure of
      the tricksters, and a resolute political (i. e., in Russian conditions,
      revolutionary) struggle against the police autocracy. Judging by
      Osvobozhdeniye, our Zemstvoists, however, are not yet equal to
      this task. They reply to political chicanery in kind, and their mouth
      piece betrays utter instability. In No. 7 of Osvobozhdeniye this
      instability is particularly glaring owing to the fact that opinions on the
      question at issue are voiced not only by the editors but also by several
      contributors with whom the editors more or less disagree. In the
      editorial, the view

    

      that Plehve’s promises are a trap and an expression of Zubatovism Is given
      only as the opinion of a few Zemstvoists, and right next to this we are
      given the opinion of other Zemstvoists who “are inclined to follow
      the minister’s instructions” (!!). The editors are far from the idea
      of launching a campaign against Zemstvo Zubatovism. They have cautioned
      the Zemstvoists against “concessions” to the government (in
      Nos. 5 and 6), but they do not come out with a resolute condemnation of
      Mr. Shipov and Co., who have heeded the advice of the old police fox and
      deleted from the agenda of the spring congress of the Zemstvo Point 4
      (which dealt with the necessity of supplementing the Select Committee on
      the Needs of the Agricultural Industry with elected Zemstvo
      representatives). The conclusion drawn by the editors in their leading
      article is not that the Zemstvo is degraded because part of the
      Zemstvoists have fallen for the police’s vile bait, but because the very
      fact of negotiations between the government and the Zemstvo “proves
      that the Zemstvo is now already a ’representative body’" (!!) andthat the
      “congress” promised by Mr. Plehve (it seems to me Mr. Plehve
      spoke only about a “conference”?)  “is desirable in any case,”
      since it “cannot but clear up the relations between the Zemstvo and
      the government.” The editors are “firmly convinced that the
      Zemstvoists will behave at the congress as befits them— as
      representatives of the people, and not as assistants to the ministers in
      the economic sphere.” If one judges solely by this leading article, one
      must, on the contrary, be firmly convinced that the Zemstvoists will again
      act as “assist ants” of the police authorities, as
      Messrs. Shipov and Co. have done (until another Zemstvo trend thrusts them
      aside, or refashions them).
    

      A welcome relief from the political chicanery in this leading article is
      offered by further articles from contributors: Mr. Anton Staritsky’s and
      even more so the article of the Zemstvo Councillor Mr. T. The former calls
      the action of Mr. Shipov and Co. a “false step,” advises the
      Zemstvoists “not to be hasty in thinking that some sort of congress
      arranged by Mr. Plehve will confirm them in their birthright,” advises
      them not to fall for the bait, and refrain from political chicanery. The
      editors comment:

    

      “On the whole we agree with the author of this article,” evidently in
      the opinion that, in particular, political chicanery should not be
      condemned so

      one-sidedly.[1]


      The second contributor, however, openly rebels against the entire stand of
      Osvobozhdeniye, attacking its incompleteness and irresolution,
      condemning such false language as, for instance, references to “the
      people’s anarchy,” and declaring that “it is impossible to rest
      content with half-measures, that it is necessary to decide to go on to the
      very end,” that “it is necessary to have done with the servile
      half-measures of the legal opposition...” “stopping at no
      sacrifice,” that “unless we become revolutionaries, we [Zemstvoists]
      will be unable to contribute anything substantial to the cause of the
      political emancipation of Russia.” From the bottom of our hearts we
      welcome these honest and firm statements by the Zemstvo councillor and
      earnestly advise everyone who takes an interest in the problem under
      examination to make a study of them. He fully confirms the
      appraisal of the Osvobozhdeniye programme given by us in
      Iskra. More than that: his article shows not only the correctness
      of our point of view, but also the expediency of our sharp exposure of the
      half-heartedness of liberalism. It appears that among the Zemstvoists
      themselves there are people who are repelled by shilly-shallying of any
      sort and whom we must make special efforts to support by ruthlessly
      criticising such shilly-shallying from our standpoint.
    

      The editor of Osvobozhdeniye, of course, does not agree with
      Zemstvo Councillor T. and—respectfully but firmly— declares:
      “We see many things in a different light....” To say the least! And
      what then are the objections of the editors? They boil down to two main
      points: firstly, Mr. Struve prefers peaceful paths “on principle,”
      in contrast, as he believes, to some revolutionaries; secondly, he accuses
      the latter of insufficient tolerance. Let us examine these objections.
    
 

      In an article headed “Apropos of a Reproach” Mr. Struve (the
      article is over his signature.—Ed.) quotes my article in No. 2-3 of
      Zarya (“The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of
      Liberalism”). What displeased him particularly, of course, were the words:
      “if, for once at least, the people taught the government a good
      lesson” it would be of “enormous historical

      significance.” [See present edition,
Vol. 5.—Ed.]

      You see, Mr. Struve decidedly and categorically disagrees that violent
      revolution is preferable to peaceful reform. The most resolute Russian
      revolutionaries, he says, preferred the peaceful path on principle, and no
      doctrines whatever can stifle this glorious tradition.
    

      It is difficult to conceive of anything more fallacious and laboured than
      this argument. Does Mr. Struve really fail to understand that a slave who
      has risen in revolt is morally entitled to speak about the preferability
      of peace with the slaveowner, whereas a slave who renounces rebellion
      sinks into shameful hypocrisy when he repeats the very same words?
      “The elements of revolution in Russia are, unfortunately or
      fortunately, not yet ripe,” says Mr. Struve, and this word
      “fortunately” shows him up completely.
    

      As for the glorious traditions of revolutionary thought, Mr. Struve would
      be well advised to keep silent on this score. We need only refer to the
      famous closing words of the Communist

Manifesto.[4]

      We need only recollect that thirty years after the publication of the
      Manifesto, when the German workers were deprived of a portion of
      the rights which the Russian people have never had, Engels retorted to
      Dühring in the following words:
    

      “To Herr Dühring force is the absolute evil; the first act of
      force is to him the original sin; his whole exposition is a jeremiad on
      the contamination of all subsequent his tory consummated by this original
      sin; a jeremiad on the shameful perversion of all natural and social laws
      by this diabolical power, force. That force, however, plays also another
      role in history, a revolutionary role; that, in the words of Marx, it is
      the midwife of every old society pregnant with a new one, that it is the
      instrument with the aid

    

      of which social movement forces its way through and shatters the dead,
      fossilised political forms—of this there is not a word in Herr
      Dühring. It is only with sighs and groans that he admits the
      possibility that force will perhaps be necessary for the overthrow of the
      economic system of exploitation—unfortunately, because all use of
      force, for sooth, demoralises the person who uses it. And this in spite of
      the immense moral and spiritual impetus which has been given by every
      victorious revolution! And this in Germany, where a violent
      collision—which indeed may be forced on the people—would at
      least have the advantage of wiping out the servility which has permeated
      the national consciousness as a result of the humiliation of the Thirty
      Years’ War. And this parsons’ mode of thought—lifeless, insipid and
      impotent—claims the right to impose itself on the most revolutionary
      party that history has

      known!"[5]


      Let us proceed to the second point, dealing with tolerance. What we need
      is “mutual understanding,” “complete frankness,” and
      “great tolerance” in relations between the various trends, we
      are unctuously instructed by Mr. Struve (like many
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and exponents of public opinion). Well, and what
      should we do, we ask him, if our complete frankness will seem to you to be
      lack of tolerance? If we, for example, find that Osvobozhdeniye
      has a right hand and a left hand, a pernicious and treacherous left hand,
      does not complete frankness make it incumbent upon us to wage ruthless
      battle against this left hand? Does not such frankness oblige us to fight
      against the adventurism (and political chicanery) of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, when they display it both in questions of the
      theory of socialism and in the attitude they have towards the class
      struggle in all their tactics? Is there even the slightest trace of
      political sense in the demand to water down this struggle and to render it
      innocuous for the sake of that which the very people this struggle is
      directed against are pleased to term tolerance?
    

      It is high time to dispense with your tawdry show of naïveté,
      gentlemen! High time to understand the simple truth that it is not
      political chicanery, not what the late

      Stepnyak[6]
      once called
      self-restriction and self-concealment, not the conventional lie of
      diplomatic mutual recognition

    

      that ensure a genuine (and not merely an alleged) joint struggle against
      the common enemy, but actual participation in the struggle, actual unity
      in struggle. When the struggle of the German Social-Democrats against the
      military-police and feudal-clerical reaction really became one with the
      struggle of any genuine party which relied for support upon a definite
      class of the people (for instance, the liberal bourgeoisie), then joint
      action was instituted without any phrase-mongering about mutual
      recognition. One does not talk about recognising a fact that is obvious to
      everyone and felt by everyone (we, for instance, do not ask anyone to
      recognise the working-class movement!). Only people who confuse politics
      with political chicanery can think that the “tone” of polemics
      can interfere with a genuine political alliance. But so long as we have
      evasive talk instead of genuine participation in our struggle, so long as
      we have only adventurist tactics instead of a genuine advance towards our
      struggle on the part of some other social stratum or class, no spate of
      threatening or miserable words will bring “mutual recognition”
      one iota nearer.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      In No. 8 of Osvobozhdeniye, which we have just received, we
      already have a more resolute condemnation of political chicanery and
      Mr. Shipov’s false step. Good! Perhaps the incident with this respected
      personage will induce the editors to look for the roots of
      “political chicanery” in their fundamental views about the
      relations between liberalism and the revolutionary trends?
    —Lenin
 



[2]

      Lenin refers to Porphiry (nicknamed “Judas”) Golovlyov, a
      sanctimonious, hypocritical landlord serf-owner described in
      M. Y. Saltykov-Shchedrin’s The Golovlyov Family.




[3]

      Lenin is referring to the Law of June 8(21), 1901, which turned government
      lands in Siberia over to private persons. The Law gave exceptional
      advantages to the landed nobility. Lenin made a detailed analysis and
      appraisal of this Law in his article, “Serf-Owners at Work”
      (see present edition, Vol. 5).
    



[4]

      Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp.
      64-65.
    



[5]

      Lenin is quoting from Engels’ Anti-Dühring (see Frederick
      Engels, Anti-Dühring, Moscow, 1959, pp. 253-54).
    



[6]

Stepnyak-Kravchinsky—the Russian Narodnaya Volya writer.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Concerning Demonstrations









Lenin: Concerning Demonstrations







V. I.  

      Lenin
Concerning Demonstrations[1]




Written: Written late in October 1902 

Published:

      Published for the first time.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      page 262.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      It seems to us that the writer of the letter raises the question rather
      too bluntly and underestimates the significance of organised
      demonstrations. We have as yet done little in this important matter, and
      our efforts must be concentrated mainly and primarily on organisation. As
      long as we

      Lack 

      solidly united revolutionary organisations capable of mustering several
      detachments of picked people to direct all aspects of a demonstration, so
      long will failures be inevitable. Once an organisation like that takes
      shape and gains strength in the process of work, through a number of
      experiences, then it (and it alone) will be able to decide the question as
      to when and how it is necessary to arm, and when and how arms should be
      used. This organisation will also have to give serious attention to the
      question of raising “the speed of mobilisation” (a very
      important circumstance quite rightfully emphasised by the writer of the
      letter), of increasing the number of active demonstrators, training
      marshals for demonstrations, extending agitation among the masses, drawing
      “the crowd of onlookers” “into the work,” and of
      “corrupting” the troops. Precisely because a step like the
      transition to armed street fighting is a “tough” one and
      because it is “inevitable, sooner or later,” it can and should be
      taken only by a strong revolutionary organisation which directly
      leads the movement.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

“Concerning Demonstrations” is Lenin’s reply to a
      letter from a St.  Petersburg University student about the editorial
      article, “What Is to Be Done?” printed on September 15, 1902, in
      Iskra, No. 25.  The manuscript has no heading. The present
      heading has been provided by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the
      Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Vulgar Socialism and Narodism as Resurrected by the Socialist-Revolutionaries









Lenin: Vulgar Socialism and Narodism as Resurrected by the Socialist-Revolutionaries







V. I.  

      Lenin
Vulgar Socialism and Narodism as Resurrected by the Socialist-Revolutionaries




Published:
Iskra, No. 27, November 1, 1902.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 263-270.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      Ridicule has its good effects. In the articles entitled
      “Revolutionary

      Adventurism,”[See pp. 186-207 of this
volume.—Ed.]

      we expressed the firm conviction that our Socialist-Revolutionaries would
      never agree to state their theoretical position in unambiguous and precise
      terms. To refute so malignant and unjust a suggestion a series of articles
      has been started in No. 11 of Revolutsionnaya Rossiya under the
      title “Questions of Programme.” Good!  Better late than never. We
      welcome in advance all articles in Revolutsionnaya Rossiya on
      “questions of programme” and we promise close attention
      directed towards ascertaining whether it will actually be possible to
      extract any programme from them.
    

      With this end in view, let us examine the first article, “The Class
      Struggle in the Countryside,” but we shall first remark that when our
      opponents say (No. 11, p. 6) “our programme has been set out,” they
      are once more being unduly ... “carried away.” You must admit,
      gentlemen, that this is not true! You have not yet set out any programme,
      i.e., you have not only failed to produce a complete exposition of your
      views as officially endorsed by the Party (a programme in the narrow sense
      of the word, or at least a draft programme), but you have not even defined
      in the least your attitude towards such fundamental “questions of
      programme” as the question of Marxism and opportunist criticism of
      it, or the question of Russian capitalism, and of the position,
      significance, arid tasks of the proletariat which

    

      that capitalism has called into being, and so on. All we know of
      “your programme” is that you occupy an altogether indefinite
      position between revolutionary Social-Democracy and the
      opportunist trend on the one hand, and between Russian Marxism
      and Russian liberal Narodism on the other.
    

      We shall now show you, using the issue you have taken up, the kind of
      inextricable contradictions you are entangled in, as a result of this
      laboured attempt to sit between two stools. “It is not that we fail
      to understand, but we deny that the present-day peasantry as a whole
      belongs to the petty-bourgeois strata,” writes Revolutsionnaya
      Rossiya (No. 11). “We regard the peasantry as being sharply
      divided into two fundamentally different categories: 1) the working
      peasantry which lives by the exploitation of its own labour-power [!??]
      and 2) the rural bourgeoisie— middle and petty—which to a
      greater or lesser extent lives by the exploitation of the labour-power of
      others.” The Socialist-Revolutionary theoreticians, who consider that the
      “essential distinguishing feature” of the bourgeois class is
      its “source of income” (use of the unpaid labour of others),
      discover “tremendous similarity in principles” between the
      rural proletariat and the “independent farmers” who live by
      applying their own labour to the means of production. “Labour, as a
      definite category of political economy, is the basis of the existence of
      both groups. This is one point. Another is that under present conditions
      both are mercilessly exploited.” Consequently, they must be put
      into a single category of the working peasantry.
    

      We have deliberately presented the arguments of Revolutsionnaya
Rossiya in such detail in order to enable the reader to ponder over
them and to appraise their theoretical premises. That these premises are
without foundation is patent. To look for the fundamental distinguishing
feature of the various classes of society in their sources of income is
to give precedence to relations of distribution, which in reality are
only a consequence of relations of production. This error was long ago
pointed out by Marx, who described as vulgar socialists those who failed
to see it. The fundamental criterion by which classes are distinguished
is the place they occupy in social production, and, consequently,

    

      the relation in which they stand to the means of production. Appropriation
      of one part or another of the social means of production and its
      application to private enterprise, to undertakings organised for the sale
      of the product, is the fundamental distinction of one class in present-day
      society (the bourgeoisie) from the proletariat, which is deprived of the
      means of production and sells its labour-power.
    

      To proceed: “Labour, as a definite category of political
      economy, is the basis of the existence of both groups.” It is not labour
      that is a definite category of political economy, but only the social form
      of labour, the social organisation of labour, or, in other words, the
      mutual relations of people arising out of the part they play in social
      labour. The same mistake in vulgar socialism, which we have analysed
      above, is repeated here in another form. When the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries say: “In essence, the relations between
      farmer and farm-labourer, on the one hand, and between independent
      peasants and the money-lenders, the kulaks, on the other, are exactly the
      same,” they are reproducing in its entirety the mistake of, say, German
      vulgar socialism, which, in the person of Mühlberger, for example,
      stated that in essence the relations between employer and worker are the
      same as those between house owner and ten ant. Our Mühlbergers are
      equally incapable of distinguishing between the basic and the derivative
      forms of exploitation, and confine themselves to declamations on the
      subject of “exploitation” in general. Our Mühlbergers are
      equally incapable of understanding that it is precisely the exploitation
      of wage-labour that forms the basis of the whole predatory system of
      today, that it is the exploitation of wage-labour that leads to the
      division of society into irreconcilably opposed classes, and that only
      from the point of view of this class struggle can all other
      manifestations of exploitation be consistently gauged, without lapsing
      into vagueness and abandoning all principles. Our Mühlbergers must
      therefore meet from those Russian socialists who value the integrity of
      their movement and the “good name” of their revolutionary
      banner a rebuff just as decisive and merciless as that which the German
      Mühlberger met.
    

      To give a clearer idea of how muddled our Socialist Revolutionaries’
      “theory” is, we shall approach the question

    

      under discussion from its practical aspect and try to illustrate it by
      concrete examples. In the first place, the vast majority of the petty
      bourgeoisie is everywhere and always working and being
      exploited. Otherwise, why should it be classed among transitional and
      intermediate strata? In the second place, small artisans and tradesmen are
      working and being exploited in a commodity-producing society in
      exactly the same way as the peasants are. Perhaps our
      Socialist-Revolutionaries would like to create also a
      “category” of “working” trade-and-industrial
      population instead of the “narrow” category of the
      proletariat? Thirdly, in order that the Socialist-Revolutionaries may
      appreciate the importance of the “dogma” they so dislike, let
      them try to visualise a peasant living near some town, who, without hiring
      any hands, lives by his own labour and by the sale of all kinds of
      agricultural produce. We make bold to hope that even the most ardent
      Narodniks will not venture to deny that this sort of peasant
      belongs to the petty bourgeoisie and that it is impossible to
      “unite” him in the same class (mark you, we are
      talking of a class, not of a party) with the wage-workers. But is there
      any difference in principle between the position of this kind of
      commercial farmer and that of any small farmer in a society of a
      developing commodity economy?
    

      The question now arises how can we account for the fact that Messrs. the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries are (to put it mildly) drawing closer to vulgar
      socialism? May it not be a chance peculiarity in this particular writer?
      To refute this supposition it will suffice to quote the following passage
      from No. 11 of Revolutsionnaya Rossiya, where the writer
      exclaims: “As if it were all a matter of the size of one and the
      same economic category” (the big and petty bourgeois) “and not
      of a difference in principle” (just listen to that!) “between
      two categories, viz., labour economy and bourgeois capitalist
      economy!" It would be difficult for us even to imagine a more
      complete and obvious confirmation of what we said in our article,
      “Revolutionary Adventurism”: scratch a Socialist-Revolutionary
      and you find Mr. V.V. This sentence alone is enough to explain the
      Socialist- Revolutionaries’ position to anyone at all familiar with the
      evolution of Russian social and political thought. It

    

      is a known fact that at the bottom of the pale-pink quasi-socialism which
      used to embellish (and still embellishes) liberal Narodism, the trend
      prevalent in our educated society, lay the idea that peasant “labour
      economy” and bourgeois economy are diametrically opposed. This idea,
      various shades of which have been elaborated in detail by
      Messrs. Mikhailovsky, V.V., Nik.—on, and others, was one of the
      strongholds that Russian Marxism directed its criticism against. If, we
      said, you want to help the peasantry, which is being ruined and oppressed,
      you must be able to abandon illusions and squarely face the reality that
      is destroying the nebulous dreams about labour economy (or “people’s
      production”?) and revealing to us the petty-bourgeois character
      of peasant economy. In Russia, as everywhere else, small-scale labour
      economy can be developed and consolidated only by turning into
      petty-bourgeois economy. This transformation is actually in progress, and
      the working peasant’s true and real tendency towards small
      enterprise has been irrefutably confirmed by the facts of life. As
      commodity economy develops, our peasants, like all small producers and by
      the very fact that they are such, come under the category of petty
      bourgeois: they break up into a minority of entrepreneurs and a mass of
      proletarians; the latter are connected with the “petty
      proprietors” by a series of transitional stages of being
      half-workers and half-proprietors (such transitional forms exist in all
      capitalist countries and in all branches of industry).
    

      What then has been the attitude of the Socialist-Revolutionaries towards
      the supplanting of one trend of socialist thought by another, towards the
      struggle between the old Russian socialism and Marxism? They simply tried
      to evade making a thorough analysis of the question as long as they
      could. And when such evasion was no longer possible, when those who wanted
      to form a separate “party” were asked to give a clear
      explanation, when they were forced to reply, forced by derision and by a
      direct accusation of a lack of principle, only then did these people take
      to reiterating the old Narodnik theory of “labour economy” and
      the old errors of vulgar socialism. We repeat: we could not have wished
      for better confirmation of the charge we brought against the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, viz., of utterly

    

      lacking principle, than this article in No. 11, which at tempts to
      “unite” the theory of ’labour economy” with the theory
      of the class struggle.
    
 *     *  * 

      As a curiosity, we will add that in No. II of Revolatsionnaya
      Rossiya attempts are made to give a “plausible”
      explanation of the decision to avoid all polemics on matters of
      principle. We are told that Iskra misquotes in its article,
      “Revolutionary Adventurism.” An example? It omits, for example, the
      words “in certain places” (in certain places the land is
      passing from capital to labour). How dreadful! An irrelevant phrase has
      been omitted! Or, perhaps, Revolutsionnaya Rossiya will dare
      assert that the words “in certain places” have a relation,
      even the slightest, to the question of appraising the
      process of the passing of land in general (whether or not it is a
      bourgeois process)?  Let it try.
    

      Further. Iskra cut the quotation short at the words “by the
      state,” although this is followed by “of course, not by the present
      state.” Iskra (we will add) was even more malicious: it had the
      impudence to term this state a class state. Will our opponents
      who “have been stung to the quick” assert that the state
      spoken of in the “minimum programme” under examination is
      not a class state?
    

      Lastly, Iskra quoted the leaflet of April 3, in which even
      Revolultsionnaya Rossiya itself found the appraisal of terrorism
      exaggerated. Yes, we did quote the reservation made by
      Revolutsionnaya Rossiya, but we added that we regarded all this
      as mere “juggling” and vague hints. Revolutsionnaya
      Rossiya was greatly displeased by this, and has set out to explain
      and give details (thereby confirming in fact that there was an
      obscurity which required explanations). What are its explanations? At the
      demand of the Party, you see, amendments, were made in the
      leaflet of April 3. These amendments, however, “were considered in
      adequate,” and for that reason the words “in the name of the
      Party” were deleted from the leaflet. But the words “published
      by the Party” remained, and the second (the “real”) leaflet,
      which was brought out on the same date,

    

      April 3, did not say a word about differences or exaggerations. Having
      given these explanations and realising that they only confirm the
      legitimacy of Iskra’s demand for an explanation (in the words
      “juggling and hints”), Revolutsionnaya Rossiya asks itself
      the question: how could the Party have issued from its own press a leaflet
      with which is was not in agreement? The answer given by
      Revolutsionnaya Rossiya is as follows: “Why, in exactly the
      same way as Rabocheye Dyelo, Iskra, Rabochaya

Mysl,[3]
      and

      Borba[4]
      all appear with the imprint of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party.” Very well. But, in the first place, we have publications of
      different kinds, and they are printed not at the “Party”
      print-shop, but at the print-shops of the various groups. In the second
      place, when Rabochaya Mysl, Rabocheye Dyelo, and Iskra
      all appeared at the same time we ourselves said that this was
      confusion. What follows from that? It follows that the
      Social-Democrats themselves lay bare and brand confusion in their own
      ranks and try to get rid of it through serious work on theory,
      whereas the Socialist-Revolutionaries begin to admit that there is
      confusion in their ranks only after they have been exposed, and
      take the opportunity once again to boast of their broad-mindedness, which
      permits them to issue, on the same day and on the occasion of the same
      political event, two leaflets in which they give two diametrically
      opposite interpretations of the political significance of this event (a
      new terroristic act). Knowing as they do that no good can come of
      ideological confusion, the Social-Democrats preferred “first to draw
      a line of demarcation and then to

  unite,”[1]

      thereby ensuring both durability and fruitfulness of the future unity. But
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries, while interpreting their
      “programme” in different ways, each at his own sweet

      will,[2]
    

      maintain the fiction of “practical” unity and superciliously
      say to us: it is only among you, Social-Democrats, that various
      “groups” exist; we have—a party! Quite true, gentlemen, but
      history teaches us that sometimes the relations between
      “groups” and parties are like the relations between Pharaoh’s
      lean kine and fat kine. All sorts of “parties” exist. For example
      there was a Workers’ Party for the Political Liberation of Russia and yet
      its two years of existence passed as tracelessly as its disappearance did.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

See present edition, Vol. 4, p. 354.—Ed.


[2]

      You have only to compare Our Tasks, published by the former
      League of Socialist-Revolutionaries, with the Manifesto of the former
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party (see No. 5 of Iskra), then with the
      editorial statement in No. 1 of Vestnik Russkot Revolutsii, the
      “programme” articles in Nos. 7-11 of
      Revolutstonnaya Rossiya and the pamphlet, Freedom,
      published by the so-called Workers’ Party for the Political Liberation of
      Russia, whose fusion with the Socialist-Revolutionary Party was recently
      announced in Revolutstonnaya Rossiya.
    —Lenin
 



[3]

Rabochaya Mysl (Workers’ Thought)—a newspaper, the most con
      sistent organ of the “economists,” which was published from October
      1897, to December 1902. Sixteen numbers were issued. The first two numbers
      were mimeographed in St. Petersburg; Nos. 3-11 were issued abroad, in
      Berlin; printing of Nos. 12, 13, 14, and 15 was effected in Warsaw; the
      last, No. 16, was issued abroad. The newspaper was edited by
      K. M. Takhtarev and others.
    

      Lenin criticised the views of Rabochaya Mysl as a Russian variety
      of international opportunism in his article, “A Retrograde Trend in
      Russian Social-Democracy” (see present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 255-85),
      in articles published in Iskra, and in the book, What Is to
      Be Done?




[4]

      Lenin gives a detailed assessment of the Borba group in his
      article, “On the Borba Group” (see p. 160 of this
      volume).
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the Tasks of the Social-Democratic Movement









Lenin: On the Tasks of the Social-Democratic Movement







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Tasks of the Social-Democratic Movement[1]




Written: Written in November 1902 

Published:

      First published in 1939 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsie, No. 1.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 271-272.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      When hypocritical flirting with both the working class and the
      “legal” opposition goes hand in hand with action on the part
      of a horde of infuriated scoundrels of the type of Val or

      Obolensky,[2]
      it means that the government wants to corrupt and split up those masses
      and sections of the people which it is powerless to break, and in order to
      facilitate its task it wants to divert the revolutionary forces, small as
      their number is, to hunt down each of these scoundrels. It does not matter
      whether one representative or another of the government is aware of this
      in general, or how well he is aware of it. What matters is that the
      tactics to which the government is impelled by all its immense political
      experience and police instinct, r e a l l y has this
      significance. When the revolutionary movement permeates the truly
      revolutionary classes of the people, moreover, when it grows in depth and
      extent, holding out the promise of developing soon into an invincible
      force, then the government finds it advantageous to provoke the best
      revolutionary forces to hunt after mediocre leaders of most outrageous
      violence. But we must not allow our selves to be provoked. We must not
      lose our heads at the very first peals of really revolutionary thunder
      coming from the people, cast all caution to the winds, and, to ease mind
      and conscience, eschew all the experience of Europe and the experience of
      Russia, all more or less definite socialist convictions, all claims to
      fundamentally consistent, and not adventurist, tactics. In short, we must
      not allow realisation of an attempt to restore the Narodnaya Volya
      movement and to repeat all its theoretical and practical

    

      mistakes that the Socialist-Revolutionaries have under taken and persist
      in furthering more and more. Our answer to efforts made to corrupt the
      masses and provoke the revolutionaries must not be given in a
      “programme” which would open the door wide to the most harmful
      old mistakes and to new ideological waverings, or in tactics that would
      tend to deepen the isolation of the revolutionaries from the masses, which
      is the main source of our weakness and of our incapacity to start a
      determined struggle at once. We must answer by strengthening the contact
      between the revolutionaries and the people, and this contact can be
      established in our time only by developing and strengthening the
      Social-Democratic labour movement. Only the working-class movement rouses
      that truly revolutionary and advanced class which has nothing to lose from
      the collapse of the existing political and social order, the class which
      is the final and inevitable product of that order, the class which alone
      is the unquestionable and uncompromising enemy of that order. Only by
      relying upon the theory of revolutionary Marxism, upon the experience of
      international Social-Democracy, clan we bring about the fusion of our
      revolutionary movement with the labour movement and create an invincible
      Social-Democratic movement. Only in the name of a real workers’ party can
      we, without losing faith in our convictions, call on all the progressive
      elements in the country to join in revolutionary work, call on all
      working, all suffering and oppressed people to support socialism.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

“On the Tasks of the Social-Democratic Movement” is
      an excerpt from an article which Lenin wrote in November 1902.
    

      The manuscript has no heading. The present heading has been provided by
      the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.
    



[2]

Val—a 

      tsarist general, who ordered that workers arrested for demon strating on
      May 1, 1902, should be flogged.
    

Obolensky—a tsarist high official, who savagely crushed
      peasant uprisings in the south of Russia in 1902.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Basic Thesis Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries









Lenin: The Basic Thesis Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Basic Thesis Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries




Written: Written in November-December 1902 

Published:

      First published in 1936 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia, No. 7.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 273-277.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      The basic thesis I am advancing against the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and
      for an appraisal of all aspects of the activities (and of the
      whole essence) of this trend is as follows: the entire trend of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, and their party as a whole, is nothing but an
      attempt by the petty-bourgeois Intelligentsia at escamotage of our
      working-class movement, and, consequently, the whole of the socialist and
      the whole of the revolutionary movement in Russia.
    

      Let me explain at once why, in this thesis which is so important to me, I
      could not avoid employing a rare foreign word no doubt incomprehensible to
      most readers. Escamotage means deception, fraudulent appropriation of the
      results of the labour of others and thus rendering this labour useless,
      trickery, swindling, etc. It is not difficult to see why I had to reject
      these Russian words and choose a foreign word instead. The words “to
      trick, fool, deceive” are invariably associated in our minds with
      the idea of a deliberate, conscious lie—that in the first place, and
      in the second, with the idea of self-seeking, dishonest motives on the
      part of those who resort to this lie. Yet I am far from the idea of
      accusing the Socialist-Revolutionaries of anything resembling a conscious
      lie or dishonest motives. Nothing of the kind. I have no doubt that as a
      trend, as a “party,” the Socialist-Revolutionaries could have
      originated (or could have survived since the days of the Narodnaya Volyn),
      that they could have grown and gained some strength of late, thanks
      entirely to the fact that they attracted people

    

      doubtlessly revolutionary-minded and even quite prepared for heroic
      self-sacrifice, people in all sincerity willing to lay down their lives in
      the interests of freedom and the interests of the people. But the fact
      that people adhere sincerely and by conviction to a certain social and
      political stand does not in any way predetermine whether this stand is not
      absolutely false and internally contradictory. Would not the results of
      the best-intended activity based on this stand prove to be (even though
      unconsciously and against the will of those who conduct it)
      “escamotage” of the working-class movement, diverting it from
      the correct course, decoying it into an impasse, etc.?
    

      I shall try to illustrate my idea by an example. Imagine that we are in a
      huge, dark, humid, and dense semi-virgin forest. Imagine that only by
      burning down this forest is it possible to prepare the way for the
      cultivation of the entire area covered by the forest or surrounded by it,
      and that it is extremely difficult to procure fire and to sustain it in
      this forest. It is necessary to dry the timber which is available
      everywhere in abundance but which catches fire with difficulty, the fire
      dying easily again and again in the oppressively humid atmosphere. It is
      necessary to get together the material to be set alight. It is necessary
      to maintain the fire (combustion), to protect it, to nurture every flash
      of fire, to let the flame grow, preparing systematically and stubbornly
      the general conflagration without which the damp and dark forest will not
      cease to be a forest. This work, however, is very difficult, not only
      because of the external, atmospheric, conditions, but also because of the
      great scarcity of the only suitable material which can burn, which cannot
      cease burning under any circumstances, which has really caught fire and is
      burning continuously, with a steady flame unlike the numerous flickering
      lights which lack intrinsic power and which in the past so often flashed
      into being only to die out after burning for a short time. And now, when
      this basic inflammable material has begun to burn so well as to cause a
      general rise in the temperature, thereby lending strength and brightness
      to a mass of other, flickering little flames, people sudden]y appear and
      declare with an overweening air: how narrow-minded one

    

      must be to believe in the antiquated dogma about the only basic, the only
      unquestionably reliable inflammable material! How stereotyped it is to
      consider all the other little flares merely as by-products, as auxiliary
      elements, and to think it absolutely necessary to cling first of all and
      most of all to this one material, at any cost! How one-sided it
      is to keep on endlessly preparing, preparing and preparing the real
      general conflagration and to allow those outrageous scoundrels, the
      tree-tops, to shelter and maintain the dampness and gloom. What should be
      done is to fire flares which will knock down the tree-tops, singe them,
      frighten all the dark forces and produce such a sensation, such a stir,
      encouragement and excitation. And these people get to work briskly. With a
      sigh of relief they heave overboard the antiquated prejudices about some
      kind of basic inflammable material. With a calm conscience they accept
      into their ranks all and sundry, without inquiring into their views and
      opinions, convictions and aspirations: we are a party of action, and it
      does not matter to us even if some of us have adopted arguments Which tend
      to extinguish the fire. They call boldly for an undiscriminating attitude
      towards all kinds of little flames and towards the firing of flares,
      brushing aside with contempt the lessons of the past; now, they say, there
      is a great deal more inflammable material, and there fore sheer
      light-mindedness is permissible!... And so, despite the harm people of
      this kind are causing to the movement, can it be thought that they are
      ordinary deceivers? Nothing of the kind! They are not deceivers at all,
      but simply pyro-technists!
    

      That, incidentally, is my answer to those Socialist-Revolutionaries who
      have simply interpreted the term “ad venturer” as
      “swindler” (Mr. Rafailov in Geneva) or “rogue”
      (Mr. Zhitlovsky in Berne). Gentlemen, I told them, you should not
      necessarily interpret everything in terms of the criminal code! The
      adventurism of a revolutionary trend, an internally contradictory,
      unprincipled, unstable trend which conceals emptiness behind high-sounding
      promises and is therefore inevitably doomed to bankruptcy, should not be
      confused with the adventurism of rogues who know very well that they are
      committing punishable offences and that they are in danger of being
      exposed for swindling. We

    

      have accused you of adventurism, stating plainly and concretely (see
      Nos. 23 and 24 of

      Iskra[See pp. 186-207 of this
volume.—Ed.])

      that it stems from your utter lack of principle in all the basic questions
      of inter national socialism, from the incredible muddle of views in your
      hastily concocted agrarian programme served out to the
      “consumer” under a savoury dressing, from the shakiness and
      groundlessness of your terrorist tactics. And you reply: look here, we are
      called adventurers, rogues, swindlers; we are offended, insulted! But
      these cries, esteemed gentlemen, seem very much to imply that in essence
      you have nothing to object to.
    

      It may now be asked: where is the proof of the correctness of my thesis?
      What distinguishing, characteristic features of the entire
      Socialist-Revolutionary trend should I demonstrate in order to justify the
      appraisal of the entire trend given in this thesis? If this appraisal is
      correct, then (it is to be hoped) there is no socialist in the least
      conscientious and serious who would deny the need for a determined and
      merciless war against this trend, for its harmfulness to be completely
      exposed to the widest possible sections of the people. And so, to be able
      to dig down to the essence of this question and analyse it from every
      aspect, I suggest that attention be directed mainly and primarily to what
      should constitute the answers to this question. Let those who
      wish to disprove the correctness of the appraisal not confine themselves
      to “complaints” or “amendments,” but answer just as
      plainly: what are the points which they think require proof in order to
      corroborate the correctness of the thesis I advanced?
    

      The central point of this thesis (escamotage of the working-class movement
      by the petty-bourgeois intelligentsia) is the fact of escamotage, or, in
      other words, the fundamental contradiction between the principles, the
      programme of the “party,” and its actual attitude towards the
      process of revolutionising present-day society. The contradiction lies in
      the fact that in reality the party of
      “Socialist-Revolutionaries” does not at all adhere to the
      standpoint of scientific revolutionary socialism (=Marxism) in questions
      relating to either the international or the Russian working-class

    

      movement. In actual fact, the characteristic feature of this
      “party” is utter lack of principle in all most important
      fundamental questions of modern

      socialism.[Here the manuscript breaks
off. —Ed.]
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## New Events and Old Questions









Lenin: New Events and Old Questions







V. I.  

      Lenin
New Events and Old Questions




Published:
Iskra, No. 29, December 1, 1902.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 278-283.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      To all appearances the brief “lull” which has marked our
      revolutionary movement for the past six to nine months, as distinguished
      from its previous rapid and stormy development, is drawing to a
      close. However brief this “lull” may have been, however
      obvious it has been to every careful and informed observer that the
      absence (for so short a time) of open manifestations of mass indignation
      among the workers by no means signifies a stop in the growth of this
      indignation both in depth and in extent, numerous voices have nevertheless
      been raised among our intelligentsia—who are revolutionary in spirit
      but frequently have neither firm ties with the working class nor a sound
      foundation of definite socialist convictions—expressing despondency
      and a lack of faith in the mass working-class movement, on the one hand,
      and, on the other, calling for a repetition of the old tactics of
      individual, political assassinations as a necessary and obligatory method
      of political struggle at the present time. During the few months that have
      elapsed since the demonstrations of the previous season, a
      “party” of “Socialist-Revolutionaries” has had
      time to arise in our country, and has begun to declaim loudly that
      demonstrations have a discouraging effect, that “the people, alas,
      are still a long way off,” and that it is easy, of course, to
      speak and write of arming the masses, but that now it is necessary to get
      down to “individual resistance” without trying to wriggle out
      of the urgent necessity of individual terror by obsolete references to one
      and the same old task (so dull and “uninteresting” to the
      intellectual who is free from “dogmatic” faith in the
      working-class movement!) of carrying on agitation among the proletarian
      masses and organising a mass onslaught.
    
 

      But what at first sight seemed a most ordinary and “common
      place” strike suddenly broke out in Rostov-on-Don and led to events
      which manifestly demonstrated the utter stupidity and harmfulness of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries’ attempt to restore the Narodnaya Volya movement
      with all its theoretical and tactical mistakes. The strike, which Involved
      many thousands of workers and began with demands of a purely economic
      nature, rapidly developed into a political event, despite the extreme
      dearth of organised revolutionary forces participating in it. Crowds of
      people which, according to some participants, numbered between twenty and
      thirty thousand, held astonishingly serious and well-organised political
      meetings where Social-Democratic leaf lets were read and eagerly
      discussed, political speeches were delivered, the most casual and
      untrained representatives of the working people were told the elementary
      truths of socialism and the political struggle, and practical and
      “object” lessons were given on how to deal with the soldiers
      and how to appeal to them. The authorities and the police lost their heads
      (perhaps partly because the soldiers could not be relied on?) and for
      several days proved unable to interfere with the organising of open-air
      political mass gatherings, the like of which had never before been seen in
      Russia. When armed force was finally brought in, the crowd offered
      desperate resistance, and the murder of a comrade served as the occasion
      for a political demonstration at his funeral the following day.... The
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, however, most likely see the thing in a
      different light; from their standpoint it would perhaps have been
      “more expedient” if the six comrades murdered in Rostov had
      given their lives in an attempt on the lives of individual police tyrants.
    

      We, however, are of the opinion that it is only such mass movements, in
      which mounting political consciousness and revolutionary activity are
      openly manifested to all by the working class, that deserve to be called
      genuinely revolutionary acts and are capable of really
      encouraging everyone who is fighting for the Russian revolution. What we
      see here is not the much-vaunted “individual resistance,” whose only
      connection with the masses consists of verbal declarations, publication of
      sentences passed, etc. What

    

      we see is genuine resistance on the part of the crowd; and the lack of
      organisation, unpreparedness and spontaneity of this resistance remind us
      how unwise it is to exaggerate our revolutionary forces and how criminal
      it is to neglect the task of steadily improving the organisation and
      preparedness of this crowd, which is waging an actual struggle before our
      very eyes. The only task worthy of a revolutionary is to learn to
      elaborate, utilise and make our own the material which Russian life
      furnishes in only too great sufficiency, rather than fire a few shots in
      order to create pretexts for stimulating the masses, and material for
      agitation and for political reflection. The Socialist-Revolutionaries
      cannot find enough praise of the great “agitational” effect of
      political assassinations, about which there is so much whispering both in
      the drawing-rooms of the liberals and in the taverns of the common
      people. It is nothing to them (since they are free of all narrow dogmas on
      anything even approximating a definite socialist theory!) to stage a
      political sensation as a substitute (or, at least, as a
      supplement) for the political education of the proletariat. We, however,
      consider that the only events that can have a real and serious
      “agitational” (stimulating), and not only stimulating but also
      (and this is far more important) educational, effect are events in which
      the masses themselves are the actors, events which are born of the
      sentiments of the masses and not staged “for a special
      purpose” by one organisation or another. We believe that even a
      hundred regicides can never produce so stimulating and educational an
      effect as this participation of tens of thousands of working people in
      meetings where their vital interests and the links between politics and
      these interests are discussed, and as this participation in a struggle,
      which really rouses ever new and “untapped” sections
      of the proletariat to greater political consciousness, to a broader
      revolutionary struggle. We are told of the disorganisation of the
      government (which has been obliged to replace Messrs. the Sipyagins by
      Messrs. the Plehves and to “select” the vilest scoundrels to
      serve it), but we are convinced that to sacrifice one
      revolutionary, even in exchange for ten scoundrels, means only
      disorganising our own ranks, which are thin as it is, so thin that they
      cannot keep up with all that is “demanded” of them

    

      by the workers. We believe that the government is truly disorganised when,
      and only when, the broad masses, genuinely organised by the struggle
      itself, plunge the government into a state of confusion; when the
      legitimacy of the demands of the progressive elements of the working class
      becomes apparent to the crowd in the street and begins to be clear even to
      part of the troops called out for the purpose of
      “pacification”; when military action against tens of thousands
      of the people is preceded by wavering among the authorities, who have no
      way of really knowing what this military action will lead to; when the
      crowd see and feel that those who have fallen on the field of civil war
      are their comrades, a part of themselves, and are filled with new wrath
      and a desire to grapple more decisively with the enemy. Here it is no
      longer some scoundrel, but the existing system as a whole that comes out
      as the enemy of the people, against whom are arrayed the local and the
      St. Petersburg authorities, the police, the Cossacks, and the troops, to
      say nothing of the gendarmes and the courts which, as ever, supplement and
      complete the picture in every popular uprising.
    

      Yes, uprising. However far the beginning of what seemed to be a strike
      movement in a remote provincial town was from a “genuine”
      uprising, its continuation and its finale nevertheless evoke involuntary
      thoughts of an uprising. The prosaic motive for the strike and the minor
      nature of the demands presented by the workers throw into particularly
      bold relief, not only the mighty power of the solidarity of the
      proletariat, which at once saw that the railway workers’ struggle was the
      common cause of the proletarians, but also its receptiveness of political
      ideas and political propaganda, and its readiness to defend with might and
      main, in open battle with the troops, those rights to a free life and free
      development which all thinking workers have already come to consider
      common and elementary. And the Don Committee was a thousand times right
      when it declared in its proclamation, “To All Citizens,” which we
      print in full elsewhere in this issue, that the Rostov strike was one of
      the steps towards a general upsurge among the Russian workers with the
      demand for political

      liberty.[1]
      In events of this sort we really see with our own eyes how an armed
      uprising of the whole people against the autocratic government is

    

      maturing, not only as an idea in the minds and programmes of the
      revolutionaries, but also as the inevitable, natural and practical
      next step of the movement itself, as the result of the growing
      indignation, growing experience, and growing boldness of the masses, who
      are being given such valuable lessons, such a splendid education by the
      realities of Russian life.
    

      An inevitable and natural step, I have said—and I hasten to make the
      reservation: if only we do not permit ourselves to depart by a
      single step from the impending and pressing task of assisting these
      masses, who have already begun to rise, to act more boldly and
      concertedly; of giving them not a couple but dozens of open-air speakers
      and leaders; of creating a real, militant organisation capable of guiding
      the masses, and not a so-called “combat organisation” that
      guides elusive individuals (if it does guide them at all). That this is a
      difficult task goes without saying, but we can quite justifiably adapt
      Marx’s words which have so frequently and so ineptly been quoted of late,
      and say: “Every step of real movement is more important
      than a dozen” individual attempts and cases of resistance, more
      important than a hundred organisations and “parties” belonging
      only to the

      intelligentsia.[2]


      Besides the Rostov fighting, the penal sentences passed on demonstrators
      are outstanding among recent political events. The government has decided
      to use every possible method of intimidation, from floggings to penal
      servitude. And what a splendid reply it received from the workers, whose
      speeches in court we give

      below[3];

      how instructive this reply is to all those who were especially loud in
      their outcries about the discouraging effect of demonstrations, not
      because they wanted to encourage further work in this direction, but
      because they wanted to preach much-vaunted individual resistance!  These
      speeches, coming as they do from the very thick of the proletariat, are
      excellent commentaries on events like those in Rostov, and, at the same
      time, they are remarkable statements (“public manifestations,” I
      would say if this were not so specifically police terminology), imbuing
      with boundless vigour the long and difficult work for the
      “real” steps of the movement. What is remarkable in these
      speeches is the simple, authentically

    

      precise description of how the most everyday facts, occurring in
      scores and

hundreds 01 millions, 

      of the “misery, oppression, slavery, degradation,
      exploitation” of the workers in present-day society lead to the
      awakening of their consciousness, to their growing “revolt,” to a
      revolutionary expression of this revolt (I have put in quotation marks the
      words I had to use in describing the speeches of the
      Nizhni-Novgorod workers, for they are the famous words which Marx uses in
      the last pages of the first volume of Capital, and which evoked
      such clamorous and unsuccessful attempts on the part of the
      “critics,” opportunists, revisionists, etc., to refute the
      Social-Democrats and accuse them of not telling the truth).
    

      For the very reason that these speeches came from ordinary workers by no
      means advanced in their development, workers who did not even speak as
      members of any particular organisation, but simply as men in the crowd,
      for the very reason that they stressed not their personal convictions but
      facts from the life of every proletarian or semi-proletarian in Russia,
      for that very reason their conclusions are so inspiring: “that is
      why we consciously went to the demonstration against the autocratic
      government.” The ordinariness and “mass character” of the
      facts from which they drew their conclusions are a guarantee that
      thousands, tens and hundreds of thousands, can and inevitably will come to
      the same conclusion, provided we prove capable of continuing, extending,
      and strengthening systematic, theoretically consistent, and all-round
      revolutionary (Social Democratic) influence over them. We are ready to be
      condemned to penal servitude for fighting against political and economic
      slavery now that we have felt the breath of liberty, said four workers
      from Nizhni-Novgorod. And thousands of workers in Rostov, who for several
      days won for themselves the right to hold political gatherings, fighting
      off a series of attacks on the part of the soldiers against the unarmed
      crowd, repeated after them as It were: we are ready to face death.
    

      By this sign shall ye conquer, is all that remains for us to say to those who
      have eyes to see and ears to hear.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      The proclamation of the Don Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., “To All
      Citizens,” dated November 6, 1902, was reprinted by Iskra,
      No. 29, December 1, 1902.
    



[2]

      Lenin is referring to the following passage from Karl Marx’s letter to
      Wilhelm Bracke, of May 5, 1875: “Every step of real movement is more
      important than a dozen programmes” (see Marx and Engels,
      Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, p. 16).
    



[3]

      Lenin is referring to the speeches made in court on October 28-31
      (November 10-13), 1902, by Nizhni-Novgorod workers on trial for taking
      part in demonstrations on May I and 5 (14 and 18), 1902. The speeches were
      originally published as a separate leaflet by the Nizhni-Novgorod
      Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.; they were later reprinted by Iskra
      (No. 29, December 1, 1902) under the heading “Nizhni-Novgorod
      Workers in Court” and issued as a separate pamphlet.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## To Secondary School Students









Lenin: To Secondary School Students







V. I.  

      Lenin
To Secondary School Students[1]




Published:
Iskra No. 29, December 1, 1902.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      ???,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      page 284.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1901).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

      Welcoming whole-heartedly the energetic initiative of the students, we on
      our part give them the following comradely advice. Try to concentrate your
      efforts on self-education as the main purpose of your organisation, in
      order to develop into convinced, steadfast, and consistent
      Social-Democrats. Draw the strictest possible line of demarcation between
      this extremely important and essential preparatory work and direct
      practical activity. On joining (and before joining) the ranks of
      the army in the field try to establish closest (and most secret) contacts
      with the local or all-Russian Social-Democratic organisations, so as not
      to be alone when you begin your work, so as to be able to continue what
      has already been done before, rather than begin all over again, to take
      your place at once in the ranks, to advance the movement and raise it to a
      higher stage.
      

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      This article was written by Lenin as an afterword of the Iskra
      Editorial Board to the leaflet, “To Secondary School Students,”
      issued by the South-Russian Secondary School Students’ Group. The leaflet
      and the afterword were published in Iskra, No. 29, December 1,
      1902.
    

      The manuscript has no heading. The present heading has been provided by
      the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the
      C.P.S.U.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the Svoboda Group









Lenin: On the Svoboda Group







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Svoboda Group




Published:
Iskra, No. 30, December 15, 1902.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 285-286.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      The attitude of Messrs. the “Revolutionary-Socialists” towards
      any analysis of differences in principle is evident from the following. In
      the pamphlet, What Is to Be Done?, Lenin directly challenged
      Svoboda to refute the proposition that an “organisation of
      revolutionaries” is necessary for extending and intensifying
      work among the masses. In the same pamphlet Mr. Nadezhdin was given a
      detailed explanation of all the harm and unseemliness of a light-minded
      attitude towards theory, of inconsistency in matters of programme (a
      “revolutionary-socialist” and at the same time practically a
      Social-Democrat!), of vacillation between revolutionary tactics and the
      tactics of “economism,” and between terrorism and the class struggle
      of the proletariat. In this pamphlet it was plainly pointed out and proved
      that Svoboda is sinking to the level of

demagogy.[See present edition,
Vol. 5.—Ed.]

      Mr. Nadezhdin preferred to decline the direct challenge. Instead of open
      battle with visor raised, this noble swashbuckler chose to act on the sly
      under a cover of a dispute on matters of organisation. In their
      “magazine for workers” (??) the Svoboda group merely
      hisses and snarls, without explaining its views, inciting the
      “masses” against an “organisation of
      revolutionaries” and assuring them that Iskra is chopping
      down the “sound trunk” of “economism.” Disputes over

      principle, It assures us, 

      are nothing but a pastime for intellectuals. For the “masses”
      it is sufficient to raise a howl against “domineering” and to
      indulge in quips about “an empty stomach and the Holy Ghost,” about
      the “danger of hobnailed jackboots,” about “swine and
      blockheads,”

    

      about “weakened grey matter” and “pig snouts,” about the
      “collaring and jaw-breaking department,” etc. (see Otkliki,
      pp. 30-55). Our revolutionary-socialists and Socialist-Revolutionaries
      persist in debasing “mass” literature to the level of cheap
      broadsheets, and for this service of theirs they claim the right to
      introduce confusion and corruption into all serious Party questions. A
      programme consisting of double book-keeping, tactics consisting of double
      book-keeping, practical activities consisting of demagogy—there you
      have a portrait of the “revolutionary socialist”
      Svoboda group.
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Extract from an Article Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries









Lenin: Extract from an Article Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries







V. I.  

      Lenin
Extract from an Article Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries




Written: Written in December 1902 

Published:

      First published in 1939 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia, No. 1.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 287-288.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

The fusion of socialism with the working-class movement (this
sole guarantee of a strong and truly revolutionary movement) is
no easy matter, and it is not surprising that it is attended by
vacillation of every kind. That is what we wrote exactly two years ago
in the first article published in the first issue of

Iskra.[* See present edition, Vol. 4,
  p. 368—Ed.]

And if a struggle was necessary against a tendency (trend) that had
chosen the correct path but had wrongly defined its tasks along that
path, it is far more necessary to struggle against a trend that does not
even think of any fusion of any more or less integral and
well-substantiated socialism with the working-class movement. Lacking a
social basis and any links with a definite social class, it is
endeavouring to cover up its inner impotence by the sweep of its
emotion, the “breadth” of its programme, i.e.
(read), by an unprincipled combination of the most diverse and opposing
programmes which are equally applicable, precisely because of this
quality of theirs, to the intelligentsia, to the proletariat, and to the
peasantry. Behind the intelligentsia en masse, just as behind
the liberal opposition, it may not be possible to discern any social
class (since the liberal-Narodist trend, towards which the old Russian
socialism was incapable of adopting a critical attitude, as are the
Socialist-Revolutionaries today, declares that it is above classes). The
peasantry may be approached without any solution of
“accursed” problems relating to the foundations of its life,
or its place in the social and economic evolution of Russia and of the
whole world; it

    

      may be approached with such general revolutionary and socialist phrases
      (socialist, at first glance) which as far as possible would not be
      contradictory to any of the accepted and declared solutions of the peasant
      question. The stormy period we are experiencing, with the struggle flaring
      up now here, now there, makes it possible, under cover of this struggle,
      to evade all and sundry questions of principle, limiting oneself to
      sympathetic support of all its manifestations and to the invention of
      “individual resistance” during a comparative lull. And the
      result is a trend which is very revolutionary in words, but not in the
      least revolutionary as far as its real views and contacts with the
      revolutionary class are concerned, revolutionary in its sharp attacks on
      the government and at the same time entirely incapable of correctly
      appraising the general tactics of this government and of giving a correct
      answer to such tactics. And truly, it is not difficult to see that,
      notwithstanding all the jumps and waverings, not withstanding all the
      confusion of the government in particular instances, its tactics as a
      whole betray clearly its two principal lines of self-defence.
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Appeal of the Russian Organising Committee to the League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy, the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, and the Foreign Committee of the Bund









Lenin: Draft Appeal of the Russian Organising Committee to the League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy, the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, and the Foreign Committee of the Bund







V. I.  

      Lenin
Draft Appeal of the Russian Organising Committee to the League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy, the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, and the Foreign Committee of the Bund




Written: Written in December 1902–January 1903 

Published:

      Published for the first time.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      page 289.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      In fulfilment of the decision passed by a conference of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party in the spring of 1902, the Organising
      Committee proposes to the League of Russian Revolutionary
      Social-Democracy, the Union of Russian Social-Democrats

      Abroad,[1]
      and the Foreign Committee of the Bund the formation of a foreign division
      of the Organising Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party.
    

      The functions of this foreign division of the Russian Organising Committee
      should he as follows:
    

      1) elaboration of the question as to how Social-Democratic organisations
      abroad should be represented at the congress. The final decision of this
      question depends upon the Russian Organising Committee and then upon the
      congress itself; 2) assistance from abroad in the arrangement of the
      congress (for example, finances, passports, etc.), and 3) preparation for
      the unification of the Social-Democratic organisations abroad, which is so
      vitally necessary in the interests of the Party and of the
      Social-Democratic labour movement in Russia in general.
    
Endnotes

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

The League of Russian Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad was
founded in October 1901 on Lenin’s initiative. Affiliated to the League
were the Iskra foreign organisation and the Sotsial
Demokrat organisation, which included the Emancipation of Labour
group.
    

      Formation of the League was preceded by an attempt to get these
      organisations join the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, made in
      June 1901 at the Geneva Conference. A resolution was worked out at this
      conference (”the agreement on principles”) recognising the need to rally
      all Social-Democratic forces of Russia, and especially to unite all
      Social-Democratic organisations abroad, and condemning opportunism in all
      its shades and manifestations. The unification was to have been given
      official form at the “Unity” Congress, which was held on
      September 21-22 (Octo ber 4-5), 1901. When it became clear at the Congress
      that the Union still adhered to its opportunist stand, the revolutionary
      section of the Congress (members of the Iskra organisation and
      the Sotsial-Demokrat group) announced that they did not consider
      union possible and walked out. Soon afterwards they formed the League
      Abroad, whose Rules stated that it was the foreign section of the
      Iskra organisation. The League recruited Iskra adherents
      from among Russian Social-Democrats living abroad, gave financial

   

      support to Iskra, organised delivery of the paper to Russia and
      published Marxist popular literature. It also brought out several
      bulletins and pamphlets, including Lenin’s To the Rural Poor.
    

      The R.S.D.L.P.’s Second Congress endorsed the League as the only Party
      organisation abroad with the status of a committee, and indicated that it
      could give support to the Russian Social-Democratic movement only through
      persons and groups appointed by the Party’s Central Committee.
    

      Following the Second Congress, the Mensheviks entrenched them selves in
      the League and launched a struggle against Lenin and the Bolsheviks. At
      the League’s second conference in October 1903, the Mensheviks got new
      Rules adopted, directed against the Party Rules approved by the Second
      Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. After this the League, which existed until
      1905, became a stronghold of Menshevism.
    

The Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad was founded in 1894
      in Geneva, on the initiative of the Emancipation of Labour group, and had
      its own press where it printed revolutionary literature. At first the
      Emancipation of Labour group guided the Union and edited its
      publications. The Union issued the Rabotnik miscellanies and
      Listok “Rabolnika” (see Note 107), and published
      Lenin’s Explanation of the Law on Fines (1897), Plekhanov’s
      New Drive Against Russian Social-Democracy (1897), etc. The First
      Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., held in March 1898, recognised the Union as
      the Party’s representative abroad. As time proceeded, the opportunist
      elements—the “economists,” or so-called “young”
      group—gained the upper hand in the Union. At the first conference of
      the Union, held in Zurich in November 1898, the Emancipation of Labour
      group announced their refusal to edit Union publications, with the
      exception of No. 5-6 of Rabotnik and Lenin’s pamphlets, The
      Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats and The New Factory
      Law,which the group undertook to publish. From then on, the Union
      published Rabocheye Dyelo, a magazine of the “economists.”
      The Emancipation of Labour group finally broke with the Union and left its
      ranks in April 1900, at the Union’s second conference held in Geneva, when
      the Emancipation of Labour group and its supporters left the conference
      and established an independent Sotsial-Demokrat organisation. In
      1903 the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. passed a decision to disband
      the Union (see The C.P.S.U. in Resolutions and Decisions of Its
      Congresses, Conferences, and Plenary Meetings of the Central
      Committee, Part I, 1954, p. 56).
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the Subject of Reports by Committees and Groups of the R.S.D.L.P. to the General Party Congress









Lenin: On the Subject of Reports by Committees and Groups of the R.S.D.L.P. to the General Party Congress







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Subject of Reports by Committees and Groups of the R.S.D.L.P. to the General Party Congress[2]




Written: Written in December 1902-January 1903 

Published:

      First published in 1924 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia, No. 1.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 290-300.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      One of the members of the Organising Committee has asked me to send a list
      of questions to which it would be desirable to have replies given in the
      reports of the committees and groups of our Party at its Second
      Congress. I enclose herewith an approximate list of such questions, but
      first I should like to say a few words about the length of this
      list. Naturally, it would be desirable to have reports on
      all branches of Social-Democratic work, and the ideal report
      would therefore embrace an all but endless number of questions. Of course,
      we cannot even dream of it being possible to present such full
      reports. Nevertheless, I consider it very important and essential for the
      Organising Committee to endeavour to acquaint each committee or group with
      the complete range of questions of interest to (and needed by)
      the congress. Our Second Congress will have an even more
      constituent character than the First, and we must therefore bend
      every effort towards making the reports as complete and substantial as
      possible. The closer each group’s report approximates to the
      ideal, the more completely and exactly will the movement as a whole be
      represented at our congress, and the more enduring the results of the
      congress.
    

      The preparation of the reports, their discussions both in the committees
      and groups, etc., should begin as much as possible prior to the
      congress. In this connection it would be extremely important for the
      committees and groups, first, to divide among many of their members the
      work of drawing up the report; secondly, as soon as each section


    

      of the report is ready the committees and groups should
      immediately forward a copy of it abroad, i.e., to a safe place
      (without waiting for the complete report); thirdly, they should
      make a point of drawing into this work not only actual but also former
      members, and not only the active but also absent members, in other words,
      those in exile or abroad. These persons could be instructed to prepare
      reports covering either a definite group of questions or a definite period
      when they worked in the committee or group. Such reports, or sections of
      reports, could greatly facilitate the task of the delegates at the
      congress. It stands to reason, furthermore, that the delegates should also
      make use of Party literature which contains numerous answers to questions
      in any report, i.e., they should try to gather all this literature, make a
      digest of all that is essential in it, correct any mistakes occurring in
      it, supplement it, adding whatever could not be printed for reasons of
      secrecy, etc. (it is also of the utmost importance to enlist for this work
      the co-operation of former members of committees and groups who are
      temporarily abroad). Incidentally, with regard to secrecy it should be
      added that there are certain questions to which written answers cannot and
      should not be given, for that would be disclosing secrets; nevertheless,
      the answers to these questions must positively be considered, prepared,
      and discussed by the committees and groups, for at the Party congress it
      will be obligatory to report on these questions (if not in
      pleno, then to a special commission, to the C.C., etc.).
    

      With a view to drawing as many people as possible into the work of
      drafting the reports, it would be desirable to circulate the list
      of questions itself (together with the amendments recommended by
      specific committees, groups or individual comrades) as widely as
      possible; moreover, only the fact that these questions and reports
      are intended for the Second Party Congress should be kept secret from the
      broad circles of Social-Democrats.
    

      Finally, there arises the question of the period to be covered by the
      reports. Formally speaking, it should be the period between the First and
      Second Congresses, i.e., from 1898 to 1903. However, since the First
      Congress was not fully representative, lasted too short a time, and was
      held under extremely unfavourable circumstances, it would be desirable

    

      that the reports should also cover the period preceding
      1898.
    

      It would perhaps not be superfluous to make the reservation that this
      extremely detailed list of questions for the report should by no means be
      interpreted to imply that the person who is best acquainted with the
      history of the movement, or, in general, who is best able to answer all
      these questions, will make the best delegate to the congress. The congress
      should be of practical value in uniting the movement and giving it a
      powerful impulse, and those comrades who, even if they are new, are the
      most energetic, influential, and devoted to revolutionary work will make
      the best delegates. The reports, however, can be compiled from the
      contributions of many people and, in addition, in some cases it will
      perhaps be possible to delegate more than one person; it would be
      particularly desirable to give a large number of worker delegates
      the opportunity of attending the congress.
    

      I shall now proceed to give the list of questions, which are divided up
      into eight sections or groups (the division of specific questions and even
      of groups of questions is often artificial and has been made only for
      convenience in reviewing them, as all questions are most closely
      interconnected).
    
I. The
Working-Class Movement, its History and Present State

      1) A brief description of the conditions and state of industry. Number,
      composition, distribution, and other specific features of the local
      proletariat (industrial, commercial, handicraft, etc., possibly
      agricultural also).
    

      2) To what extent are the workers affected by socialist agitation? In what
      districts? Factories? Domestic industry, etc. Describe in as great detail
      as possible the growth of this group of workers from the very outset of
      the movement.
    

      3) As complete a list as possible of strikes and a detailed account of
      each more or less big strike. Aggregate figures are desirable.
    

    

      4) Have there been any outstanding instances of boycotts or other collective

      action,[1]

      besides strikes, on the part of the workers? Give details.
    

      5) What workers’ circles have existed and still exist? Mutual aid
      societies?  Self-education societies? Working-class organisations? Trade
      unions? Fullest possible description of all such associations, their
      organisation, predominant composition, membership, period of existence,
      nature of activities, results of experience in this respect, etc.
    

      6) Have any attempts been made to organise legal workers’ societies?
      Detailed information about each such at tempt, its results, effect, fate,
      present condition, and importance. The same with regard to Zubatov
      societies. Have any attempts been made to utilise legal societies for
      Social-Democratic purposes?
    

      7) Effect of the present crisis? Description of it, primarily on the basis
      of information given by workers. The unemployed, their mood, agitation
      among them, etc.
    
II. History of
the Local Socialist Circles, Appearance of the Social-Democrats,
Struggle of Trends Within Them

      8) Were there any traces of the old socialist organisations when
      Social-Democracy appeared? What did they consist of and how did they make
      themselves felt? When did propaganda and agitation begin among the working
      class, and who started it? The followers of the Narodnaya Volya? What was
      their attitude towards Social-Democracy?
    

      9) When and under what circumstances did individual Social-Democrats or
      Social-Democratic circles make their appearance? Give, in as much detail
      as possible, a description of each circle (in accordance with its
      programme), its importance and influence on subsequent circles.
    

      10) How did Social-Democratic views take shape and develop in the local
      circles? What was the influence of other (towns) places? Of literature
      from abroad? Of legally published Marxist literature (and the literature
      of the “critics

    

      of Marxism”)? Describe the influence of the first, second and third
      factors as fully as possible.
    

      11) Differences within the Social-Democratic movement. Did they exist
      before the appearance of the Manifesto of 1898? How did they express
      themselves? Have any documents remained? How was the Manifesto received?
      What protests or dissatisfaction did it arouse and from whom? How did the
      so-called “economist” views arise? How did they develop and
      spread? It is very important to describe this most accurately, using all
      available documentary material, with regard to every
      “economist” “phase” in the local movement. How did
      differences in the appraisal of the various Party papers and in the
      struggle among their adherents express themselves? Of Rabochaya

Gazeta[3]
      (1897),

      Rabotnik,[4]

      published abroad, and its Listok, of Babochaya Mysl,
      Rabocheye Dyelo, Iskra, Zarya, Borba,

Zhizn,[5]
      etc., etc.?
    

      11 b i s) Have there been any splits and conflicts between
      workers and the “intelligentsia” among Social-Democrats? It is
      very important to ascertain the causes and influence of such.
    

      12) How has the struggle of trends been waged in the local circles? Only
      among the Social-Democratic intellectuals? Or among the workers too? Among
      the adherent student groups? Has it found expression in splits? In the
      organisation of separate groups? Has it flared up over general questions
      of principle? Over the contents of the leaflets? Over the question of
      demonstrations? Over the attitude to wards the student movement? Over the
      question of the May Day demands?
    

      Describe in detail the course and consequences of the struggle among the
      trends, and the present state of affairs in this respect.
    
III. Organisation of the Local
Committee, Local Groups and Circles

      13) Predominant composition of the committee (resp. of the group,
      circle, and, if there are many, of each specific one)? Students?
      Workers? Are members added by election (and how is this done?), or
      otherwise? Are there separate intellectuals’

    

      and workers’ committees? Special technical, propagandist, agitational
      groups? Literary, central, district, local, executive groups? Their
      relationships according to the “Rules” (if such exist) and in
      actual practice? General meetings, their functions, frequency, and size?
      Organisation of contacts with other towns and abroad (i.e., special
      people, groups or persons outside the groups, etc.)? How is the
      distribution of literature organised?  Organisation of tours?
    

      What are the conclusions to be drawn from experience in organisational
      matters, and the prevailing views on organisational principles in the
      committees, among the intellectuals and the workers?
    

      It is particularly important to give a detailed explanation of the causes
      and effects of the formation of separate intellectuals’ and
      workers’ (factory, artisan, etc.) committees.
    

      14) Extension of work to nearby and other localities? What form has this
      taken: organised or sporadic? Have attempts been made to form
      district organisations or to participate in them?
    

      Character of contacts with other localities.
    

      History of the origin and work of district organisations. Composition of
      central district committee? Attitude towards local committees? Collection
      of funds?  District treasuries? Repositories for literature? Effect of the
      district organisations upon the scope of the work, its stability, contact
      with the local committees, etc.
    

      15) Finances of the committee? Statement of aggregate income and
      expenditure (based on reports, if any) for the entire period of existence?
      Ordinary and average budget, nature of its sources,collections raised
      among workers, levies on members, payment for literature, socials,
      donations, etc. (influence of Osvobozhdeniye and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries in this respect).
    

      Amount and character of expenditure: technical aspects? maintenance of
      people?  travelling expenses? etc.
    
IV. Character,
Content, and Scope of Local Work

      16) Propaganda. Composition (of the circles) of propagandists? Their
      number, method of action? Do they include workers? Do students
      predominate? Do more experienced

    

      comrades examine and direct their activities? Usual programmes of
      lectures, and how these are modified in the course of time? Workers’
      response and requests for definite subjects? Is it a practice to send
      speakers with good lectures to various towns, districts, etc.? Composition
      and size, frequency and circumstances of lecture meetings?
    

      17) Economic agitation. When did issue of leaflets begin? Is it possible
      to give the total number of leaflets issued and in how many copies?
      (Approximately?)  What districts, factories, and trades has this agitation
      involved? The procedure adopted in drawing up and approving leaflets?
      Participation of workers in this? Technique of publication and
      distribution? Do workers act as distributors? To what extent is
      the demand for leaflets met?
    

      18) Political agitation. Transition from economic agitation? When did it
      begin?  Has it evoked any protests? When were the first political leaflets
      issued?  Was there a time when only economic leaflets were
      issued? How is political agitation carried out and on what pretexts?
      Describe as fully as possible its expansion both as to the nature of the
      leaflets and as to the sphere of distribution. Documentary material is
      desirable, since it is important to know all instances of
      political agitation and all its spheres. Has it been conducted only among
      workers or among other classes as well (cf. below)? Methods and procedure
      in drawing up leaflets, demand for them, and extent to which this demand
      is met? Which are more needed, local or general leaflets?
    

      19) Literature. What illegal publications are distributed? Enumerate them,
      stating how widely they are distributed, the attitude of the committee and
      the workers (resp. of the public in general) towards
      each publication (pamphlets, etc.). Time of distribution, demand,
      among which sections, chiefly for what literature?
    

      Distributed or scattered? Collective reading in circles? What items have
      required explanation by intellectuals? Is interpretative reading widely
      practised? Of what works specifically?
    

      20) Local and general Party press. History of the local paper. How
      frequently issued? Number of copies? How has the literary end been
      organised?  Collection and safekeeping (loss?) of material? Organisation
      of contributions to

    

      the local and general Party organs? Are there special literary groups?
      Reporters? Contacts with literary people? How are contributions forwarded?
      Through the committee? Through private persons and to what extent?
      Attempts to utilise students? Exiles?
    

      Conclusions and inquiries about the papers.
    

      21) May Day rallies. Account of each May Day rally and lessons for the
          future.
    

      22) Demonstrations. Summary information on each demonstration. Attempts to
      organise in general? To offer resistance in particular? To arm? Views of
      workers and of “practicians” in general on this question?
    

      Supplementing and checking of Party literature on demonstrations.
    

      Present attitude towards this question.
    
V. Attitude
Towards Revolutionary (Especially Social-Democratic) Groups of Other
Races and Nationalities

      23) Are there any workers of other nationalities and races? Work among
      these?  Organised or sporadic? In what languages? Attitude towards
      Social-Democratic groups working in same locality and using some other
      language? A precise and detailed account of these relations is
      desirable. Are there differences of opinion? On question of principle as
      to the national programme? On tactics? On organisation? Relations
      desirable for joint work. Possibility of a single Party organ? Is
      federation desirable, and of what type?
    
VI. Print-Shops,
Transport, and Arrangements for Secret Work

      24) Print-shops. Experience in establishing them. Expenditure of money and
      forces. Productivity. Need for local print-shops (for leaflets?) and
      general print-shops for many towns? Technical, organisational, financial,
      and secrecy arrangements for this work.
    

      25) Transport. Have there been contacts in this field? Transport groups?
      History of each and detailed information

    

      on arrangements, functioning, results, and prospects. Desirable form of
      organisation.
    

      26) Arrangements for secret work. Secret quarters? Signals? Underground
      quarters? Procurement of passports? Experience in this respect? Are there
      necessary contacts for this?
    

      Arrangement of rendezvous?
    

      Shadowing of spies? The struggle against spies and agents
      provocateurs? Its forms, previous and desirable?
    

      Codes, correspondence between towns, within the town, with abroad?
    

      Lectures on: “How to behave at police interrogations?” Need for
      pamphlets on this and other subjects?
    

      Committee records? Have there been such and have they been kept in the
      past? At present?
    
VII. Contacts
and Activity Among Sections of the Population Outside the Working
Class

      27) Work among the peasantry? Are there individual contacts? Detailed
      information about such? How are contacts made and maintained, and with
      what peasants? With agricultural workers? Role of factory workers who go
      to the villages?
    

      Attempts at propaganda? Distribution of pamphlets? Leaflets? What kind?
      How successful?
    

      Existing situation and prospects.
    

      28) Students. Is influence sporadic and personal, or or ganised? Have many
      Social-Democrats come from the midst of the students? Are there any
      contacts with students’ circles, fraternities, union councils? How are
      these contacts main tained? Lectures? Distribution of literature?
      Prevalent mood among students and the history of changes in various moods.
    

      Attitude towards student disturbances?
    

      Students’ participation in demonstrations? Attempts to reach preliminary
      agreement in this respect?
    

      Students as propagandists, their training for this work?
    

      29) Secondary schools, Gymnasia, theological seminaries, etc., commercial
      and business schools? Nature of contacts with pupils? Attitude towards new
      phase of upsurge in movement

    

      among them? Attempts to organise circles and study courses? Have recruits
      to the Social-Democratic movement been made (and how often) amopg recent
      Gymnasium grad uates (or pupils)? Circles, lectures? Distribution of lit
      erature?
    

      30) Contacts with “society”? In the past and today, and among what
      sections? Based on money collections? Distribution of literature?  For
      organisation of legal libraries? To collect information and
      correspondence? Changes in the attitude of “society” towards
      Social-Democrats. Demand for Social-Democratic literature? Contacts among
      civil servants? Among postal, telegraph, and railway em ployees? Among
      factory inspectors? Among police employees? Among the clergy? Etc.?
    

      It is likewise desirable to have an account of the experience of
      individual committee members in establishing personal contacts among
      various sections.
    

      31) Contacts with the military? Part played by Social-Democratic
      intellectuals and workers who have completed military service? Contacts
      among commissioned and non commissioned officers? How are these contacts
      maintained and utilised? Importance of these contacts in agitation,
      propaganda, organisation, etc.
    

      It is desirable that particularly detailed information be given on this
      question and the preceding, since the problem is a new one and numerous
      isolated measures have to be summed up and collated.
    
VIII. State of
the Non-Social-Democratic Revolutionary and Opposition Trends and Attitude
Towards Them

      32) Liberal trends. Liberal-Narodnik. Among the public? Among the
      students?  Osvobozhdeniye, its circulation (among students? among
      workers?)  and its influence? Are there any Osvobozhdeniye
      circles? Their attitude towards the Social Democrats?
    

      Interest in Osvobozhdeniye among Social-Democratic circles and
      attitude towards this publication. Is it utilised for propaganda and
      agitation?
    

      General meetings with debates?
    

    

      33) Socialist-Revolutionaries. Detailed account of their appearance in the
      given locality? When? From the

      N. V. [Narodnaya Volya.–Ed.]?

      Their change into the Socialist-Revolutionaries? Influence of
      “economism”? Character and composition of their contacts and
      circles? Veterans? Students? Workers? The struggle against the
      Social-Democrats, its course, and how conducted?
    

      United groups of Social-Democrats and Socialist-Revolutionaries. Their
      detailed history, data on their work, l e a f l e t s,
      resolutions of groups, and so on.
    

      Special features of weakness or strength of the Socialist-
      Revolutionaries?  Inclination towards terrorism? Among students? Among
      workers?
    

      Work of the Socialist-Revolutionaries among the peasantry? Character of
      their contacts and activities there? Influence of their “agrarian
      programme”?
    

      34) Other groups and trends. The Svoboda group, Workers’ Party
      for the Political Liberation of Russia,

      Makhayevists,[6]
Rabocheye Znamya-ists, etc. An account of their views, attitude
towards Social-Democracy, information about their contacts and work.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      Collective statements? Public meetings? Participation in public
      manifestations? etc.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

      Lenin’s work On the Subject of Reports by Committees and Groups of the
R.S.D.L.P. to the General Party Congress was published in the
preceding Russian edition of the Collected Works according to a
copy of Lenin’s manuscript. Subsequently, Lenin’s original manuscript
was discovered. In the present edition of V. I. Lenin’s Collected
Works this article is for the first time published according to
Lenin’s original manuscript.
    



[3]

Rabochaya Gazeta (Workers’ Gazette)—illegal organ of the
      Kiev Social-Democrats, was published in Kiev with the participation and
      under the editorship of B. L. Eldelman, P. L. Tuchapsky, N. A. Vigdorchik,
      and others. In all, two numbers were issued: No. 1— in August 1897,
      and No. 2—in December (marked as November) of that
      year. P. L. Tuchapsky, who went abroad on the instructions of the
      Editorial Board, acquainted G. V. Plekhanov and other members of the
      Emancipation of Labour group with No. I of Rabochaya Gazeta, and
      secured their consent to contribute to the paper. In a letter to the
      members of the Editorial Board, G. V. Plekhanov gave a favourable
      appraisal of the paper as an all-Russian Social-Democratic organ, and
      pointed out that more attention should be paid to questions of the
      proletariat’s political struggle. Following this contact with the
      Emancipation of Labour group, No. 2 of Rabochaya Gazeta was more
      definitely political in character. The Social-Democrats, grouped round
      Rabochaya Gazeta, worked on the preparations for the First
      Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
    

      The First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. (March 1898) recognised Rabochaya
Gazeta as the official Party organ. After the Congress, the third
issue of the newspaper, which was ready for the press, did not appear
owing to the arrest of members of the Central Committee and the
Rabochaya Gazeta Editorial Board, and also to the seizure of
the printing-press. In 1899 an attempt was made to re sume publication
of Rabochaya Gazeta; V. I. Lenin speaks about this attempt in
section “a” of the fifth chapter of What Is to Be
Done? (see present edition, Vol. 5).
    



[4]

Rabotnik (The Worker) —a non-periodical miscellany
      published in 1896-99 by the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, on
      the initiative of Lenin. The first number, which carried Lenin’s article,
      “Frederick Engels,” was published not earlier than March 1896.
    

      Six numbers of Rabotnik were issued in three books, and 10
      numbers of Listok “Rabotnika” (The “Rabotnik”
      Bulletin).




[5]

Zhizn (Life)—a monthly magazine published in St. Petersburg
      between 1897 and 1901 and abroad in 1902. From 1899 the magazine was the
      organ of the “legal Marxists.”
    

      It published Lenin’s article, “Reply to Mr. P. Nezhdanov”
      (No. 12, December 1899) and two articles entitled “Capitalism in
      Agriculture (Kautsky’s Book and Mr. Bulgakov’s Article)” in Nos. 1 and 2,
      January and February 1900 (see present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 160-65 and
      105-59).
    



[6]

Makhayevists, Makhayevism—an anarchist trend hostile to
      Marxism and headed by the Polish socialist, V. K. Makhaysky, who wrote
      under the pen-name of A. Volsky. Their programme was set out in a book by
      Makhaysky, The Intellectual Worker (published in three parts:
      parts 1 and 2 were hectographed in 1899 and 1900 in Siberia, where the
      author had been exiled, while Part 3 came out in Geneva in
      1904). Makhayevism was marked by hostility towards the intelligentsia,
      which Makhaysky considered

   

      a parasitic class, and by an attempt to foster among the working class
      antagonism towards the revolutionary intelligentsia. Individual
      Makhayevist groups lacking any organisational form or links with one
      another existed in Irkutsk, Odessa, Warsaw, St. Petersburg, and
      elsewhere. The Makhayevists’ influence on the working class was
      negligible.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Moscow Zubatovists in St. Petersburg









Lenin: Moscow Zubatovists in St. Petersburg







V. I.  

      Lenin
Moscow Zubatovists in St. Petersburg




Published:
Iskra, No. 31, January 1, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 301-306.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

Moskovskiye Vedomosti (No. 345, Dec. 15, 1902) carries a
      “Letter to the Publisher,” written by a worker named F. A. Slepov,
      which we reproduce in full below. First of all, we would like to
      lend encouragement to our esteemed “fellow journalist,”
      Mr. Gringmut, editor of Moskovskiye Vedomosti, for publishing a
      document of such great interest. And Mr. Gringmut undoubtedly stands in
      need of encouragement, for of late his extremely useful activity in
      obtaining (and featuring) material for revolutionary agitation has somehow
      fallen off, faded ... lost some of its fervour. You must try harder,
      colleague! Secondly, it is of the utmost importance at the present time
      that the St. Petersburg workers should watch every step of Zubatovism,
      should collect information more regularly about workers who have linked up
      with spies and are conferring with former, present and future generals,
      society ladies, and “true Russian” intellectuals, and should
      spread this information as widely as possible, explaining it in detail to
      one and all.
    

      Here is the letter, which we have supplemented with a few comments of our
      own in brackets:
    

      “Dear Sir,
    

      “Could you find it possible to publish the following in
Moskovskiye Vedomosti, which is held in such esteem by all true
Russian people:
    

      “On the 10th of this month, a meeting of the Board of the Russkoye

      Sobraniye[1]
      was held in the premises of the Sobraniye in St. Petersburg and was
      devoted exclusively to questions concerning the life of Russian factory
      workers.
    

      “Among the most prominent members of St. Petersburg society present
      at the meeting were: General K. V. Komarov,

    

      former Assistant Governor General of Warsaw; Auditor General
      A. V. Vasilyev; Colonel A. P. Veretennikov; Count Apraxin; Count
      A. P. Ignatyev, ex-Governor General of Kiev; Count
      P. A. Golenishchev-Kutuzov; General Zabudsky; Admiral Nazimov; Nikolai
      Vyacheslavovich von Plehve; I. P. Khrushchov, member of the Board of the
      Ministry of Public Education; Professor Zolotaryov of the General Staff;
      V. S. Krivenko; Count N. F. Heyden; General Demyanenkov; Archpriest
      Ornatsky and other church dignitaries. Also present were ladies from the
      upper circles of St. Petersburg society, as well as Mayor Lelyanov and
      Councillor Dekhterev of the City Council. The press was represented by
      V. V. Komarov, editor of Svyet; V. L. Velichko, editor of
      Russky Vestnik; Syromyatnikov, of the staff of Novoye
      Vremya; K. K. Sluchevsky, former editor of Praviteistvenny
      Vestnik; Leikin, editor and publisher of the Oskolki
      magazine; the painter Karazin, and others.
    

      “The meeting opened with a report on the condition of workers in the
      manufacturing industries delivered by I. S. Sokolov, a worker”
      (concerning Sokolov see No. 30 of Iskra, which gives a fuller
      list, based on information taken from Svyet, of St. Petersburg
      worker-Zubatovists.—Ed., Iskra)." In the main, the speaker
      explained the present condition of the working class in the industrial
      cities, their material and spiritual needs, their efforts to acquire
      knowledge, etc." (It is a pity that Mr. Sokolov’s report has not been
      published! It would be interesting to see how he managed to
      “explain” the workers’ efforts to acquire knowledge but made
      no mention of police persecution of such efforts.—Ed.,
      Iskra.) “Then representatives of the Moscow workers”
      (would it not be more correct to say: representatives of the Moscow secret
      police? Was it not on money supplied by the police that you and your
      friends travelled to St. Petersburg, Mr. Slepov?—Ed.,
      Iskra), “among whom I was, also had the honour of attending
      the meeting of the Russkoye Sobraniye and reporting to that illustrious
      gathering on the state of affairs in the working-class world of Moscow. In
      our report we first of all expressed, on behalf of Russian workers, our
      profound gratitude to the members of the Russkoye Sobraniye for giving
      their representatives the opportunity to explain the present condition of
      the Russian working class. Further we

    

      requested the representatives of Russian higher society to devote serious
      attention to the education of the Russian workers” (quite naturally!
      It is precisely from the upper classes that the worker should expect an
      education—by means of the whip probably!—Ed., Iskra),
      “which is in a far from satisfactory state, a fact that is being
      successfully used for socialist propaganda by persons with malicious
      intent” (if the lack of education is advantageous to the
      socialists, why, then, is the government closing schools
      for workers and reading-rooms? It doesn’t make sense,
      Mr. Slepov!—Ed., Iskra), “thereby causing harm not
      only to the workers, but to the entire Russian state. Then we endeavoured
      to call the attention of the illustrious assembly to the lack of sympathy
      among Moscow factory-owners for the Moscow workers’ idea of uniting in a
      close family for the purpose of founding their own mutual aid societies,
      which are so important for delivering the workers from crushing want. In
      this connection we asked members of the illustrious assembly to raise in
      government circles the question of loans to the workers’ mutual aid
      societies” (see the speech of the Nizhni-Novgorod worker, Samylin,
      before the court, in No. 29 of Iskra, in which be tells how he
      was arrested for taking part in a workers’ circle studying
      economics. There is education for you; there you have mutual aid
      societies!—Ed., Iskra). “Undoubtedly, support of the
      workers in their material needs would constitute the best. refutation of
      malicious propaganda among them” (can it really be that
      Mr. Slepov—and what an appropriate name he

      has! [Slepov, from slepoi—the Russian
for “blind"—Ed.]

      —seriously believes that for the sake of some miserable hand-out a
      class-conscious worker would cease striving for liberty? As to
      “supporting” the non-class-conscious, ignorant mass
      “in their material needs,” this is beyond the power of even the most
      highly placed patrons of the Zubatovists, since in order to provide such
      support it is first necessary to change the whole social system, which
      rests on destitution of the masses.—Ed.,
      Iskra.). “These false ’well-wishers’ of the
      workers usually say that the workers can improve their life only by means
      of riots, disturbances, resistance to the authorities, etc. Unfortunately
      such incitement sometimes meets with success, as every-

    

      one knows. Peaceful improvement of the workers’ living conditions is the
      best way to refute these agitators. Then we had the honour to report to
      the illustrious assembly that in Moscow, despite most widespread
      unemployment, socialist propaganda had lost all its appeal of late”
      (but only quite recently we heard of an enormous number of arrests in
      Moscow! What would be the point of the arrests and who would there have
      been to arrest if this propaganda had lost its appeal??—Ed.,
      Iskra), “precisely because the workers are already beginning to
      organise and have a Mutual Aid Society and a Consumers’ Society, and
      because the sympathetic attention of the authorities has already been
      given to the needs of the workers, making it possible to arrange for them
      lectures on general education, etc. Besides what has been said above, we
      also reported to the Sobraniye about cases in Moscow in which we had
      figured in the capacity of mediators and conciliators between workers and
      manufacturers, not only putting an end to disorders but even averting
      them, as, for instance, at the Hakental factory, the Bromley Bros. factory
      and the Dobrov-Nabholtz factory. We also mentioned the strike of workers
      of the Goujon metallurgical plant, where the workers of the rolling and
      nail shops did stop work, but thanks to our intervention did not go so far
      as to cause disturbances, and returned to work as a result of our
      comradely advice” (the workers get plenty of such
      “comradely” advice during each strike both from the police and
      from the factory inspectors, who are always asking them to “return
      to work.” This is not comradely, but police advice. —Ed.,
      Iskra).
    

      “The members of the Russkoye Sobraniye listened to our reports
      sympathetically” (how else but sympathetically would they listen to
      workers who are helping the police in its business!—Ed.,
      Iskra) “and many voiced the opinion that serious thought
      should be given to the question of the workers and that they should be
      afforded the opportunity and the means of ridding themselves of the
      influence of the socialist doctrine” (an interesting scene: generals
      and priests, Zubatov spies and writers loyal to the police spirit intend
      to “help” the workers rid themselves of the influence of the
      socialist doctrine!—and incidentally, at the same time to help hook
      unwary workers who will swallow the bait.—Ed.,

    

      Iskra), “allowing them independent activity, under control
      of government statutes and under the guidance of that section of the
      intelligentsia which truly loves its native land and is striving for its
      welfare and prosperity” (fine independent activity indeed under
      police control!  No, the workers are already demanding independent
      activity untrammelled by the police, with the right to choose as leaders
      those of the intellectuals whom they, the workers, trust.— Ed.,
      Iskra). “V. V. Komarov, A. V. Vasilyev, Colonel Veretennikov,
      Mr. Dekhterev, the painter Karazin, Princle D. P. Golitsyn, and many
      others reacted most warmly to the question of the workers. The idea was
      expressed that it was necessary to set up special workers’ councils,
      headed by a central council, which would be a beneficial factor in
      averting misunderstandings between workers and manufacturers. As
      Mr. Dekhterev put it, this should be allowed because a crowd can never act
      intelligently and that influence over a crowd of workers could be exerted
      best of all by the workers themselves; as an example, he cited a similar
      type of institution in France which was coping with the above-mentioned
      task successfully.” (Yes, Workers’ Councils are meeting with success in
      France and throughout Europe. That is true. But they are meeting with
      success because there the workers enjoy political liberty, have their own
      unions, their own newspapers, their elected representatives in
      parliament. Does Mr. Dekhterev really think that the St. Petersburg
      workers are all so naïve as not to know this?— Ed.,
      Iskra). “The question of government loans to the workers’
      mutual aid societies also met with sympathy by members of the Russkoye
      Sobraniye. The meeting closed with a decision to elect a special
      commission to consider the steps to be taken in the matter. We trust that
      you, Mr. Editor, as a true Russian, will accord us, workers, the same
      sympathy, and that you will find it possible to publish the above in your
      paper, so that our best people may all unite for a joint struggle against
      the enemies of our native land, who are stirring up sedition among the
      mass of the people, sowing the seeds of internecine strife and undermining
      loyalty to the time-honoured traditions, and respect and reverence for the
      supreme authority. We are firmly convinced that there are also people in
      Russia who are ready to give their all to the

    

      service of their fatherland, to offer up their forces and abilities on its
      altar and, in close communion, to erect an insurmountable barrier to
      falsehood and malice in Russia.
    
“F. A. Slepov, worker.”

      And at the close Mr. Slepov could not but let his tongue run away with
      him! All support for the workers’ needs, all sympathy on the part of the
      government boiled down to one thing: to form groups from among the workers
      themselves to combat socialism. This is the truth of it. And it will be
      most interesting for the workers to learn that in addition to the knout
      and imprisonment, exile and prisons, the Zubatov workers will also try to
      inculcate in them “respect and reverence for the supreme authority.”
      No sensible worker will say at a public meeting what he really
      thinks—that would be delivering himself directly into the hands of
      the police. But through our own papers, our own leaflets
      and our own meetings we can and must see to it that the new
      Zubatov campaign is turned entirely to the good of socialism.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

Russkoye Sobraniye (the Russian Assembly)—a
Black-Hundred monarchist organisation, which supported the policy of the
Zubatovists. It was formed in the autumn of 1900.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Announcement of the Formation of an Organising Committee









Lenin: Announcement of the Formation of an Organising Committee







V. I.  

      Lenin
Announcement of the Formation of an Organising Committee[2]




Published:
Iskra, No. 32, January 15, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 307-311.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    


Four years ago several Russian Social-Democratic organisations united in
the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party and worked out a certain plan
of organisation and general principles of activity, which were set forth
in the “Manifesto” published by the

Party.[3]
Unfortunately, this first attempt was not crowned with success: the
elements necessary for building up a united and strong Social-Democratic
Party, which would wage an unremitting struggle for the emancipation of
the proletariat from all forms of oppression and exploitation, did not
as yet exist. On the one hand, the very forms of the practical activity
of the Russian Social-Democrats were only just beginning to take
shape. The Social-Democrats, who had but recently entered on the path of
struggle, were still seeking the best ways of putting their theoretical
views into practice and were still advancing with timid and uncertain
steps. The working-class movement, on which they based their activities
and which was finding expression in tremendous strikes,had only just
burst forth in a brilliant flash that dazzled the eyes of many,
obscuring from their vision the tasks and aims, so clear and definite,
of revolutionary Social-Democracy, and inducing an enthusiasm for a
narrow trade-union struggle. On the other hand, the constant repressions
practised by the government against the Social-Democratic organisations,
which had not yet become strong or firmly rooted, destroyed all
continuity and cut short any tradition in their activities.
      

However, this unsuccessful attempt did not pass without a trace. From
that time on, the very idea of an organised political party of the
proletariat, which guided our forerunners, became the lodestar and goal
of all class-conscious Social-Democrats. In the course of these four
years, repeated attempts have been made to give effect to this idea,
which has been handed down to us by the first Social-Democratic
leaders. But to this day we are faced with the very same disorganisation
that existed four years ago.
      

At the same time, life makes greater and greater demands on us. Whereas
the first leaders of the Party made it their task to rouse the dormant
revolutionary forces of the mass of the workers, we are faced with the
much more complex task of guiding the awakening forces in the right
direction, of taking our place at the head of these forces

    

and of leading them. We must be prepared at any moment to hear the call:
“Lead us whither you have called us!” It will be a fearful thing
if that moment takes us unawares, just as divided and unprepared as we
are at present. Let it not he said to us that we are exaggerating the
gravity of the moment. Anyone capable of seeing beyond ripples on the
surface, anyone capable of discerning a process that is going on in the
depths, will never suspect us of exaggeration.
      

But the gravity of the situation is enhanced by still other
circumstances. We are passing through a momentous period in history. The
awakening of the working class in connection with the general course of
Russian life has roused various sections of society to activity. More or
less consciously they are striving to organise for the purpose of
joining, in one way or another, the struggle against an obsolete
regime. We wish them every success! Social-Democrats can only welcome
all who join such a struggle. But they must vigilantly watch lest such
allies make Social-Democracy a tool in their hands, lest they divert it
from the main field of activity, lest they deprive it of the leading
role in the struggle against the autocracy and, what is most important,
lest they hinder the progress of the revolutionary struggle by diverting
it from the correct path. That this danger is no figment of the
imagination is clear to everyone who has carefully followed the
development of the revolutionary struggle in recent years.
      

Thus, Russian Social-Democracy is now faced with a gigantic task, one
that is beyond the power of any local committee or even district
organisation. No matter how perfect the local organisations may be, they
will not be able to cope with this task, for it has already grown beyond
local bounds. It can be accomplished only by the collective forces of
all Social-Democrats in Russia, welded into a single, centralised,
disciplined army. But, then, who is to assume the initiative for this
unification?
      

This question was discussed last year at a conference of representatives
of the St. Petersburg League of Struggle, the Central Committee of the
United Committees and Organisations of the South, the Iskra
organisation, the Central Committees of the Bund (in Russia and abroad),
the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad, and some other
organisations. The conference instructed representatives of certain
organisations to form an Organising Committee, which would assume the
task of actually re-establishing the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
Party.
      

In fulfilment of this decision, representatives of the St. Petersburg
League of Struggle, the Iskra organisation, and Yuzhny
Rabochy

group[1]

have formed an Organising Committee, which sets itself the first and
foremost task of preparing the conditions for the convocation
of a Party congress.
      
 

However, since the convocation of a congress is a highly complex matter
and requires considerable time, the Organising Committee assumes, until
the re-establishment of the central Party body, certain general,
functions (the issuing of leaflets intended for the whole of Russia,
general transport arrangements and methods of underground work the
establishment of contacts between the committees, etc.).
      

It is self-evident that the Organising Committee, which has arisen on
the initiative of several organisations, will be bound by obligatory
relations only with those organisations that have already authorised it
or that will authorise it to act for them. Its relation to all other
committees and groups is that of a separate organisation, which offers
its services to them.
      

The task which the Organising Committee has decided to undertake is a
great and responsible one, and, if it has nevertheless made so bold as
to do so, that is only because the need for unity is so pressing,
because disunity is making itself felt all too keenly, and because
continued disorganisation constitutes so great a threat to the common
cause. In setting to work, the Organising Committee believes that the
success of its activity will depend to a considerable extent on the
attitude adopted towards it by the Social-Democratic committees and
organisations, and this attitude itself will be regarded by the
committee as a criterion of the correctness with which it has gauged the
present situation.
      
The Organising Committee
December 1902

 *     *  * 

      This statement by the newly-formed Organising Committee of our Party
      speaks eloquently enough for itself, and there is no need for us to devote
      many words to explaining the great significance of the step that has been
      taken. Unification, the re-establishment of a united Party, is the most
      pressing task of the Russian Social-Democrats, a task that urgently
      requires immediate accomplishment. This task is a very difficult one, for
      it is not unity of a few handfuls of revolutionarily minded intellectuals
      that we need, but unity of all leaders of the working-class movement,
      which has roused the whole of a large class of the population to
      independent life and struggle. We need unification based on a strict
      singleness of principle which must be consciously and firmly arrived at by
      all or by the vast majority of committees, organisations, and groups, of
      intellectuals and workers, who act in varying circumstances and under
      varying conditions and have sometimes achieved their Social-Democratic
      convictions along the most diverse paths. Such unification

    

      cannot be decreed; neither can it be established immediately, by mere
      resolutions adopted by assembled delegates. It must be prepared and
      developed systematically and gradually, so that the general Party congress
      can consolidate and improve what has already been accomplished, continue
      what has been started, and complete and formally endorse the firm
      foundation for further, more widespread and intense work. And that is why
      we particularly welcome the wisely cautious and modest way in which the
      Organising Committee has entered upon its duties. Without insisting on any
      kind of obligatory relations with the mass of Russian Social- Democrats,
      the Organising Committee confines itself to offering its services
      to all of them. And so let all Russian Social-Democrats without except
      ion—committees and circles, organisations and groups, those on
      active service and those temporarily on the retired list (exiles,
      etc.)—make haste to respond to this call; let them strive to
      establish direct and active contacts with the O.C.; let them give their
      most active support to the great work of unification. We must see to it
      that not a single group of Russian Social-Democrats fails to
      establish contacts with the O.C., or work in comradely harmony with
      it. Further, while regarding the preparation and convocation of a general
      Party congress as its primary task, the O.C. also assumes certain general
      functions in the service of the movement. We are confident that
      no Social-Democrat will fail to recognise the pressing need for this
      extension of functions on the part of the O.C., for this is merely an
      extended offer of its services—an offer that goes to meet
      demands expressed thousands and thousands of times—an offer that
      does not entail the forfeiture of any “rights,” but rather the
      practical abandonment of isolation as speedily as possible, and the
      tackling in common of a number of joint undertakings. Finally, we also
      consider absolutely correct and in place the resolute statement of the
      O.C. that the convocation of a congress is a highly complex matter and
      requires considerable time. This, of course, does not at all mean that the
      convocation of the congress should be put off. Nothing of the sort. If we
      take into account the urgency of the congress, then we would have to admit
      that even one month is too “considerable” a period for its
      convocation. But if we bear in mind our conditions of

    

      work and the necessity for adequate representation of the entire movement
      at the congress, then five or even ten times as long a period will not
      cause a single Party worker who is at all experienced to lose heart.
    

      Let us then wish every success to the work for the speediest possible
      unification and re-establishment of the Party and let us show our sympathy
      with this work not only in words but in immediate action on the part of
      every one of us. Long live Russian and international revolutionary
      Social-Democracy!
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      The Bund was also invited to send its representative to the Organising
      Committee, but for reasons unknown to us, the Bund did not respond to this
      invitation. We hope that these reasons were purely accidental, and that
      the Bund will not delay in sending its representative.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

The Organising Committee (O.C.) for convening the Second Congress of
the R.S.D.L.P. was first elected by the Belostok Conference in
March (April) 1902, but soon after the conference all the Committee
members hut one were arrested. On Lenin’s initiative a new Organising
Committee was set up at the Pskov Conference of Social-Democratic
committees held in November 1902. The Iskra supporters had an
overwhelming majority in the new committee.
    

      Under Lenin’s leadership, the Organising Committee carried out
      considerable work in preparing the Second Party Congress. In February
      1903, draft rules for the convocation of the Party Congress were adopted
      at a plenary session held in Orel.
    

      Following the February plenary session, members of the 0. C. twice visited
      local committees with a view to assisting them in their work. With the
      participation of members of the 0. C. the local Party organisations
      discussed the draft rules for the convocation of the Congress, after which
      the rules were confirmed by the 0. C.
    

      The 0. C. confirmed the list of local organisations entitled to attend the
      Congress in accordance with the rules adopted. A detailed written report
      on its activities was prepared by the 0. C. for presentation to the
      Congress.
    



[3]

      The reference is to the First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., which was held
      in Minsk on March 1-3 (13-15), 1898. It was attended by nine delegates
      from six organisations—the St. Petersburg, Moscow,
      Ekaterinoslav. and Kiev Leagues of Struggle for the Emancipation of the
      Working Class, the group of the Kiev Rabochaya Gazeta, and the
      Bund. The Congress elected the Central Committee of the Party, confirmed
      Rahochaya Gazeta as the Party’s official organ, published a
      “Manifesto,” and declared that the Union of Russian Social-Democrats
      Abroad represented the Party abroad (see The C.P.S.U. in Resolutions
      and Decisions of Its Congresses, Conferences, and Plenary Meetings of the
      Central Committee, Part 1,1954, pp. 11-15).
    

      The significance of the First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. lay in the fact
      that, in its decisions and Manifesto, it proclaimed the formation of the
      Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, thereby being an important factor
      of revolutionary propaganda. However, the Congress did not adopt a
      programme or work out the Party Rules. The Central Committee elected at
      the Congress was arrested and the Rabochaya Gazeta print-shop
      seized, so that the Congress did not succeed in linking together and
      unifying the individual Marxist

   

      study circles and organisations. There was no central leadership and no
      definite line in the work of the local organisations.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Some Reflections on the Letter from “7 Ts. 6 F.”









Lenin: Some Reflections on the Letter from '7 Ts. 6 F.'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Some Reflections on the Letter from “7 Ts. 6 F.”[2]




Written: Written in the second half of January 1903 

Published:

      First published in 1924 in the magazine Molodaya Gvardia, No. 2-3.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 312-318.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      I am writing under the fresh impression of your letter, which I have just
      read. Its senseless twaddle is so exasperating that I am unable to
      suppress the desire to state my opinion frankly. Please send my letter on
      to the author and tell him that he need not take offence at the severe
      tone. After all, it is not meant for publication.
    

      The letter deserves a reply, in my opinion, because it shows up in
      particularly bold relief a characteristic trait in the mood of many
      present-day revolutionaries: waiting for instructions; demanding
      everything from above, from others, from outside; looking lost
      when faced by failures caused by local inactivity; piling up complaint
      after complaint, and inventing recipes for a cheap and simple cure of the
      evil.
    

      You will not invent anything, gentlemen! If you yourselves are
      inactive, if you permit splits to take place under your very noses and
      then heave sighs and make complaint— no recipes will help
      you. And it is utterly absurd to shower us with complaints on this
      score. Don’t imagine that you offend us by your accusations and attacks:
      you see, we have become inured, so devilishly inured to them that they do
      not provoke us!
    

      “Mass” literature “by the hundredweight”
      —this battle-cry of yours is nothing but an imaginary
      recipe for someone else to cure you of your own inactivity. Believe
      me, no such recipes will ever work! If you yourselves are not
      energetic and alert, no one will help you in any way. It is highly
      unreasonable to wail,

      “g i v e

      us this or that,

      d e l i v e r

      something or other,” when you yourselves should do the getting and
delivering. It is useless to write about it to us, for we cannot do
it from here, whereas you can and should

    

      do it by yourselves: I am referring to the delivery of literature we are
      publishing and have on hand.
    

      Some local “activists” (so called because they are inactive),
      who have seen no more than a few issues of Iskra and who do not
      work actively to get and distribute it in mass quantities, invent
      the flimsy excuse: “That is not what we want. Give us mass
      literature, for the masses! Masticate it for us, put it into our mouths,
      and perhaps we’ll manage to do the swallowing ourselves.”
    

      How phenomenally absurd these plaints appear to those who know and see
      that they, these local “activists,” are unable to organise the
      distribution of even what is available. Is it not ridiculous to read: give
      us hundredweights, when you are unable to take and transport even
      a

        f e w   p o u n d s?  

      Do that first, worthy “dreamers for an hour” (for the first
      mishap makes you abandon everything, even all your convictions!). Do that,
      and then, when you have done it not once, but dozens of times, the
      publication, too, will grow with the demand.
    

      I say it will grow, for your plaints about mass literature (which you have
      uncritically and senselessly copied from the Socialist-Revolutionaries,
      Svoboda people, and all sorts of confused “inactivists”)
      are caused by forgetfulness of a small ... a very small trifle, namely,
      forgetfulness of the fact that you are unable to take and distribute
      even a hundredth part of the mass literature we are publishing
      now. I shall take one of the recent lists of one of our few (miserably,
      pitifully, shamefully few) consignments. The Nizhni-Novgorod speeches,
      the Rostov struggle, the pamphlet on strikes, the Dikstein

pamphlet[1]
[3]–I

      shall limit myself to these. Four, only four small items! So little!!
    
 

      Yes, it is very little! Yes, we need four hundred, not four.
    

      But, permit me to ask you, have you been able to distribute at least
      these four things by the ten thousand? No, you have not been able to
      do this. You have not been able to distribute them by the hundred
      even. That is why you shout: give us hundredweights! (No
      one will ever give you anything if you are unable to
      take it: bear that in mind.)
    

      Have you been able to make use of the hundreds of copies which
      have been delivered to you, brought to you, and
      placed into your mouths?? No, you have not been able to do that. Even
      in this trifle you have not been able to link up the masses with
      Social-Democracy. Every month we get tens and hundreds of Leaflets,
      reports, news items, and letters from all parts of Russia, but we have had
      not a single (give good thought to the exact meaning of the
      words, “not a single”!) report about the distribution of these
      hundreds of copies among the masses, about the impression they
      made on the masses, about the reaction of the masses,
      about discussions among the masses on

        t h e s e  

      things! You are placing us in a position wherein the writer does the
      writing and the reader (the intellectual) does the reading—after
      which this same slothful reader fulminates against the writer because he
      (the writer!!!) does not furnish literature “by the
      hundredweight” everywhere. The person whose sole business it is to

        l i n k   u p  

      the writer with the masses sits like a ruffled turkey and gobbles away:
      give us mass literature, while at the same time he is
      unable to make use of even a

      h u n d r e d t h   p a r t

      of what is available.
    

      You will of course say that it is impossible, impossible in
      general, to get, for instance, Iskra, our main product,
      linked up with the masses. I know you will say that. I have heard
      it hundreds of times and have always replied that this is untrue, that it
      is a subterfuge, shirking, inability, and indolence, the desire to have
      roast duck fly straight into your mouths.
    

      I know from the facts that enterprising people have been able to
      “link up” Iskra (this super-intellectual
      Iskra, as the sorry little intellectuals consider it) with the
      masses of even such backward and uneducated workers as those in
      the industrial gubernias around Moscow. I have known workers who
      have themselves distributed Iskra among the masses (there)

    

      and who merely remarked that there were too few copies. Quite recently I
      heard a “soldier from the field of battle” tell of how in one
      such out-of-the-way factory area in central Russia Iskra is read
      at one and the same time in numerous circles, at gatherings numbering from
      ten to fifteen people, the committee and subcommittees themselves
      reading over every issue in advance, planning jointly just how to
      use each article in agitation talks. And they were able to make use of
      even those paltry five to eight (maximum: eight!!) copies which
      were all that they got owing to the helpless inactivity of the activists
      stationed near the border (who are never even able to make arrangements
      for reception of literature consignments and hope that the writer will
      give birth not only to articles but to people to do the work for them!).
    

      Come now, tell us with your hand over your heart: have many of you made
      such use of

        e v e r y  

      copy of Iskra you received (delivered to you, brought to
      you)? You are silent! Well then, let me tell you: one out of a
      hundred copies that get to Russia (by the will of the fates and due
      to the inactivity of the “readers”) is being used in this
      way, with discussions on the agitation value of every item, with
      readings of every item in workers’ study circles, in all circles
      of all workers who are accustomed to foregather in a particular
      town. And yet people who are unable to assimilate even a
      hundredth part of the material that gets to them wail: give us hundred
      weights!! Shchedrin’s formula (the writer does the writing) still regards
      the “reader” far, far too optimistically!!
    

      The present-day reader (from among the Social-Democratic intellectuals)
      has gone so far as to complain about the writers because the
      local intellectuals are lazy and “order” the workers about,
      without doing anything for them. The complaint is justified, a thousand
      times justified, only ...  is it directed to the proper quarter? Won’t you
      permit us to return this complaint to the sender, with a double
      charge as punishment?? What about yourselves, my worthy complainants? If
      your friends are unable to make use of Iskra for
      readings in workers’ study circles, if they are unable to assign
      people for the delivery and distribution of literature, if they are
      unable to assist the workers to set up circles for this purpose,
      why

        d o n’ t   y o u   t h r o w  

      such helpless friends

        o v e r b o a r d??  

      Just think, in what sort of pretty

    

      situation do you find yourselves when you complain to us about

        y o u r   o w n  

      helplessness?
    

      It is a

        f a c t  

      that the “practicians” do not make use of even a hundredth
      part of all they could take. And it is a no less indubitable fact
      that the special varieties of “mass” literature which these
      people have thought up are only pretexts and dodges. In the letter of
      "7 Ts. 6 F.,” for instance, three varieties are recommended to
      “us” (ii would be to us, of course):
    

      1) A popular newspaper. Chew over every fact so as to make its
      assimilation possible without digestion, so that w e,
      “activists,” should need no stomachs at all.
    

      It does not matter that the world has never yet seen such a
      “popular” “newspaper,” since a newspaper giver
      answers to everything, while popular literature gives
      instruction on a few things. It does not matter that
      all our examples of such literature, beginning with Rabochaya
      Mysl, on through

      Vperyods,[4]
Rabocheye Dyelos, Krasnoye

Znamyas,”[5]
      and the like, have unavoidably and necessarily proved mongrels, being
      neither popular nor newspapers. It does not matter that all
      efforts of the “workers’” news papers have merely nurtured, and
      always will nurture, the absurd division into an intellectual movement and
      a working-class movement (a division caused by the dull-wittedness and
      bungling of the intellectuals, who go so far as to send complaints about
      their own bungling from the seat of the trouble to the ends of
      the earth!). It does not matter that all the efforts of the
      “workers’” newspapers so far have been breeding, and will always
      breed among us, amateurishness and special, profound, Kazan and Kharkov
      theories. All this does not matter. Look at the captivating
      Svoboda group and the captivating (“breath-taking”)
      Socialist-Revolutionaries; what a mass (ugh, what a mass!) of popular
      newspapers and periodicals they are publishing!! Narodnoye Dyelo,
      Krasnoye Znamya, Svoboda—a magazine for workers,
      Otkliki—a newspaper and magazine for workers,
      Luchina—for peasants, Rabochaga Mysl—the
      Geneva news paper of the St. Petersburg workers!! It does not matter that
      all this is trash, but it is

        m a s s  

      trash for all that.
    

      And all you have is just one Iskra; after all, it gets
      monotonous!  Thirty-one issues and all Iskra, while with the

    

      captivating people every two issues of one title (of trash) are
      immediately followed by three issues of another title (of trash). Now,
      this is energy, this is jolly, this is new! But our Social-Democrats....
    

      2) And “they” are always having new pamphlets. Each reprint is
      considered a pamphlet and all this is meretriciously trumpeted forth, and
      the printed sheets are added up (a million printed sheets: see No. 16 of
      Revolutsionnaya Rossiya. They have broken all records!
      Champions!).
    

      But in our case! Reprints are not counted as pamphlets— that is
      highbrowism, bookishness!! The ancient Dikstein pamphlets are being
      republished, when every girl in Paris and in Chernigov knows that
      ten new pamphlets (trash) are worth a hundred times more than one
      old pamphlet, even a good one.
    

      It is only the Germans who do things in such a way that, for example, in
      1903 Bebel’s Our Aims, written thirty-four years ago, is
      being republished for the eleventh time!! That is so boring. Our
      “captivating” Socialist-Revolutionaries are pouring out
      stuff. But our local “activists” are able to use neither the

        o l d  

      Plekhanov pamphlets (twenty years old: ancient stuff! To the archives with
      them!), nor “some” one (one!) pamphlet on

      strikes[6]
      and on the Witte memorandum!
    

      This quite apart from the fact that the local “activist” does
      not lift a finger to squeeze

        g o o d  

      pamphlets out of authors now in exile—and to get local writers
      to contribute to “Iskra.” Why do that? It is much easier to
      complain than to undertake such a troublesome business! And the
      present-day reader unblushingly calls himself an Iskra-ist on the
      grounds that he writes complaints to Iskra.  Nor does it trouble
      his conscience in the slightest that 90 per cent of the articles are
      written by the one and the same three and a half writers. Nor does he find
      it necessary even to think about the fact that Iskra must not be
      allowed to stop publication and that the fortnightly issue of one and a
      half to two signatures calls for a lot of work. Still, he continues to
      shout with simply unparalleled fatuity: thirty-one issues, and there are
      still many fools in the localities and much helpless wailing!! A truly
      crushing argument.... Only whom and what does it crush?
    
 

      3) Leaflets.
    

G i v e us leaflets! The committees cannot do it!! Write,
      deliver, bring (and distribute?) leaflets!
    

      Well, now, this is indeed consistent. I open my mouth and you shovel it
      in: here we have the new formula for the relations between the
      “writer” and the Iskra practician! To go so far as to
      state that the local organisations (consisting of slothful
      “activists”?) cannot manage to issue local leaflets, that these
      leaflets should be delivered from abroad, that is the limit. This
      is such a splendid (in my opinion) crowning touch to the whole letter of
      “7 Ts. 6 F.” that it only remains for me to conclude with this
      “crown.” Any further remarks or comments will only dim its shining
      lustre.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      “This is old stuff!” you wail. Yes. All parties that have good
      popular literature have been distributing

        o l d   s t u f f:  

      Guesde and Lafargue, Bebel, Bracke, Liebknecht, etc.,

        f o r  

d e c a d e s.  

      Do you hear: for decades! And the

        o n l y  

      popular literature that is good, the only popular
      literature that is suitable is that which can serve for
      decades. For popular literature is a series of textbooks for the
      people, and textbooks teach the ABC, which remains unchanged for

        f i f t y   y e a r s  

      at a time. The “popular” literature which
      “captivates” you and which the Svoboda group and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries publish by the hundredweight every month is
      waste paper and charlatanism. Charlatans always bustle
      and make the greatest noise, and some naïve people mistake that for
      energy.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

7 Ts. 6. F.—pseudonym of the Bolshevik F. V. Lengnik.
    



[3]

The Nizhni-Novgorod speeches—the reference is to the
      speeches made by Nizhni-Novgorod revolutionary workers during their trial
      for participation in demonstrations. These speeches were published in
      Iskra and then as a pamphlet.
    

The Roslov struggle—the reference is to the pamphlet,
The Struggle of the Rostov Workers, published by Iskra.
    

The pamphlet on strikes refers to the pamphlet, The Autocracy and
Strikes, published in Geneva by the League of Russian Revolutionary
Social-Democracy.
    

The Dikstein pamphlet—this refers to a popular Marxist
      pamphlet, The Ways People Live, by Dikstein.
    



[4]

Vperyod (Forward)—a newspaper of the
      “economist” trend, published in Kiev between 1896 and 1900.
    



[5]

Krasnoye Znamya (Red Banner)—organ of the
      “economists,” was published by the Union of Russian Social-Democrats
      Abroad from November 1902 to January 1903 to take the place of
      Rabocheye Dyelo. Three numbers were issued.
    



[6]

      Lenin is referring to the pamphlet, The Autocracy and Strikes.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Concerning the Statement of the Bund









Lenin: Concerning the Statement of the Bund







V. I.  

      Lenin
Concerning the Statement of the Bund




Published:
Iskra, No. 33, February 1, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 319-325.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      We have just received No. 106 of the Bund’s Posledniye Izvestia
      (dated February 3/January

      21[Second date Old Style.—Ed.]),

      which reports an exceptionally important, drastic and highly lamentable
      step taken by the Bund. It appears that in Russia there has come out a
      statement of the Central Committee of the Bund on the announcement of the
      Organising Committee. As a matter of fact, it would be more correct to
      say: a statement on the footnote in the announcement of the
      Organising Committee, for it is mainly this single footnote that
      the Bund deals with in its statement.
    

      This is what it is all about. As our readers know, the Organising
      Committee stated in this terrible “footnote,” which (ostensibly!)
      was the spark that set the forest on fire, literally the following:
    

      “The Bund was also invited to send its representative to the
      Organising Committee, but for reasons unknown to us, the Bund did not
      respond to this invitation. We hope that these reasons were purely
      accidental, and that the Bund will not delay in sending its

      representative."[See p. 308 of this
volume.—Ed.]
    

      What, we ask, could be more natural and innocent than this footnote? How
      else could the O.C. have acted? To avoid mentioning the Bund would have
      been wrong, since the O.C. did not and could not ignore it so long as the
      Bund, on the basis of the decision of the Party Congress in 1898, was
      affiliated to the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. And once we did
      mention it, we had to state that we had invited it. Clear enough, one
      would think? And it is even clearer that if the O.C. did not know the
      reasons for

    

      the Bund’s silence, this is exactly what should have been stated:
      “for reasons unknown to us.” By adding the words: we hope that these
      reasons were purely accidental and that the Bund will not delay
      in sending its representative—the O.C. openly and straightforwardly
      expressed its desire to work together with the Bund for the
      organisation of the congress and the re-establishment of the Party.
    

      Obviously, if the Bund also shared this desire, it would only have to send
      its representative, who was invited both through secret channels
      and in the press announcement. Instead, the Bund enters into
      polemics with a footnote (!!), and in a printed statement gives a
      separate and particular exposition of its opinions and
      views on the tasks of the O.C. and the conditions for convoking a
      congress. Prior to examining the Bund’s “polemic” and
      analysing its views, we must protest most emphatically against
      the Bund coming out with a separate statement in the press, since such
      action is an infringement of the most elementary rules governing the
      joint conduct of revolutionary activities and especially
      organisational activities. One of two things, gentlemen. Either you do
      not want to work in one common O.C., in which case no one,
      of course, will complain of your acting separately, or you want to work
      jointly, in which case you are in duty bound to state your views,
      not in separate statements to the public, but to the comrades on the O.C.,
      which comes out publicly only as an integral body.
    

      The Bund itself is, of course, fully aware that its action flies in the
      face of all rules of comradely conduct of common affairs, and it
      attempts to take refuge in the following feeble justification:
      “Since we have had no possibility to express our views on the tasks
      of the forthcoming congress either through personal attendance at the
      conference or through participation in drawing up the ’Announcement,’ we
      are obliged to make up for this omission, at least to some extent, by the
      present statement.” The question arises: does the Bund really intend in
      all seriousness to assure us that it had “no possibility” to
      send a letter to the O.C.? Or to send a letter to the St. Petersburg
      Committee? Or to the Iskra organisation, or Yuzhny
      Rabochy? And besides was there no possibility for the Bund to send
      its delegate to one of these organisations? Did the Bund try to take at
      least one

    

      of these “impossibly” difficult steps, which very likely were
      especially difficult for an organisation so weak, inexperienced and
      lacking in all links as the Bund?
    

      Stop this game of hide-and-seek, gentlemen! It is both stupid and
      unbefitting. You acted separately because you wanted to act
      separately. And you wanted to act separately in order to indicate and
      immediately carry out your decision to place your relations with
      the Russian comrades on a new footing: not to affiliate
      to the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party on the basis of the Rules of
      1898, but to enter into a federative alliance with it. Instead of
      discussing this question in detail and comprehensively before the
      entire congress, as we wanted to do, when for a very long time we
      refrained from continuing the polemic we started on the question of
      federation and

      nationality[1]—instead

      of doing this, as all or
      the vast majority of the Russian comrades undoubtedly wanted to do, you
      wrecked joint discussion. You did not act as a fellow comrade of
      St. Petersburg, the South, and Iskra, one who desired to discuss
      together with them the best form of relations (both prior to the
      congress and at the congress); you acted as a
      contracting party, apart from all the members of the R.S.D.L.P.,
      presenting your own terms to the whole of this Party.
    

      Love cannot be forced, says the Russian proverb. If the Bund does not want
      to remain in the closest alliance with the Russian Social-Democratic
      Labour Party, which was properly recommended by the Congress of 1898, then
      of course it will cease to maintain the old relations. We do not deny the
      “right” of the Bund to express its opinion and its desire (in
      general, we do not indulge in talk about “rights” in the cause
      of revolution except in cases of dire necessity). But we do very much
      regret the fact that the Bund has shown so little tact as to give
      expression to its opinion in a separate public statement when it was
      invited to enter a common organisation (the O.C.) which had not
      expressed in advance any hard and fast opinion on the given question
      and was calling a congress for the express purpose of discussing each and
      every opinion.
    

      The Bund wanted to provoke an immediate declaration of opinions
      on the part of all those who entertain different views on this
      question. Very well! We, of course, shall not

    

      refuse to do so. We shall tell the Russian proletariat, and shall
      specially repeat to the Jewish proletariat, that the present Bund leaders
      are committing a grave political error, which will undoubtedly be
      corrected by time, experience, and the growth of the movement. At one time
      the Bund sup ported “economism,” helped to bring about the split
      abroad, and adopted resolutions stating that the economic struggle is the
      best means of political agitation. We rose up against this and
      fought it. And the fight helped to rectify the old mistakes, of which very
      likely not even a trace has remained. We fought against the urge towards
      terrorism, which to all appearances vanished even more rapidly. We are
      convinced that nationalist passion too will vanish. In the end the Jewish
      proletariat will understand that its most vital interests demand the
      closest unity with the Russian proletariat in one party, that it
      is the height of folly to decide in advance whether the evolution of the
      Jewish people in free Russia will differ from its evolution in free
      Europe, that the Bund ought not to go beyond the demand (in the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party) for the complete autonomy in matters
      concerning the Jewish proletariat, which was fully recognised by the 1898
      Congress and which has never been denied by anyone.
    

      But let us return to the Bund’s statement. It terms the footnote to the
      “Announcement” of the O.C. “ambiguous.” This is an
      untruth that borders on malicious slander. A few lines later, the Bund’s
      Central Committee itself admits that the “reasons for our
      representative’s absence from the conference were purely accidental.” And
      what did the O.C. say? It expressed the hope that it was only for
      accidental reasons that the representative of the Bund did not attend. You
      yourselves confirm this assumption and then grow angry over it. Why is
      that? Further. No one can know of accidental occurrences in
      advance. Hence, the assertion of the Bund’s Foreign Committee that the
      O.C. knew the reasons that prevented the representative from
      appearing is absolutely unfounded. The Bund’s Foreign Committee is in
      general playing a very unseemly part in this affair: the Bun d’s Foreign
      Committee supplements the statement of the Bund’s Central Committee with
      its own inventions, which flatly contradict the words of even the
      C. C. itself!  How could the

    

      Bund’s Foreign Committee ascertain that the O.C. knew the reasons
      for the Bund’s absence, when it was the C.C. (and not the Foreign
      Committee) of the Bund that was invited, and when the C.C. itself says
      that the reasons for this absence were purely accidental??
    

      “We are convinced,” says the Bund’s C.C., “that had the
      initiators of the conference taken a little more trouble, these accidental
      reasons could not have kept us from responding....” We would ask any
      impartial person: if two comrades who are preparing to get together in the
      O.C. admit in a single voice that the reasons which prevented the meeting
      were “purely accidental,” is it not out of place and unseemly to
      start a public polemic on who is more to blame for the
      non-appearance? On our part, let us remark that we long ago expressed our
      regret (of course, not in the press, but in a letter) over the absence of
      the Bund, and we were informed that the Bund had been invited
      twice: first, by letter, and then by word of mouth through the
      X. Committee of the Bund.
    

      The delegate arrived almost a month after the conference, the
      Bund complains. Yes, this is a terrible crime, and, of course, it deserves
      public exposure, since it lends particular conspicuousness to the
      punctuality of the Bund, which has not got round to sending a delegate
      even after two months have passed!
    

      The delegate “did not keep his promise” to send the
      “Announcement” of the O.C. either in manuscript or in printed
      form, but without fail prior to its distribution.... We advise
      our Russian comrades not to talk to certain people without making a record
      of the conversation. We too were promised by the Iskra
      organisation that we would be sent both the manuscript and a printed copy
      of the “Announcement,” but nevertheless we did not receive the
      manuscript at all, and saw the printed copy much later than
      members of organisations which have no contacts with the Iskra
      organisation. Let the Bundists decide the question of whether it would be
      seemly on our part if we began to publish accusations against the
      Iskra organisation of having broken its promise. The delegate of
      the O.C. promised the Bund’s C.C. to write at once to the comrade charged
      with the printing of the “Announcement” about holding up the
      printing: this was actually promised (so far as we can judge from
      information at our disposal).

    

      This promise was kept, but it was too late to stop the printing, since
      there was no time to get in touch with the printshop.
    

      To sum up: the O.C. initiators wrote letters, made a personal announcement
      through the X. Committee, and sent a delegate to the Bund’s Central
      Committee, while for months the Bund did not send a single
      letter, let alone a delegate! And yet the Bund comes out in the press
      with accusations! And strangely enough the Bund’s Foreign Committee
      affirms that the initiators of the conference behaved “strangely,”
      that their activities are decidedly at variance with their aim, that they
      displayed “haste” (the Bund’s C.C., on the contrary, accuses
      them of slowness!), that they merely want to “create the
      impression” that the Bund “was indifferent”!!
    

      We have still to say a few words about the charge against the O.C. that it
      has not drawn “the only correct conclusion,” namely: “Since
      actually there is no party, the forthcoming congress should be in the
      nature of a constituent congress, and, therefore, the right to participate
      in it should be accord ed to all Social-Democratic organisations in
      Russia, both Russian and those of all other nationalities.” The Bund is
      trying to get round the unpleasant fact that, since it does not have a
      single centre, the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party consists of a
      number of committees and organs, and possesses a “Manifesto”
      and resolutions of the First Congress, at which, incidentally, the Jewish
      proletariat was also represented by people who had not yet made their mark
      in “economist,” terrorist, and nationalist waverings. By formally
      advancing the “right” of “all” nationalities to
      found the long-ago-founded Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, the
      Bund manifestly confirms that it is precisely over the question of the
      notorious “federation” that it has raised the whole issue. But
      the Bund should be the last to raise this question, and it is not about
      “rights” that the issue should be raised among serious
      revolutionaries. Everyone knows that the question of cementing and uniting
      a basic nucleus of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party is on the
      order of the day. We cannot but favour representation of “all”
      nationalities at the congress, but at the same time we must remember that
      we can think of expanding the nucleus or allying it with other
      organisations only
    

      after the formation of this nucleus has been completed (or, at
      the very least, after there is no doubt about its stability). Until we
      have ourselves become united organisationally and have firmly set out
      along the correct path, amalgamation with us will not give anything to
      “all other” nationalities! And the answer to the question of
      the possibility (and not of the “right,” gentlemen!) of
      “all other” nationalities being represented at our congress
      depends on a number of tactical and organisational steps by the O.C. and
      the Russian committees, depends, in short, on how successful the activity
      of the O.C. will be. It is a historical fact that from the very outset the
      Bund has tried to put a spoke in the wheel of the O.C.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      The polemic between Iskra and the Bund on the question of the
      latter’s organisational relations with the R.S.D.L.P. arose out of the
      decision of the Bund congress (in April 1901) to insist upon the
      federative principle of Party structure. Iskra opposed this
      decision. In a number of articles and in his speeches at the Second Party
      Congress, Lenin sharply criticised the Bund’s nationalism.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the Manifesto of the Armenian Social-Democrats









Lenin: On the Manifesto of the Armenian Social-Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Manifesto of the Armenian Social-Democrats




Published:
Iskra, No. 33, Feburary 1, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 326-329.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      A new Social-Democratic organisation has made its appearance in the
      Caucasus: The League of Armenian Social-Democrats. This League,
      as we know, began its practical activities over half a year ago and
      already has its own paper, published in Armenian. We have received the
      first issue of this paper, which is called Proletariat and next
      to its title carries the inscription “Russian Social-Democratic
      Labour Party.” It contains a number of articles, commentaries, and reports
      dealing with the social and political conditions which have called into
      existence the League of Armenian Social-Democrats, and giving a general
      outline of the programme of its activities.
    

      The leading article, “Manifesto of the Armenian Social- Democrats,”
      states: “In its activities, the League of Armenian Social-Democrats,
      as one of the branches of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party which
      extends the net work of its organisations far and wide over the entire
      expanse of Russia, is in complete accord with the R.S.D.L.P., and will
      fight together with it for the interests of the Russian proletariat in
      general, and of the Armenian proletariat in particular.” Further, after
      referring to the rapid development of capitalism in the Caucasus and the
      monstrously powerful and manifold results of this process, the authors go
      on to speak of the present state of the working-class movement in the
      Caucasus. In the industrial centres of the Caucasus, such as Baku, Tiflis,
      and Batum, with their big capitalist establishments and numerous
      industrial proletariat, this movement has already struck deep
      roots. However, because of the extremely low cultural level of the
      Caucasian workers,

    

      their struggle against the employers has naturally been of a more or less
      instinctive, spontaneous nature till now.  A force was necessary which
      could unite the workers’ scattered forces, give their demands articulate
      form and develop class-consciousness among them. That force is socialism.
    

      Then, after briefly setting forth the main theses of scientific socialism,
      the League explains its stand in relation to the present-day trends in
      international, and, in particular, Russian, Social-Democracy. “The
      attainment of the socialist ideal,” says the Manifesto, “is, in our
      opinion, conceivable neither through the working class’ efforts in the
      economic sphere nor through partial political and social reforms; it is
      possible only by completely smashing the entire existing system, by means
      of a social revolution, to which the political dictatorship of the
      proletariat must he the necessary prologue.” Then, pointing out that the
      existing political system in Russia is hostile to every social movement,
      especially to that of the working class, the League declares that it sets
      itself the immediate task of politically educating the Armenian
      proletariat and drawing it into the struggle of the entire Russian
      proletariat for the overthrow of the tsarist autocracy. Without at all
      denying the need for the partial economic struggle of the workers against
      the employers, the League, however, does not consider it of importance in
      itself. The League recognises this struggle insofar as it improves the
      material condition of the workers and helps develop political
      consciousness and class solidarity among them.
    

      Of particular interest to us is the League’s attitude towards the national
      question. “Taking into consideration,” says the Manifesto, “that the
      Russian state is made up of many different nationalities at varying levels
      of cultural development, and believing that only the extensive development
      of local self-government can safeguard the interests of these
      heterogeneous elements, we deem essential the establishment of a
      federative [italics ours] republic in the future free Russia. As
      to the Caucasus, in view of the extremely diverse national composition of
      its population, we shall strive to unite all the local socialist elements
      and all the workers of the various nationalities; we shall strive to
      create a united and strong Social-Democratic organisation,

    

      for a more successful struggle against the autocracy. In the future Russia
      we shall recognise the right of all nations to free self-determination,
      since we regard national freedom as being only one of the aspects of civil
      liberties in general. Proceeding from this proposition, and taking into
      account the above-mentioned diverse national composition of the Caucasus
      and the absence of geographical boundaries between the various
      nationalities, we do not find it possible to include in our programme the
      demand for political autonomy for the Caucasian peoples; we demand only
      autonomy in matters pertaining to cultural life, i. e., freedom of
      language, schools, education, etc.”
    

      We whole-heartedly welcome the Manifesto of the League of Armenian
      Social-Democrats and especially its splendid attempt to give a correct
      presentation of the national question. It is highly desirable that this
      attempt be carried through to the end. Two fundamental principles by which
      all Social-Democrats in Russia should be guided in the national question
      have been quite correctly outlined by the League. These
      are, firstly, the demand for political and civil liberties and complete
      equality, rather than for national autonomy; and, secondly, the demand for
      the right to self-determination for every nationality forming part of the
      state. But neither of these principles is as yet quite consistently
      brought out by the League of Armenian Social-Democrats. As a matter of
      fact, is it possible from the Armenian Social-Democrats’ point of
      view to speak of the demand for a federative republic?
      Federation presupposes autonomous national political units,
      whereas the League rejects the demand for national autonomy. To be fully
      consistent, the League should delete the demand for a federative
      republic from its programme, confining itself to the demand for a
      democratic republic in general. It is not the business of the proletariat
      to preach federalism and national autonomy; it is not the
      business of the proletariat to advance such demands, which inevitably
      amount to a demand for the establishment of an autonomous class
      state. It is the business of the proletariat to rally the greatest
      possible masses of workers of each and every nationality more
      closely, to rally them for struggle in the broadest possible
      arena for a democratic republic and for socialism. And since the
      state arena in which we are working

    

      today was created and is being maintained and extended by means of a
      series of outrageous acts of violence, then, to make the struggle against
      all forms of exploitation and oppression successful,we must not disperse
      but unite the forces of the working class, which is the most
      oppressed and the most capable of fighting. The demand for recognition of
      every nationality’s right to self-determination simply implies that we,
      the party of the proletariat, must always and unconditionally oppose
      any attempt to influence national self-determination from without
      by violence or injustice. While at all times performing this
      negative duty of ours (to fight and protest against violence), we on our
      part concern ourselves with the self-determination of the
      proletariat in each nationality rather than with
      self-determination of peoples or nations. Thus, the general, basic and
      ever-binding programme of Russian Social-Democracy must consist only in
      the demand for equal rights for all citizens (irrespective of sex,
      language, creed, race, nationality, etc.) and for their right to free
      democratic self-determination. As to support of the demand for
      national autonomy, it is by no means a permanent and binding part
      of the programme of the proletariat. This support may become necessary for
      it only in isolated and exceptional cases. With regard to Armenian
      Social-Democracy, the League of Armenian Social-Democrats has itself
      recognised the absence of such exceptional circumstances.
    

      We hope to return to the question of federalism and

      nationality.[See pp. 454-63 of this
volume.–Ed.]

      For the time being we shall conclude by once again welcoming a new member
      of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party—the League of Armenian
      Social Democrats.
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Does the Jewish Proletariat Need an “Independent Political Party”?







Lenin: Does the Jewish Proletariat Need an 'Independent Political Party'?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Does the Jewish Proletariat Need an “Independent Political Party”?




Published:
Iskra, No. 34, February 15, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 330-336.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      No. 105 of Posledniye Izvestia (January 28/15, 1903), published
      by the Foreign Committee of the General Jewish Workers’ Union of
      Lithuania, Poland, and Russia, carries a brief article entitled
      “Concerning a Certain Manifesto” (viz., the manifesto issued
      by the Ekaterinoslav Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party) containing the following statement, which is as extraordinary as it
      is significant and indeed “fraught with consequences”:
      “The Jewish proletariat has formed itself (sic!) into an
      independent (sic!) political party, the Bund.”
    
We did not know this before. This is something new.
    
Hitherto the Bund has been a constituent part of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party, and in No. 106 of Posledniye
      Izvestia we still (still!)  find a statement of the Central Committee
      of the Bund, bearing the heading “Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party.” It is true that at its latest congress, the Fourth, the Bund
      decided to change its name (without stipulating that it would like to hear
      the Russian comrades’ opinion on the name a section of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party should bear) and to “introduce”
      new federal relations into the Rules of the Russian Party. The
      Bund’s Foreign Committee has even “introduced” these
      relations, if that word can be used to describe the fact that it has
      withdrawn from the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad and has
      concluded a federal agreement with the latter.
    
On the other hand, when Iskra polemised with the decisions of the
      Bund’s Fourth Congress, the Bund itself stated very definitely that it
      only wanted to secure the acceptance
    

      of its wishes and decisions by the R.S.D.L.P.; in other
      words, it flatly and categorically acknowledged ·that until the
      R.S.D.L.P. adopted new Rules and settled new forms of its attitude towards
      the Bund, the latter would remain a section of the R.S.D.L.P.
    
Butnow, suddenly, we are told that the Jewish proletariat has already
      formed itself into an independent political party! We
      repeat—this is something new.
    
Equallynew is the furious and foolish onslaught of the Bund’s Foreign
      Committee upon the Ekaterinoslav

      Commit tee. 

      We have at last (though unfortunately after much delay) received
a copy of this manifesto, and we do not hesitate to say that in
attacking a manifesto like this the Bund has
undoubtedly taken a serious political

      step.[1]

      This step fully accords with the Bund’s proclamation as an independent
      political party and throws much light on the physiognomy and behaviour of
      this new party.
    
Weregret that lack of space prevents us from reprinting the Ekaterinoslav
      manifesto in full (it would take up about two columns in

      Iskra[2]

),

      and shall confine ourselves to remarking that this admirable manifesto
      excellently explains to the Jewish workers of the city of
      Ekaterinoslav (we shall presently explain why we have emphasised
      these words) the Social-Democratic attitude towards Zionism and
      anti-Semitism. Moreover, the manifesto treats the sentiments, moods, and
      desires of the Jewish workers so considerately, with such comradely
      consideration, that it specially refers to and emphasises the necessity of
      fighting under the banner of the R.S.D.L.P. “even for the
      preservation and further development of your [the manifesto addresses
      the Jewish workers] national culture,” “even from the standpoint
      of purely national interests” (underlined and italicised in the
      manifesto itself).
    
Nevertheless,the Bund’s Foreign Committee (we almost said the new party’s
      Central Committee) has fallen upon the

    

      manifesto for making no mention of the Bund. That is the
      manifesto’s only crime, but one that is terrible and unpardonable. It is
      for this that the Ekaterinoslav Committee is accused of lacking in
      “political sense.” The Ekaterinoslav comrades are chastised for not
      “yet having digested the idea of the necessity for a separate
      organisation [a profound and significant idea!] of the forces [!!] of the
      Jewish proletariat,” for “still harbouring the absurd hope of
      somehow getting rid of it” (the Bund), for spreading the “no
      less dangerous fable” (no less dangerous than the Zionist fable)
      that anti-Semitism is connected with the bourgeois strata and with their
      interests, and not with those of the working class. That is why the
      Ekaterinoslav Committee is advised to “abandon the harmful habit of
      keeping silent about the independent Jewish working-class movement”
      and to “reconcile itself to the fact that the Bund exists.”
    
Now,let us consider whether the Ekaterinoslav Committee is actually
      guilty of a crime, and whether it really should have mentioned the Bund
      without fail. Both questions can be answered only in the negative, for the
      simple reason that the manifesto is not addressed to the “Jewish
      workers” in general (as the Bund’s Foreign Committee quite wrongly
      stated), but to “the Jewish workers of the city of
      Ekaterinoslav” (the Bund’s Foreign Committee forgot to quote
      these last words!). The Bund has no organisation in
      Ekaterinoslav. (And, in general, regarding the south of Russia the Fourth
      Congress of the Bund passed a resolution not to organise separate
      committees of the Bund in cities where the Jewish organisations are
      included in the Party committees and where their needs can be fully
      satisfied without separation from the committees.) Since the Jewish
      workers in Ekaterinoslav are not organised in a separate committee, it
      follows that their movement (inseparably from the entire working-class
      movement in that area) is wholly guided by the Ekaterinoslav Committee,
      which subordinates them directly to the R.S.D.L.P., which
      must call upon them to work for the whole Party, and not
      for its individual sections. It is clear that under these circumstances
      the Ekaterinoslav Committee was not obliged to mention the Bund; on the
      contrary, if it had presumed to advocate “the necessity for a
      separate organisation of the forces [it would rather and more probably
      have been

    

      an organisation of

      impotence[3]

]

      of the Jewish proletariat” (which is what the Bundists want), It
      would have made a very grave error and committed a direct breach, not only
      of the Party Rules, but of the unity of the proletarian class struggle.
    
Further, the Ekaterinoslav Committee is accused of lack of
      “orientation” in the question of anti-Semitism. The Bund’s
      Foreign Committee betrays truly infantile views on important social
      movements. The Ekaterinoslav Committee speaks of the
      international anti-Semitic movement of the last decades
      and remarks that “from Germany this movement spread to other
      countries and everywhere found adherents among the bourgeois, and not
      among the working-class sections of the population.”  “This is a no
      less dangerous fable” (than the Zionist fables), cries the
      thoroughly aroused Bund’s Foreign Committee. Anti-Semitism “has
      struck roots in the mass of the workers,” and to prove this the
      “well-oriented” Bund cites two facts: 1) workers’
      participation in a pogrom in Częstochowa and 2) the behaviour of 12
      (twelve!) Christian workers in Zhitomir, who scabbed on the
      strikers and threatened to “kill off all the Yids.” Very weighty
      proofs indeed, especially the latter! The editors of Posledniye
      Izvestia are so accustomed to dealing with big strikes involving five
      or ten workers that the behaviour of twelve ignorant Zhitomir workers is
      dragged out as evidence of the link between international anti-Semitism
      and one “section” or another “of the population.” This
      is, indeed, magnificent! If, instead of flying into a foolish and comical
      rage at the Ekaterinoslav Committee, the Bundists had pondered a bit over
      this question and had consulted, let us say, Kautsky’s pamphlet on the
      social

      revolution,[4]
      a Yiddish edition of which they themselves published recently, they would
      have understood the link that undoubtedly exists

    

      between anti-Semitism and the interests of the bourgeois, and not of the
      working-class sections of the population. If they had given it a little
      more thought they might have realised that the social character of
      anti-Semitism today is not changed by the fact that dozens or even
      hundreds of unorganised workers, nine-tenths of whom are still quite
      ignorant, take part in a pogrom.
    
The Ekaterinoslav Committee has risen up (and rightly so) against the
      Zionist fable about anti-Semitism being eternal; by making its angry
      comment the Bund has only confused the issue and planted in the minds of
      the Jewish workers ideas which tend to blunt their
      class-consciousness.
    
From the viewpoint of the struggle for political liberty and for socialism
      being waged by the whole working class of Russia, the Bund’s attack on the
      Ekaterinoslav Committee is the height of folly. From the viewpoint of the
      Bund as “an independent political party,” this attack becomes
      understandable: don’t dare anywhere organise “Jewish” workers
      together with, and inseparably from, “Christian” workers! If
      you would address the Jewish workers in the name of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party or its committees, don’t dare do so
      directly, over our heads, ignoring the Bund or making no mention of

      it I 

And this profoundly regrettable fact is not accidental. Having once
      demanded “federation” instead of autonomy in matters
      concerning the Jewish proletariat, you were compelled to proclaim
      the Bund an “independent political party” in order to carry
      out this principle of federation at all costs. However, your
      declaring the Bund an independent political party is just that reduction
      to an absurdity of your fundamental error in the national question which
      will inescapably and inevitably be the starting-point of a change in the
      views of the Jewish proletariat and of the Jewish Social-Democrats in
      general. “Autonomy” under the Rules adopted in 1898 provides
      the Jewish working-class movement with all it needs: propaganda and
      agitation in Yiddish, its own literature and congresses, the right to
      advance separate demands to supplement a single general Social-Democratic
      programme and to satisfy local needs and requirements arising out of the
      special features of Jewish life. In everything else there must be complete
      fusion with the Russian proletariat, in the interests

    

      of the struggle waged by the entire proletariat of Russia. As for the fear
      of being “steam-rollered” in the event of such fusion, the
      very nature of the case makes it groundless, since it is autonomy that is
      a guarantee against all “steam-rollering” in matters
      pertaining specifically to the Jewish movement, while in matters
      pertaining to the struggle against the autocracy, the struggle against the
      bourgeoisie of Russia as a whole, we must act as a single and centralised
      militant organisation, have behind us the whole of the proletariat,
      without distinction of language or nationality, a proletariat whose unity
      is cemented by the continual joint solution of problems of theory and
      practice, of tactics and organisation; and we must not set up
      organisations that would march separately, each along its own track; we
      must not weaken the force of our offensive by breaking up into numerous
      independent political parties; we must not introduce estrangement and
      isolation and then have to heal an artificially implanted disease with the
      aid of these notorious “federation” plasters.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      That is, of course, if the Bund’s Foreign Committee expresses the views of
      the Bund as a whole on this question.
    —Lenin

[2]

      We intend to reprint in full the manifesto and the attack of the Bund’s
      Foreign Committee in a pamphlet which we are preparing for the press.
    —Lenin

[3]

      It is this task of “organising impotence” that the Bund serves
      when, for example, it uses such a phrase as “our comrades of the
      ’Christian working-class organisation.’" The phrase is as preposterous as
      is the whole attack on the Ekaterinoslav Committee. We have no knowledge
      of any “Christian” working-class organisations. Organisations
      belonging to the R.S.D.L.P. have never distinguished their members
      according to religion, never asked them about their religion and never
      will—even when the Bund will in actual fact “have
      formed itself into an independent political party.”
    —Lenin
 



[4]

      The reference is to a Yiddish translation of Karl
      Kautsky’s pamphlet, Social Revolution.









Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Marxist Views on the Agrarian Question in Europe and in Russia









Lenin: Marxist Views on the Agrarian Question in Europe and in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Marxist Views on the Agrarian Question in Europe and in Russia[1]




Written: Written in February 1903 

Published:

      First published in 1932 in Lenin Miscellany XIX.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 337-347.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    
    


    

    Programme of
Lectures

      Lecture I. General Theory of the Agrarian Question. Development
      of capitalist agriculture. Different forms of development of commercial
      agriculture and the formation of the class of agricultural
      wage-workers. Marx’s theory of rent. Bourgeois character of the teachings
      of the so-called critical school (Messrs. Bulgakov, Hertz, David, Chernov,
      and in part Maslov, and others), which tries to explain by natural laws
      (such as the notorious law of diminishing returns) the existence of the
      tribute levied on society by the landed proprietors. Contradictions of
      capitalism in agriculture.
    

      Lecture II. Small- and Large-Scale Production in Agriculture.
    

      Efforts of the so-called critical school to obscure the slavery of the
      small producer in present-day society. An analysis of the monographic
      investigations completely misinterpreted by this school (M. Hecht,
      K. Klawki, Auhagen).
    

      Lecture III. Continuation. The Baden questionnaire. Complete
      confirmation of Marxist views by its returns. General data of German
      agrarian statistics. Fable about the latifundian degeneration of big
      capital. Machinery in agriculture. Greatest deterioration of draught
      cattle in middle-peasant households. Co-operatives in agriculture; German
      general statistics of 1895 on dairy co-operatives. Difference in form
      between co-operatives in agriculture and trusts in industry, which
      prevented the so-called critical school from understanding the complete
      identity of both in their social and economic content.
    

      Lecture IV. Presentation of the Agrarian Question in Russia.
      Foundations of the Narodnik world outlook and its historical significance as a
      primitive form of agrarian

    

      democracy. Central significance of the question of the peasantry (the
      village commune and people’s production). Dis integration of the peasantry
      into the rural bourgeoisie and rural proletariat. Methods of studying this
      process and its significance. Replacement of the corvée system by
      the capitalist system of economy. Reactionary character of Narodnik
      views. Requirements of the current historical moment: elimination of the
      remnants of the serf-owning system and free development of the class
      struggle in the countryside.
    
Outline of Lecture
One
General Theory

      Marx’s theory of the development of the capitalist mode of production
      applies to agriculture just as it does to industry. Capitalism’s basic
      features and its different forms in agriculture and industry should not be
      confused.
    

      Let us examine the characteristic basic features and the specific forms of
      the process which creates the capitalist system in agriculture. The cause
      of the appearance of this process is a double one: 1) commodity production
      and 2) the fact that labour-power, not the product, is a commodity. When
      this labour-power is drawn into exchange, all production becomes
      capitalistic, and a special class, the proletariat, is created. The growth
      of commodity production and the development of wage-labour in agriculture
      take place in a different form than ·in industry, and the
      application of Marx’s theory here may therefore seem incorrect; it is,
      however, necessary to know the form in which agriculture becomes
      capitalistic. To this end it is essential in the first place to establish
      two facts:
    

      I. How does commercial agriculture grow? and
    

      II. How does the formation of the working class manifest itself?
    

      I. The basic feature of this process is the rapid growth of the industrial
      population and the sale of products on the market. Hence, extensive growth
      of the non-agricultural population is necessary for the extensive
      development of commodity agriculture. This process assumes different

    

      forms and is to be observed in countries which import and export grain. On
      its part, the rapid growth of the industrial population creates a shortage
      of grain in the industrial countries, i.e., makes it impossible to do
      without imported grain if the technological system remains unchanged.The
      growing demand for grain under private ownership of the land leads to the
      formation of monopoly prices.
    

      That is important for the explanation of rent.
    

      The very process of the formation of commercial agriculture does not take
      place in exactly the same way as in factory industry: in industry it takes
      place in a simple and direct form, whereas in agriculture we see something
      different: the prevalence of a mixture of commercial and non-commercial
      agriculture. Here we have a combination of differ ent forms. In the main,
      in a given locality one definite product is taken to the
      market. On the one band, production on the landlord’s estate, and
      particularly on the peasant’s Land, is commodity production, while on the
      other hand it retains its consumer character.
    

      The necessity to obtain money brings about the transition from natural to
      commercial economy. The power of money weighs upon the peasants, not only
      in Western Europe, but in Russia too. Zemstvo statistics show that the
      peasant’s subordination to the market attains colossal proportions even in
      places where the survivals of patriarchal economy are still very strong.
    

      II. The process by which the class of wage-workers is formed consists in
      the disintegration of the peasantry into two strata: I) farmers who regard
      agriculture as an industry, and 2) wage-workers. This process is often
      described as the differentiation of the peasantry. In Russia in particular
      this process has been very conspicuous. It was observed by
      “economists” as far back as the times of the feudal system.
    

      Specific features of formation.
    

      This process takes place unevenly. Alongside of the emergence of a class
      of wage-workers we see the existence of the patriarchal system and the
      formation of the new, capitalist system. The wage-workers’ class is
      connected with the land in one way or another: the forms of this process
      will consequently be very varied.
    
    

    Domination of
Capitalist Agriculture
Rent

      The population in a capitalist country is divided into three classes: 1)
      wage-workers, 2) owners of land, and 3) capitalists. In studying the
      system it will be necessary to ignore specific local features where this
      distinct division may not yet exist.
    

      According to Marx, a product is basically divided into necessary and
      surplus-product. A certain part of this surplus-product constitutes ground
      rent, viz., that part which remains after the deduction of average profit
      on capital. In a developed capitalist society, average profit is formed
      under the influence of competition, which distributes the surplus-product
      among the capitalists, not in proportion to the number of workers, but in
      proportion to the total amount of capital invested in a given enterprise.
    

      The process of the formation of average profit is analysed by Marx in
      Volume III of Capital. Capital will yield different profits on
      plots of land with varying fertility, the poorer land yielding less
      profit, and the better land—more, additional profit. (The theory of
      rent was founded before Marx by Ricardo.) Owing to monopoly prices on the
      grain market and the general shortage of grain, the price is determined by
      the poorest plot of land. The extra profit derived from the better land,
      or from the land situated close to the market, as compared with the poorer
      and more remotely situated plot, is called differential rent,
      according to Marx.
    

      Rent is extracted from the farmers by the owners of land.
    

      The varying amounts of surplus-profit may be of two kinds: 1) profit due
      to varying fertility, and 2) profit due to different application of
      capital. Further. In addition to the monopoly of private cultivation of
      the land, there is the monopoly of private ownership of the land: the
      owner of land may not give the land to the farmer until the price of grain
      rises, and then he takes absolute rent, which is an elementary
      monopoly. It may be: 1) a pure monopoly (in that case, strictly speaking,
      it should not be called rent). Secondly, absolute rent may be taken from
      surplus-profit

    

      on agrarian capital owing to the following circumstance. In view of the
      fact that in agriculture the technical equipment is poorer, the share of
      variable capital (=which creates profit) is higher than in industry. The
      share of profit should therefore also be higher in agriculture than in
      industry. However, the monopoly of landownership prevents the levelling of
      high profit in agriculture and low profit in industry. And absolute rent
      in the strict sense of the term is taken from the higher agricultural
      profit which has not been levelled out. It has its source in higher grain
      prices. Differential rent, on the other hand, is taken from the
      product. Recent years, characterised by new countries being drawn into
      trade, have led to a crisis.
    

      The price of land is calculated, anticipated rent. It is therefore treated
      as income from a certain capital. The capital to be spent on the purchase
      of land may yield an average rent income. Consequently, the rapid
      development of industry has greatly inflated and stabilised rent in
      Europe.
    

      A large section of Maslov’s hook, recently published under the title
      Conditions of the Development of Agriculture in Russia, deals
      with the theory of rent, and in this question Maslov adheres to an
      entirely erroneous viewpoint, repeating the arguments of the bourgeois
      so-called “critics” of Marx, such as Mr. Bulgakov and
      others. Marx showed that the old English political economy took too simple
      a view of this question; it was treated not as a process creating special
      historical conditions, but as one creating natural conditions, and it
      reasoned therefore: rent is formed owing to the necessity of transition
      from the better to the poorer plots of land. But changes in the reverse
      direction also take place, inasmuch as improvements are effected. The
      critics have retreated from Marx towards bourgeois economy.
    

      Another narrow concept of the theory of rent is one that combines the law
      governing the formation of differential rent with the law of diminishing
      returns, which alleges that profits diminish on one and the same plot of
      land. Ricardo explains the transition from the better plots to the poorer
      ones by the impossibility of applying increasing amounts of
      capital. All the Russian “critics” have taken up the defence
      of the theory of diminishing returns, as has

    

      Maslov, who in all other questions wants to remain a Marxist. But the
      arguments in defence of this theory have not gone beyond quips, as, for
      example, the one which claims that if this theory is not recognised then
      it must be admitted that the returns of one plot of land should be enough
      to feed a whole state.
    

      Marx fought against this theory. It adopts an arithmetical approach to the
      expenditure of capital and falls into error by ignoring general economic
      conditions. If we assume that the application of ever greater amounts of
      capital is always possible, then it would have been correct, but that
      presupposes the transformation of systems; however, systems in agriculture
      persist for ages, which has placed the application of capital within
      definite limits. If techniques do not change, then further application of
      capital is impossible, or possible within narrow limits. Marx pointed out
      that in industry too production cannot be developed infinitely on a given
      plot of land: if a definite territory is occupied by an enterprise, it has
      to be expanded if it is to be developed. If, on the other hand,
      land is rationally cultivated, that can only improve production; therefore
      Marx deduces that, far from being a disadvantage, such use of the land is,
      on the contrary, profitable. Precisely this “if”. was
      ignored by the opponents of Marx’s theory. Consequently, Maslov, as an
      alleged Marxist, can mislead many people by his views in this
      question. His book is one of the countless examples of a tendency to be
      seen in our time: going back instead of forward.
    

      There is an absolute decline in the agricultural population, but
      agricultural production is making progress. In the nineteenth century this
      progress was closely connected with the growth of commodity
      agriculture. It brings out one of the main features of the capitalist
      system today, which is expressed in the development of competition in
      agriculture, in the creation of a market for it, and in the
      differentiation of the population. This progress has given a strong
      stimulus to the development of agriculture, but every step in this
      progress has been attended by a rise of contradictions which make it
      impossible to use all the productive forces of the new, scientific
      agriculture. Capitalism creates large-scale production and competition,

    

      which are attended by rapacious use of the productive forces of the
      soil. Concentration of the population in the cities creates depopulated
      territories and an abnormal metabolism. Cultivation of the land is not
      improved, or not improved as it should be.
    

      Socialist critics directed attention to this fact a long time ago
      (Marx). Mr. Hertz, and, later, Messrs. Bulgakov, Chernov, and Struve here
      in Russia maintained that the theory of Marx, who relied upon Liebig, had
      become antiquated. This opinion of the “critics” is quite
      fallacious. There is no doubt that capitalism has upset the equilibrium
      between the exploitation of the land and fertilisation of the land (the
      role of the separation of the town from the countryside). With many
      writers who sympathise with the “criticism” of the Marxist
      theory rather than with this theory itself, their own data speak against
      them. An example is Nossig. According to his data, it would appear that
      the productive forces of the soil are not replenished, that the land does
      not get back what is taken from it. Both manure and artificial fertilisers
      are required. One-third of an average of 60,000 kilograms of fertilisers
      used per hectare of land should be made up of manure, but that cannot be
      provided under the existing system of agriculture.
    

      Thus, the influence of capitalism in agriculture is expressed in the
      following:
    

      It demands freedom for the wage-worker and ousts all forms of the old
      bondage. But the agricultural wage-workers remain oppressed. Their
      oppression has become greater, which has created the need for greater
      struggle.
    

      Capitalism has increased to a tremendous degree the tribute exacted by the
      owner of land, the magnitude of differential and absolute rent. The further
      development of agriculture is hampered by inflated rent.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      This work consists of the programme of lectures on the agrarian question
      and an outline of the first lecture delivered by Lenin in February 1903 at
      the Higher Russian School of Social Sciences in Paris. The school was
      founded in 1901 for Russian students living abroad, and functioned
      legally. The organisers of the school openly showed their dislike of the
      revolutionary Marxists and expressed sympathy with the representatives of
      the Narodniks and Socialist-Revolutionary party. However, Lenin’s prestige
      as a theoretician of the agrarian question was so high that the school’s
      Council of Professors decided to invite “the well-known Marxist
      Vi. Ilyin” (V. I. Lenin—Ed.), “author of the
      legal hooks, The Development of Capitalism in Russia and
      Economic Studies,” to deliver a course of lectures on the
      agrarian question.
    

      Lenin drafted the programme of his lectures well in advance and presented
      it before opening the course. The outline of the first lecture

   

      contained in this volume was taken down by one of the students of the
      school during the lecture and was then edited by Lenin.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Autocracy is Wavering....









Lenin: The Autocracy is Wavering....







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Autocracy is Wavering....




Published:
Iskra, No. 35, March 1, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 348-353.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      The autocracy is wavering. The autocrat himself publicly admits this to
      the people. That is the enormous significance of the tsar’s Manifesto of
      February 26, and no amount of conventional phrases, none of the
      reservations or subterfuges the Manifesto abounds in, can alter the
      historic importance of the step that has been taken.
    

      The tsar begins in the old way—as yet in the old way:
      “by the grace of God”... and concludes with a half-cowardly,
      half-hypocritical appeal for help addressed to people invested with
      public confidence. The tsar himself already feels that the days
      when government in Russia could maintain itself by the grace of God are
      passing never to return and that henceforth the only stable government
      Russia can have is government by the will of the people.
    

      The tsar reaffirms his sacred vow to safeguard the age-old pillars of the
      Russian Empire. Translated into Russian from the language of officialdom,
      this means: to safeguard the autocracy. Alexander III once declared that
      openly and without circumlocution (in the Manifesto of April 29, 1881),
      when the revolutionary movement was receding and dwindling. Today, when
      the battle-cry “Down with the autocracy” is resounding ever
      more loudly and impressively, Nicholas II prefers to cover his declaration
      with a small fig-leaf and to make a modest reference to his unforgettable
      progenitor. A senseless and contemptible

      stratagem I 

      The question of whether or not the autocracy is to be has been raised
      point-blank and carried into the streets. And every promise of
      “reforms”—if they may be called “reforms”!— that
      begins with a promise to preserve the autocracy is

    

      a glaring lie, a mockery of the Russian people. But there is nothing that
      could serve to expose the government in the eyes of the whole people
      better than this governmental appeal to the people with hypocritical and
      false promises.
    

      The tsar speaks (again using a fig-leaf) about the revolutionary movement,
      complaining that “sedition” interferes with the work of
      improving public welfare, agitates minds, tears the people away from
      productive labour, ruins forces dear to the heart of the tsar, ruins the
      youthful forces indispensable to the fatherland. And so, since
      the ruined participants in the revolutionary movement are dear to the
      tsar’s heart, there lore he at once promises to ruthlessly
      suppress every deviation from the normal course of social life, i.e., to
      brutally persecute free speech, workers’ strikes, and popular
      demonstrations.
    

      That is enough, more than enough. This Jesuitical speech speaks for
      itself. We merely make so bold as to express the conviction that by being
      spread throughout the length and breadth of Russia this “tsarist
      pledge” will act as most splendid propaganda in favour of
      revolutionary demands. There is only one answer that this pledge of the
      tsar’s can evoke from anyone who has the least spark of honour left in
      him: the demand for the immediate and unconditional release of
      all persons who have been imprisoned, exiled or
      arrested—with or without trial, before or after sentence has been
      passed—for political or religious considerations, or because of
      strike activities or resistance to the authorities.
    

      We have seen the hypocrisy of the tsar’s speech. Let us now see
      what he speaks about.
    

      He speaks mainly about three things. First, about tolerance. Our
      fundamental laws which guarantee freedom of worship for all faiths are to
      be confirmed and upheld. But the Russian Orthodox Church shall remain
      dominant. Secondly, the tsar speaks about a revision of legislation
      relating to rural affairs, about people who enjoy public confidence taking
      part in this revision, and about joint efforts on the part of all his
      subjects to raise moral standards in the family, the school, and public
      life. Thirdly, about

    

      making it easier for the peasants to leave their village communes, about
      releasing the peasants from the restrictions of collective liability.
    

      In answer to Nicholas II’s three declarations, promises, and proposals,
      Russian Social-Democracy replies with three demands which it long ago
      raised, and has always defended and popularised to the best of its
      ability, and which we must now reaffirm most emphatically in connection
      with the tsar’s Manifesto and in answer to it.
    

      First, we demand the immediate and unconditional recognition by law of the
      freedom of assembly, freedom of the press, and an amnesty for all
      “political prisoners” and members of religious sects. Until
      that is done, all talk about tolerance and freedom of worship will remain
      a miserable pretence and a discreditable lie. Until freedom of assembly,
      speech, and the press is proclaimed, there will be no end to the shameful
      Russian inquisition, which hounds the profession of officially
      unsanctioned faiths, opinions, and doctrines. Down with the censorship!
      Down with police and gendarme protection of the “established”
      church! For these demands the class-conscious proletariat of Russia will
      fight to the last drop of blood.
    

      Secondly, we demand the convocation of a national Constituent Assembly
      which will be elected by all citizens without exception and will establish
      an elective form of government in Russia. Enough of this game of
      conferences of local people, of landlords’ parliaments under the
      governors, of representative government by the Marshals (and perhaps by
      the delegates as well?) of the Nobility! Enough of this cat-and-mouse game
      which the all-powerful officialdom has been playing with all kinds of
      Zemstvos, now letting them go, now stroking them with its velvet paws!
      Until a national assembly of deputies is called, all talk of public
      confidence and moral standards in public life will be a pack of
      lies. Until then the Russian working class will not abate its
      revolutionary struggle against the Russian autocracy.
    

      Thirdly, we demand the immediate and unconditional recognition by law of
      the full equality of the peasants with all other social-estates, and the
      convocation of peasant committees for the abolition of all
      remnants of serfdom in

    

      the countryside and the adoption of serious measures to improve the
      conditions of the peasantry.
    

      The absence of rights for the peasantry, which constitutes nine-tenths of
      the population of Russia, cannot be tolerated a day longer. The entire
      working class and the entire country are suffering from this absence of
      rights; it is on this that all the Asiatic backwardness in Russian life
      rests; it is owing to this absence of rights that all the various
      conferences and commissions produce no results (or are injurious to
      the peasants). Now, too, the tsar wants to escape by invoking the
      former “conferences” of bureaucrats and noblemen; he even
      speaks of “strong government” to guide the efforts of the
      local forces. The peasants know full well from the example of the rural
      superintendents what this “strong government” means. Not in
      vain have the peasants endured forty years of poverty, want and constant
      starvation after the benefactions bestowed on them by the committees of
      nobles. Now the peasants will understand that all “reforms”
      and improvements will re main a sham if they are not put into effect
      by the peasants themselves. The peasants will
      understand—and we shall help them to understand—that only
      peasant committees are capable of really abolishing not only
      collective liability but all survivals of the corvée system and
      serfdom, which are still oppressing tens of millions of people right into
      the twentieth century. Freedom of assembly and freedom of the press are
      quite enough for the urban workers: we shall be able to make good use of
      these liberties!! But for the peasants, scattered in out-of-the-way
      places, and cowed and reduced to a state of barbarism, this is not
      enough—and the workers must help them, must explain to them that
      they will unavoidably and inescapably remain miserable slaves until they
      take their destiny into their own hands, until they take their first and
      most important step and achieve the establishment of peasant
      committees for real and not sham emancipation of the peasantry.
    

      Intelligent and experienced people have long observed that

      there. is 

      no more precarious moment for a government in a revolutionary period than
      the beginning of concessions, the beginning of waverings. Russian
      political life of the last few years has brilliantly confirmed this. The
      government

    

      began to waver on the question of the working-class movement, giving a
      free hand to Zubatovism—and made a laughing-stock of itself, playing
      splendidly into the hands of revolutionary agitation The government wanted
      to make concessions on the student question—and made a laughing
      stock of itself, advancing the revolutionisation of the students by
      seven-league strides. The government is now repeating on a large scale the
      very same method with regard to all questions of home policy—and it
      will inevitably make a laughing-stock of itself, inevitably facilitate,
      strengthen and add impetus to the revolutionary onslaught on the
      autocracy!
    
 *     *  * 

      There is still another question we must deal with, and that is the
      practical question of how to use the tsar’s Manifesto of February 26 for
      purposes of agitation. The Russian Social-Democrats long ago answered the
      question as to the means of struggle by saying: organisation and
      agitation; neither were they put out by the jeers of naive people who
      considered this “indefinite,” and held that the only
      “definite” means were pistol shots. And now, at a moment like
      the present, when such a welcome cue for conducting agitation on a
      nation-wide scale unexpectedly presents itself, one which so urgently
      demands the exertion of our every effort—at such a moment, a
      deficiency, the old self-same deficiency in organisation, in ability
      rapidly to set our agitation going, makes itself felt more keenly than
      ever.
    

      But we shall yet make up for lost time, make up for it many times over!
    

      First of all, we must reply to the Manifesto of February 26 with leaflets
      published by central and local Party organisations. Whereas hitherto
      leaflets were issued in tens of thousands for all Russia, they should now
      be distributed in millions, so that the whole people may learn of the
      answer of the class-conscious Russian proletariat to the tsar’s appeal to
      the people. so that all may see our definite, practical demands in
      juxtaposition with the speech of the tsar on the same subject.
    

      Further. We must not allow reverential raptures of legal meetings of
      well-intentioned Zemstvoists and noblemen,

    

      merchants and professors, etc., etc., to be the only reply to the
      Manifesto of February 26. Nor will the replies that Social-Democratic
      organisations will give in their leaflets prove sufficient. Let every
      study circle, every meeting of workers draw up its own answer and
      ratify formally and solemnly the demands of Social-Democracy. Let the
      decisions of these workers’ meetings (and, if possible, also of peasants’
      meetings) be published in local leaflets and reported in our press. Let
      all know that we consider answers from the workers and peasants themselves
      the only answer from the people. And let all study circles begin to
      prepare immediately to back up our fundamental demands with
      force.
    

      Moreover, we must not allow messages of gratitude to the tsar to be drawn
      up at all sorts of meetings, without counteraction. Our liberals have
      falsified Russian public opinion long enough! Long enough have they lied,
      saying not what they themselves think, or what the entire reasoning and
      militant section of the people thinks! We must endeavour to get into their
      meetings, declare our opinion there, too, as widely, publicly and openly
      as possible, voice our protest against servile gratitude, give our
      real answer to the tsar, and declare it by distributing leaflets
      as well as by speaking publicly, whenever possible, at all such meetings
      (even though the chairmen will try to stop such speeches).
    

      Finally, we must try to bring the answer of the workers out on to the
      street, to broadcast our demands through demonstrations, and to show
      publicly the numbers and strength of the workers, their
      class-consciousness and determination. Let the coming May Day celebration
      be not only a general declaration of our proletarian demands, but also a
      special and definite answer to the Manifesto of February 26!
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Mr. Struve Exposed by His Colleague









Lenin: Mr. Struve Exposed by His Colleague







V. I.  

      Lenin
Mr. Struve Exposed by His Colleague




Published:
Iskra, No. 37 (?), April 1, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 354-360.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    


      No. 17 of Osvobozhdeniye produced much that is gratifying to
      Iskra in general, and to the author of these lines in
      particular. To Iskra because it was gratifying for it to
      see. that its endeavours to push Mr. Struve to the Left had yielded some
      result; it was gratifying to see Mr. S.S. indulging in sharp criticism of
      half-heartedness, gratifying to read about the intention of the
      Osvobozhdeniye people to create “openly and definitely a
      constitutional party” with a programme demanding universal
      suffrage. To the author of these lines because Mr. S.S.—“who took a
      prominent part” in drawing up the declaration “of the Russian
      constitutioflalists” in No. 1 of Osvobozhdentye, and hence
      is no mere collaborator, but to some extent the master of
      Mr. Struve—has unexpectedly rendered us a great service in our
      polemic against Mr. Struve. I shall take the liberty of beginning
      with this second point. No. 2-3 of Zarya carried an article of
      mine entitled “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of

      Liberalism,”[See present edition,
Vol. 5.—Ed.]

      in which I polemised against Mr. B. N. S., who had written a preface to
      the well-known Witte memorandum. In this article I revealed the ambiguity
      of the entire stand taken by Mr. R.N.S., when he spoke of his Hannibal vow
      to fight against the autocracy and at the same time addressed unctuous
      speeches to the powers that be, to the sage conservatives, at the same
      time advancing the “formula” of “Rights, and an
      Authoritative Zemstvo,” etc., etc. Now that the second edition of the
      “Memorandum” has appeared, the public has learned that this
      Mr. R.N. S. is—Mr. Struve. Mr. Struve was highly displeased with my
      criticism, and he came down heavily on me with his extremely lengthy and
      extremely irate “Note to a Note.”
    

    

      Let us examine Mr. Struve’s arguments.
    

      The first example of the “groundlessness and injustice” of my
      “polemical masterpiece” is that I spoke about Mr. Struve’s
      antipathy against revolutionaries, despite his “alleged absolutely
      clear statement.”  Let me cite this statement in full. “The
      testimonial presented to the Zemstvo by the bureaucracy itself,”
      Mr. Struve wrote, “is an excellent reply to all those who, because
      of an inadequate political education or because they are carried away by
      revolutionary phrases, refused and persist in refusing to see the great
      political importance of the Russian Zemstvos and their legal cultural
      activity.” In a note to this tirade, Mr. Struve made the reservation:
      “By these words we do not intend in the least to give offence to the
      revolutionaries, to whom credit must be accorded above all for their moral
      courage in the struggle against despotism.”
    

      These are the “documents in the case” of groundless and unjust
      criticism. We leave it to the reader to judge who is right: the person who
      found this statement absolutely clear, or the person who has found that
      Mr. Struve has only made matters worse by “giving offence” to
      revolutionaries (without naming them concretely), not only with
      the “anonymous” charge of ignorance (it is not known against
      whom it is levelled), but also with the assumption that they can be made
      to swallow the pill of an accusation of ignorance if only it is gilded
      with recognition of their “moral courage.”
    

      For my part, I shall merely remark that tastes differ. Many liberals
      consider it the height of tact and wisdom to present the revolutionaries
      with testimonials to their courage, at the same time treating their
      programme as mere phrase-mongering, as a sign of an inadequate education,
      without even analysing the substance of their views. To our way
      of thinking, this is neither tact nor wisdom, but a piece of discreditable
      evasion. It is a matter of taste. The Russian Thiers, of course,
      appreciate the genteel drawing-room parlance, the irreproachably
      parliamentarian opportunist phrase-mongering of the real Thiers.
    

      To proceed. I, if you please, “pretended not to understand that the
      formula ’an Authoritative all-Russian Zemstvo’ signifies the demand for a
      constitution,” and my arguments on this score “confirm once more [so
      Mr. Struve

    

      thinks I 

      the widespread occurrence of real revolutionary phrase-mongering, and
      malevolently biased phrase-mongering at that, in our literature issued
      abroad [this disgusting literary style is particularly rife in the columns
      of Iskra and Zarya I," p. xii of the second edition of the
      “Memorandum.” Well, as to being malevolently biased, it is difficult
      for us to dispute this point with Mr. Struve: what to him is a reproach we
      consider a compliment. What the liberals and many radicals call bias is
      actually unshakable firmness of conviction, while sharp criticism of
      erroneous views is termed “malevolent” by them. There is
      nothing to be done about it. Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa! I have
      been and shall continue to be “malevolently biased” against
      Messrs. the Struves. Then there is the other charge—on a matter of
      fact. Did I pretend not to understand or did I actually fail to
      understand, and was it impossible to understand? That is the question.
    

      I maintained that the formula “Rights, and an Authoritative
      Zemstvo” means unseemly playing up to the political prejudices of
      the broad mass of Russian liberals, that this is “not a banner
      that can serve to distinguish enemies from allies” (take note
      of this!), but “a rag which can only help to attract the most
      unreliable characters to the movement” (p. 95 in No. 2-3 of

      Zarya).[See present edition,
Vol. 5.—Ed.]

      Let me ask all and sundry: where is there any “pretence” on my
      part here?? I frankly state my opinion that this is not a banner but a
      rag, and I get the answer: you are pretending not to understand! This is
      indeed nothing but a new attempt to avoid an analysis of the question
      in essence, the question whether the “formula” is
      best fit to be a banner or a rag!
    

      Nor is that all. Thanks to the kind assistance of Mr. S.S., I am now able
      to adduce facts to prove something much more important. I can
      prove that there was “unseemly playing up” on the part of
      Mr. Struve, not only in the sense of philistine doctrinairism intended to
      move the government with its modesty. not only in the sense of an
      irrational desire to unite the “liberals” around a minimum,
      but also in the sense of open and direct “playing up” to
      supporters of the autocracy who are well known as such to Mr. Struve.
      Mr. S.S. exposes Mr. Struve mercilessly and

    

      irretrievably by saying that the “obscure and ambiguous [mark that!]
      Slavophil slogan of the ’Zemsky

      Sobor’”[1]

      is being advanced to suit the purposes of the “unnatural
      alliance” between the liberal constitutionalists and the liberal
      advocates of an ideal autocracy. Mr. S. S. says that this is no more and
      no less than “political juggling”!! And Mr. Struve acknowledges
      receipt ... by terming the slogan of a Zemsky Sobor “vague and
      valuable by very reason of its vagueness [italics ours!] and at
      the same time dangerous.”
    

      Pretty good, isn’t it? When a Social-Democrat called an even more
ambiguous slogan (an Authoritative Zemstvo) unseemly playing up,
Mr. Struve donned the mantle of injured innocence and spoke in mincing
accents about a pretended failure to understand. But when a liberal,
Mr. S. S., repeated the very same thing, Mr. Struve made
grateful obeisance and acknowledged receipt! By reason of its very
vagueness, a vague slogan was of value to Mr. Struve, who is
not embarrassed in the least to admit that be is prepared to launch
dangerous slogans as well, depending on the way the wind
blows. If Mr. Shipov appears to be strong and influential, then the
editor of this liberal newspaper will speak about an Authoritative
Zemstvo. If Mr. S.S. appears to be strong and influential, then the
editor of this liberal newspaper will speak about a constitution and
universal suffrage! Not a bad picture of the political practices and
political ethics in the liberal camp.... Mr. Struve forgets only to
consider what value his statements will have after this magnificent
metamorphosis: in January 1901 Mr. Struve demanded “Rights, and an
Authoritative Zemstvo”; in December 1902 Mr. Struve declared that
it was a “pretence” not to understand that this was a demand
for a constitution; in February 1903 Mr. Struve stated that in essence
he had never questioned the justice of universal suffrage and that the
vague slogan of a Zemsky Sobor was valuable just because it was
vague. The question arises: what right now has any person
active in politics, any Russian citizen, to assert that tomorrow
Mr. Struve will not launch a new slogan “valuable by very reason
of its vagueness”??


      Let us pass to the last point of Mr. Struve’s reply. “Is it not
      revolutionary phrase-mongering,” he asks, “or abso

    

      lutely lifeless doctrinairism for Mr.

      T.P.[2]
      to argue that the Zemstvo is an instrument for strengthening the
      autocracy?” Mr. Struve sees in this an assimilation of the ideas of the
      Slavophils, agreement with

      Goremykin,[3]
      and the Herculean pillars of a lifeless doctrine. Mr. Struve is absolutely
      incapable of understanding the revolutionary attitude towards
      half-hearted reforms undertaken for the purpose of avoiding a
      revolution. To Mr. Struve every reference to the double game played
      by the reformers from above appears to be Slavophilism and reaction, just
      as all the European Yves Guyots declare the socialist criticism of private
      property to be reactionary! It is, of course, not surprising that once
      Mr. Struve has become a reformer, he has lost the ability to
      understand the dual nature of reforms and their significance as an
      instrument to strengthen the domination of the rulers, strengthen it at
      the price of granting reforms. But ... there was a time when Mr. Struve
      understood this amazingly cunning manoeuvre. That was long ago, when he
      was “a bit of a Marxist,” and when we fought together against the
      Narodniks in the columns of the now defunct Novoye

Slovo.[4]
      In the July 1897 issue of this periodical, Mr. Struve wrote about

      N.Y. 

      Vodovozov: “I remember a conversation we had in the street in
      1890—I had just returned from a summer trip through Germany, full of
      new and strong impressions—a conversation on Wilhelm II’s social
      policy and plans of reform. Vodovozov attached importance to them and did
      not agree with me, to whom the question of the significance of the fact
      and idea of the so-called ’social monarchy’ was at that time (and so much
      the more so at present) decided once and for all in the
      negative. Vodovozov viewed the idea of social reform in the
      abstract, divorced from the real social forces that create it. That is why
      he considered Catholic socialism in the main a peculiar ideological
      movement in favour of social reform and not a specific. form of
      preventative reaction to the growing working-class movement on the part of
      the European bourgeoisie, and partly also of the remnants of European
      feudalism....” So you see: in the distant past, at the time of his
      youthful infatuations, Mr. Struve understood that reforms may be a
      preventative reaction, i.e., a measure to prevent the ruling classes

    

      from falling, and directed against the revolutionary class, even though it
      does improve the condition of this class. I put it to the reader: who,
      then, is right? Was it “revolutionary phrase-mongering” I
      indulged in when I exposed the reformist one-sidedness of Mr. Struve’s
      attitude towards a reform such as the Zemstvo, or has Mr. Struve
      become wiser and abandoned “once and for all” the
      position of a revolutionary which he at one time defended (allegedly once
      and for all)? Have I become a champion of the Slavophils and Goremykin, or
      did the “strong impressions” of his trip through socialist
      Germany last Mr. Struve only a few years??
    

      Yes, indeed, there are different conceptions of the strength of
      impressions, of the force of convictions, of the significance of
      convictions, of the compatibility of political ethics and political
      conviction with the launching of slogans which are valuable by reason of
      their vagueness....
    

      In conclusion I cannot but remark on several statements of Mr. Struve’s
      that considerably “mar” the pleasant impression produced by
      his turn to the Left. Although he has advanced only one democratic demand
      (universal suffrage) Mr. Struve is already making haste to speak of a
      “liberal democratic party.” Is this not somewhat premature?
      Would it not be better first to definitely indicate all the
      democratic transformations which the Party demands
      unconditionally not only in the agrarian and workers’ programme
      but in the political programme as well, and only then to paste on
      a label, only then claim promotion from the “rank” of liberal
      to the rank of liberal democrat? After all, universal suffrage is a
      minimum of democracy that has been recognised even by some
      conservatives who (in Europe) have become reconciled to elections in
      general. But for some reason or other, Mr. Struve does not go beyond this
      mini mum either in No. 17 or in No. 18. Further, we shall note, in
      passing, Mr. Struve’s curious remark that the problem of socialism must be
      put entirely aside by the liberal democratic party “primarily
      because socialism is actually only a problem so far.” Is it not, most
      esteemed Mr. Struve, because the “liberal democratic” elements
      of Russian society express the interests of the classes that
      oppose the socialist demands of the proletariat? I repeat, this
      is said merely

    

      in passing, in order to note the new methods used by the liberals
      to “negate” socialism. Actually, of course, Mr. Struve is
      right when he says that the liberal “democratic” party is not
      a socialist party and that it would not be fitting for it to pose as such.
    

      As to the tactics of the new party, Mr. Struve could not have expressed
      himself more vaguely. That is very regrettable. And it is even more
      regrettable that he repeats again and again, and stresses the necessity of
      “two in-one” tactics in the sense of a “skilful,
      flexible and indissoluble combination” of legal and illegal methods
      of action. At best, this is an evasion of the urgent questions connected
      with the methods of illegal activities. And this is a pressing
      question because it is only systematic illegal activity that actually
      determines the physiognomy of the party.  At worst, this is a
      repetition of the wriggling used by Mr. Struve when he wrote about
      “Rights, and an Authoritative Zemstvo,” and not about an openly and
      definitely constitutional and “democratic” party. Every
      illegal party “combines” illegal with legal activities in
      the sense that it relies on the masses, who do not participate
      directly in illegal activities, that it supports legal pro tests, utilises
      legal opportunities for propaganda, organisation, etc. This is generally
      known, and it is not this that is meant when the tactics of an illegal
      party are discussed. The point in question is the irrevocable
      recognition of struggle by this party, elaboration of methods of
      struggle, the duty of party members not to limit
      themselves to legal protests, but to subordinate everything
      without exception to the interests and demands of the
      revolutionary struggle. If there is no systematic illegal
      activity and revolutionary struggle, then there is no party that
      can really be constitutional (let alone democratic). And no
      greater harm can be done to the cause of the struggle than by
      confusing revolutionary work, which is based on the broad masses,
      makes use of mass organisations, and facilitates the political training of
      legal party functionaries, with work restricted within legal
      bounds.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      The Slavophils were a social trend in Russia in the middle of the
      nineteenth century, at a time when the serf-owning system was in the
      throes of a crisis. The Slavophils held the “theory” that
      Russia had her own and peculiar path of historical development, one that
      derived from the village commune system and Russian Orthodoxy, which, they
      claimed, were inherent in the Slays. Since they held that Russia’s
      historical development excluded possibility of revolution, the Slavophils
      were strongly opposed to the revolutionary movement, not only in Russia,
      but in the West as well. They stood for preservation of the autocracy, but
      thought that the monarch should give due consideration to public opinion,
      and pro posed the calling of a Zemsky Sobor (Duma) composed of
      representatives of all sections of society. They were, however, against a
      constitution or any limiting of the autocracy. In the peasant question the
      Slavophils stood for emancipation of the peasants as individuals, and for
      the village communes being allotted land through its redemption from
      landlords. Among leading Slavophils were A. Khomyakov, the Kireyevsky
      brothers, the Aksakov brothers, and Y. Samarin.
    



[2]

T.P.—the pseudonym under which Lenin published his
      article, “Persecutors



o!the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism,” in
      Zarya, No. 2-3, in 1901. (See present edition, Vol. 5.)
    



[3]

      Goremykin—tsarist statesman and a typical representative of the
      reactionary bureaucracy. A rabid monarchist, he was Minister of the
      Interior in 1896-99, during which period he conducted a reactionary policy
      and savagely persecuted the working-class movement.
    



[4]

Novoye Slovo (New Word)—a monthly scientific, literary, and
      political magazine, published in St. Petersburg by the liberal Narodniks
      from 1894, and by the “legal Marxists” from the spring of
      1897. Lenin published two articles in Novoye Slovo: “A
      Characterisation of Economic Romanticism” and “About a Certain
      News paper Article” (see present edition, Vol. 2, pp. 129-265 and
      316-22). In December 1897, the magazine was suppressed by the tsarist
      government.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## To the Rural Poor









Lenin: To the Rural Poor








V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Rural Poor
An Explanation for the Peasants of What the Social-Democrats Want[1]




Written: Written in March 1903 

Published:

      First published as a separate pamphlet in May 1903, in Geneva, by the League of Russian Social-Democracy Abroad.

      Published according to the text of the pamphlet.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 361-432.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






1. The Struggle of the Urban Workers
  365



2. What Do the Social-Democrats Want?
  367



3. Riches and Poverty, Property-Owners and Workers in the Countryside
  377



4. What Path Should the Middle Peasant Take? Should He Take the Side of the Property-Owners and the Rich or the Side of the Workers and the Poor?
  391



5. What Improvements are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain for the Whole People and for the Workers?
  398



6. What Improvements are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain for all the Peasants?
  408



7. The Class Struggle in the Countryside
  423



The Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Proposed by the Newspaper Iskra in Conjunction with the Magazine Zarya
  430

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

      While preparing the pamphlet, To the Rural Poor, Lenin drew up
      several variants of the plan and individual items for the first variant,
      as well as plans for separate chapters of the pamphlet (see Lenin
      Miscellany XIX, pp. 339-56).
    

      Regarding the aims of the pamphlet, To the Rural Poor, Lenin
      informed Plekhanov in a letter of March 1903 that he was writing a popular
      pamphlet for peasants about the agrarian programme, in which he explained
      the Marxist view of the class struggle in the countryside on the basis of
      concrete data on the four strata of the village population (landlords,
      peasant bourgeoisie, middle peasants, and semi-proletarians together with
      proletarians).
    


      The pamphlet was published in Geneva in May 1903 by the League of Russian
      Revolutionary Social-Democracy Abroad.
    

      The text of the draft programme of the R.S.D.L.P., with an introduction
      written by Lenin, was appended to the pamphlet, which was very widely
      distributed. It was transported illegally to Russia from abroad,
      dispatched to various towns and from there distributed among the
      villages. During the period from May 1903 to December 1905 alone, the
      pamphlet was supplied to 75 towns and villages, according to the
      incomplete data available. It was studied in illegal Social-Democratic and
      workers’ circles, penetrated into the army and navy, and was read by
      students in secondary schools and universities. In 1904 the pamphlet was
      republished by the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. abroad; it was
      several times reprinted in Russia.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Struggle of the Urban Workers









Lenin: 1903/rp: 1. The Struggle of the Urban Workers







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Rural Poor
An Explanation for the Peasants of What the Social-Democrats Want



    

    
    

 
1. The Struggle of the Urban Workers

      Many peasants have probably already heard about the labour unrest in the
      towns. Some of them have themselves been in the capitals and in the
      factories, and have seen the riots, as the police call them. Others know
      workers who were involved in the unrest and were deported to their
      villages by the authorities. Others again must have seen the leaflets
      issued by the workers, or pamphlets about the workers’ struggle. Still
      others have only heard stories about what is going on in the towns from
      people with first-hand experience.
    

      Formerly, only students rebelled, but now thousands and tens of thousands
      of workers have risen in all the big towns. In most cases they fight
      against their employers, against the factory owners, against the
      capitalists. The workers declare strikes, all of them stop work at a
      factory at the same time and demand higher wages, demand that they should
      be made to work not eleven or ten hours a day, but only eight hours. The
      workers also demand other things that would make the working man’s life
      easier. They want the workshops to be in better condition and the machines
      to be protected by special devices so as to prevent them from maiming the
      workers; they want their children to be able to go to school and the sick
      to be given proper aid in the hospitals; they want the workers’ homes to
      be like human dwellings instead of being like pigsties.
    

      The police intervene in the workers’ struggle. The police seize workers,
      throw them into prison, deport them without trial to their villages, or
      even to Siberia. The government has passed laws banning strikes and
      workers’ meetings. But the workers wage their fight against the police and
      against the government. The workers say: We,

    

      millions of working people, have bent our backs long enough! We have
      worked for the rich and remained paupers long enough! We have allowed them
      to rob us long enough! We want to unite in unions, to unite all the
      workers in one big workers’ union (a workers’ party) and to
      strive jointly for a better life. We want to achieve a new and better
      order of society: in this new and better society there must be neither
      rich nor poor; all will have to work. Not a handful of rich people, but
      all the working people must enjoy the fruits of their common
      labour. Machines and other improvements must serve to ease the work of all
      and not to enable a few to grow rich at the expense of millions and tens
      of millions of people. This new and better society is called socialist
      society. The teachings about this society are called
      socialism. The workers’ unions which fight for this better order
      of society are called Social-Democratic parties. Such parties
      exist openly in nearly all countries (except Russia and Turkey), and our
      workers, together with socialists from among the educated people, have
      also formed such a party: the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party.
    

      The government persecutes that Party, but it exists in secret, despite all
      prohibitions; it publishes its news papers and pamphlets and organises
      secret unions. The workers not only meet in secret but come out into the
      streets in crowds and unfurl their banners bearing the inscriptions:
      “Long live the eight-hour day! Long live freedom! Long live
      socialism!” The government savagely persecutes the workers for this. It
      even sends troops to shoot down the workers. Russian soldiers have killed
      Russian workers in Yaroslavl, St. Petersburg, Riga, Rostov-on-Don, and
      Zlatoust.
    

      But the workers do not yield. They continue the fight. They say: neither
      persecution, prison, deportation, penal servitude, nor death can frighten
      us. Our cause is a just one. We are fighting for the freedom and the
      happiness of all who work. We are fighting to free tens and hundreds of
      millions of people from abuse of power, oppression and poverty. The
      workers are becoming more and more class- conscious. The number of
      Social-Democrats is growing fast in all countries. We shall win despite
      all persecution.
    
 

      The rural poor must clearly understand who these Social-Democrats are,
      what they want, and what must be done in the countryside to help the
      Social-Democrats to win happiness for the people.
    
 

Notes
 
 

 
  


|

2. What Do the Social-Democrats Want?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## What Do the Social-Democrats Want?









Lenin: 1903/rp: 2. What Do the Social-Democrats Want?







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Rural Poor
An Explanation for the Peasants of What the Social-Democrats Want



    

2. What Do the Social-Democrats Want?

      The Russian Social-Democrats are first and foremost striving to win
      political liberty. They need political liberty in order to unite
      all the Russian workers extensively and openly in the struggle for a new
      and better socialist order of society.
    

      What is political liberty?
    

      To understand this the peasant should first compare his present state of
      freedom with serfdom. Under the serf-owning system the peasant could not
      marry without the land lord’s permission. Today the peasant is free to
      marry without anyone’s permission. Under the serf-owning system the
      peasant had unfailingly to work for his landlord on days fixed by the
      latter’s bailiff. Today the peasant is free to decide which employer to
      work for, on which days, and for what pay. Under the serf-owning system
      the peasant could not leave his village without the landlord’s per
      mission. Today the peasant is free to go wherever he pleases—if the
      mir allows him to go, if he is not in arrears with his taxes, if
      he can get a passport, and if the governor or the police chief does not
      forbid his changing residence. Thus, even today the peasant is not quite
      free to go where he pleases; he does not enjoy complete freedom of
      movement; the peasant is still a semi-serf. Later on we shall explain in
      detail why the Russian peasant is still a semi-serf and what he must do to
      escape from this condition.
    

      Under the serf-owning system the peasant had no right to acquire property
      without the landlord’s permission; he could not buy land. Today the
      peasant is free to acquire any kind of property (but even today he is not
      quite free to leave the mir; he is not quite free to dispose of
      his land as he pleases). Under the serf-owning system the peasant could be
      flogged by order of the landlord. Today the peas ant cannot be flogged by
      order of the landlord, although he is still liable to corporal punishment.
    
 

      This freedom is called civil liberty—freedom in family
      matters, in private matters, in matters concerning property. The peasant
      and the worker are free (although not quite) to arrange their family life
      and their private affairs, to dispose of their labour (choose their
      employer) and their property.
    

      But neither the Russian workers nor the Russian people as. a whole are yet
      free to arrange their public affairs. The people as a whole are
      the serfs of the government officials, just as the peasants were the serfs
      of the landlords. The Russian people have no right to choose their
      officials, no right to elect representatives to legislate for the whole
      country. The Russian people have not even the right to arrange meetings
      for the discussion of state affairs. We dare not even print
      newspapers or books, and dare not even speak to all and for all on matters
      concerning the whole state without permission from officials who have been
      put in authority over us without our consent, just as the landlord used to
      appoint his bailiff without the consent of the peasants!
    

      Just as the peasants were the slaves of the landlords, so the Russian
      people are still the slaves of the officials. Just as the peasants lacked
      civil freedom under the serf-owning system, so the Russian people still
      lack political liberty. Political liberty means the freedom of
      the people to arrange their public, state affairs. Political liberty means
      the right of the people to elect their representatives (deputies) to a
      State Duma (parliament). All laws should be discussed and passed, all
      taxes should be fixed only by such a State Duma (parliament) elected by
      the people them selves. Political liberty means the right of the people
      themselves to choose all their officials, arrange all kinds of meetings
      for the discussion of all state affairs, and publish whatever papers and
      books they please, without having to ask for permission.
    

      All the other European peoples won political liberty for themselves long
      ago. Only in Turkey and in Russia are the people still politically
      enslaved by the sultan’s government and by the tsarist autocratic
      government. Tsarist autocracy means the unlimited power of the tsar. The
      people have no voice in determining the structure of the state or in
      running it. All laws are made and all officials are appointed

    

      by the tsar alone, by his personal, unlimited, autocratic authority. But,
      of course, the tsar cannot even know all Russian laws and all
      Russian officials. The tsar cannot even know all that goes on in the
      country. The tsar simply endorses the will of a few score of the richest
      and most high-born officials. However much he may desire to, one man
      cannot govern a vast country like Russia. It is not the tsar who governs
      Russia—it is only a manner of speech to talk about autocratic,
      one-man rule! Russia is governed by a handful of the richest and most
      high-born officials. The tsar learns only what this handful are pleased to
      tell him. The tsar cannot in any way go against the will of this handful
      of high-ranking nobles: the tsar himself is a landlord and a member of the
      nobility; since his earliest childhood he has lived only among these
      high-born people; it was they who brought him up and educated him; he
      knows about the Russian people as a whole only that which is known to
      these noble gentry, these rich landlords, and the few very rich merchants
      who are received at the tsar’s Court.
    

      In every volost administration office you will find the same picture
      hanging on the wall; it depicts the tsar (Alexander III, the father of the
      present tsar) speaking to the volost headmen who have come to his
      coronation. “Obey your Marshals of the Nobility!” the tsar
      is ordering them. And the present tsar, Nicholas II, has repeated those
      words. Thus, the tsars themselves admit that they can govern the country
      only with the aid of the nobility and through the nobility. We must well
      remember those words of the tsar’s about the peasants having to obey the
      nobility. We must clearly understand what a lie is being told the people
      by those who try to make out that tsarist government is the best form of
      government. In other countries—those people say—the government
      is elected; but it is the rich who are elected, and they govern unjustly
      and oppress the poor. In Russia the government is not elected; an
      autocratic tsar governs the whole country. The tsar stands above everyone,
      rich and poor. The tsar, they tell us, is just to everyone, to the poor
      and to the rich alike.
    

      Such talk is sheer hypocrisy. Every Russian knows the kind of justice that
      is dispensed by our government. Everybody knows whether a plain worker or
      a farm labourer

    

      in our country can become a member of the State Council. In all other
      European countries, however, factory workers and farm-hands have been
      elected to the State Duma (parliament); they have been able to speak
      freely to all the people about the miserable condition of the workers, and
      call upon the workers to unite and fight for a better life. And no one has
      dared to stop these speeches of the people’s representatives; no policeman
      has dared to lay a finger on them.
    

      In Russia there is no elective government, and she is governed not merely
      by the rich and the high-born, but by the worst of these. She is governed
      by the most skilful intriguers at the tsar’s Court, by the most artful
      tricksters, by those who carry lies and slanders to the tsar, and flatter
      and toady to him. They govern in secret; the people do not and cannot know
      what new laws are being drafted, what wars are being hatched, what new
      taxes are being introduced, which officials are being rewarded and for
      what services, and which are being dismissed. In no country is there such
      a multitude of officials as in Russia. These officials tower above the
      voiceless people like a dark forest—a mere worker can never make his
      way through this forest, can never obtain justice. Not a single complaint
      against bribery, robbery or abuse of power on the part of the officials is
      ever brought to light; every complaint is smothered in official red
      tape. The voice of the individual never reaches the whole people, but is
      lost in this dark jungle, stifled in the police torture chamber. An army
      of officials, who were never elected by the people and who are not
      responsible to the people, has woven a thick web, and men and women are
      struggling in this web like flies.
    

      Tsarist autocracy is an autocracy of officials. Tsarist autocracy means
      the feudal dependence of the people upon the officials and especially upon
      the police. Tsarist autocracy is police autocracy.
    

      That is why the workers come out into the streets with banners bearing the
      inscriptions: “Down with the autocracy!”, “Long live political
      liberty!” That is why the tens of millions of the rural poor must also
      support and take up this battle-cry of the urban workers. Like them,
      undaunted by persecution, fearless of the enemy’s threats and

    

      violence, and undeterred by the first reverses, the agricultural labourers
      and the poor peasants must come forward for a decisive struggle for the
      freedom of the whole of the Russian people and demand first of all the
      convocation of the representatives of the people. Let the people
      themselves all over Russia elect their representatives (deputies). Let
      those representatives form a supreme assembly, which will introduce
      elective government in Russia, free the people from feudal dependence upon
      the officials and the police, and secure for the people the right to meet
      freely, speak freely, and have a free press!
    

      That is what the Social-Democrats want first and fore most. That is the
      meaning of their first demand: the demand for political liberty.
    

      We know that political liberty, free elections to the State Duma
      (parliament), freedom of assembly, freedom of the press, will not at once
      deliver the working people from poverty and oppression. There is no means
      of immediately delivering the poor of town and country from the burden of
      working for the rich. The working people have no one to place their hopes
      in and no one to rely upon but themselves. Nobody will free the
      working man from poverty if he does not free himself. And to free
      themselves the workers of the whole country, the whole of Russia, must
      unite in one union, in one party. But millions of workers cannot unite if
      the autocratic police government bans all meetings, all workers’
      newspapers, and the election of workers’ deputies. To unite they must have
      the right to form unions of every kind, must have freedom to unite; they
      must enjoy political liberty.
    

      Political liberty will not at once deliver the working people from
      poverty, but it will give the workers a weapon with which to fight
      poverty.  There is no other means and there can be no other means of
      fighting poverty except the unity of the workers themselves. But
      millions of people cannot unite unless there is political
      liberty.
    

      In all European countries where the people have won political liberty, the
      workers began to unite long ago. Throughout the whole of Europe, workers
      who own no land and no workshops, and work for other people for wages all
      their lives are called proletarians. Over fifty years ago

    

      the call was sounded for the working people to unite. “Workers of
      all countries, unite!"—during the past fifty years these words
      have circled the whole globe, are repeated at tens and hundreds of
      thousands of workers’ meetings, and can be read in millions of
      Social-Democratic pamphlets and newspapers in every language.
    

      Of course, to unite millions of workers in one union, in one party, is an
      extremely difficult task; it requires time, persistence, perseverance, and
      courage. The workers are ground down by poverty and want, benumbed by
      cease less toil for the capitalists and landlords; often they have not
      even the time to think of why they remain perpetual paupers, or how to be
      delivered from this. Everything is done to prevent the workers from
      uniting: either by means of direct and brutal violence, as in countries
      like Russia where there is no political liberty, or by refusing to employ
      workers who preach the doctrines of socialism, or, lastly, by means of
      deceit and bribery. But no violence or persecution can stop the
      proletarian workers from fighting for the great cause of the emancipation
      of all working people from poverty and oppression. The number of
      Social-Democratic workers is constantly growing. Take our neighbouring
      country, Germany; there they have elective government. Formerly, in
      Germany, too, there was an unlimited, autocratic, monarchist
      government. But long ago, over fifty years ago, the German people
      destroyed the, autocracy and won political liberty by force. In Germany
      laws are not made by a handful of officials, as in Russia, but by an
      assembly of people’s representatives, by a parliament, by the
      Reichstag, as the Germans call it. All adult males take part in
      electing deputies to this assembly. This makes it possible to count how
      many votes were cast for the Social-Democrats. In 1887 one-tenth
      of all votes were cast for the Social-Democrats. In 1898 (when the most
      recent elections to the Reichstag took place) the Social-Democratic vote
      increased nearly threefold. This time more than
      one-fourth of all the votes were cast for the
      Social-Democrats. Over two million adult males voted for
      Social-Democratic candidates to parliament. Among the farm
      labourers of Germany socialism is not yet widespread but it is now making
      very rapid progress among them. And when the masses

    

      of farm-hands, day laborers and poor, pauperised peasants unite with their
      brothers in the towns, the German workers will win and establish an order
      under which the working people will suffer neither poverty nor oppression.
    

      By what means do the Social-Democratic workers want to deliver the people
      from poverty?
    

      To know this, one must clearly understand the cause of the poverty of the
      vast masses of the people under the present social order. Rich cities are
      growing, magnificent shops and houses are being built, railways are being
      constructed, all kinds of machines and improvements are being introduced
      in industry and agriculture, but millions of people remain iii poverty,
      and continue to work all their lives to provide a bare subsistence for
      their families. That is not all: more and more people are becoming
      unemployed. Both in town and country there are more and more people who
      can find no work at all. In the villages they starve, while in the towns
      they swell the ranks of the “tramps” and
      “down-and-outs,” find refuge like beasts in dug-outs on the
      outskirts of towns, or in dreadful slums and cellars, such as those in the
      Khitrov Market in Moscow.
    

      Why is this? Wealth and luxury are increasing, and yet the millions and
      millions who by their labour create all this wealth remain in poverty and
      want! Peasants are dying of starvation, workers wander about without
      employment, and yet merchants export millions of poods of grain from
      Russia to foreign countries, factories are standing idle because the goods
      cannot be sold, for there is no market for them!
    

      The cause of all this is, first of all, that most of the land, and also
      the factories, workshops, machines, buildings, ships, etc., belong to a
      small number of rich people. Tens of millions of people work on this land
      and at these factories and workshops, but they are all owned by a few
      thousand or tens of thousands of rich people, landlords, merchants, and
      factory owners. The people work for those rich men for hire, for wages,
      for a crust of bread. All that is produced over and above what is required
      to provide a bare subsistence for the workers goes to the rich; this is
      their profit, their “income.” All the benefits arising from the use
      of machines and from improvements in methods

    

      of production go to the landowners and capitalists: they accumulate wealth
      untold, while the workers get only a miserable pittance. The workers are
      brought together for work; on large estates and at big factories several
      hundred and sometimes even several thousand workers are employed. When
      labour is united in this way, and when the most diverse kinds of machines
      are employed, work becomes more productive: one worker produces much more
      than scores of workers did working separately and without the aid of
      machines. But the benefits of this more productive labour go not to all
      the working people, but to an insignificant number of big landowners,
      merchants, and factory owners.
    

      One often hears it said that the landlords and merchants
      “provide work” for the people, that they
      “provide” the poor with earnings. It is said, for instance,
      that a neighbouring factory or a neighbouring landlord
      “maintains” the local peasants. Actually, however,
      the workers by their labour maintain themselves and also all
      those who do not work themselves. But for permission to work on
      the landlord’s land, at a factory, or on a railway, the worker
      gives the owner gratis all he produces, while the worker
      himself gets only enough for a bare subsistence. Actually, therefore, it
      is not the landlords and the merchants who give the workers employment,
      but the workers who by their labour maintain everybody, surrendering
      gratis the greater part of their labour.
    

      Further. In all present-day states the people’s poverty is due to the fact
      that the workers produce all sorts of articles for sale, for the
      market. The factory owner and the artisan, the landlord and the well-to-do
      peasant produce various goods, raise cattle, sow and harvest grain for
      sale, in order to obtain money. Money has everywhere become
      the ruling power. All the goods produced by human labour are exchanged for
      money. With money you can buy anything. With money you can even buy a man,
      that is to say, force a man who owns nothing to work for another who has
      money. Formerly, land used to be the ruling power—that was the case
      under the serf-owning system: whoever possessed land possessed power and
      authority. Today, however, money, capital, has become the ruling
      power. With money you can buy as much land as you like. Without money you
      will

    

      not be able to do much even if you have land: you must have money to buy a
      plough or other implements, to buy livestock, to buy clothes and other
      town-made goods, not to speak of paying taxes. For the sake of money
      nearly all the landlords have mortgaged their estates to the banks. To get
      money the government borrows from rich people and bankers all over the
      world, and pays hundreds of millions of rubles yearly in interest on these
      loans.
    

      For the sake of money everyone today is waging a fierce war against
      everyone else. Each tries to buy cheap and to sell dear, each tries to get
      ahead of the other, to sell as many goods as possible, to undercut the
      other, to conceal from him a profitable market or a profitable
      contract. In this general scramble for money the little man, the petty
      artisan or the small peasant, fares worse than all: he is always left
      behind by the rich merchant or the rich peasant. The little man never has
      any reserves; he lives from hand to mouth; each difficulty or accident
      compels him to pawn his last belongings or to sell his livestock at a
      trifling price. Once he has fallen into the clutches of a kulak or of a
      usurer he very rarely succeeds in escaping from the net, and in most cases
      he is utterly ruined. Every year tens and hundreds of thousands of small
      peasants and artisans lock up their cottages, surrender their holdings to
      the commune gratis and become wageworkers, farm-hands, unskilled
      workers, proletarians. But the rich grow richer and richer in this
      struggle for money. They pile up millions and hundreds of millions of
      rubles in the banks and make profit not only with their own money, but
      also with the money deposited in the banks by others. The little man who
      deposits a few score or a few hundred rubles in a bank or a savings-bank
      receives interest at the rate of three or four kopeks to the ruble; but
      the rich make millions out of these scores and use these millions to
      increase their turnover and make ten and twenty kopeks to the ruble.
    

      That is why the Social-Democratic workers say that the only way to put an
      end to the poverty of the people is to change the existing order from top
      to bottom, throughout the country, and to establish a socialist
      order, in other words, to take the estates from the big landowners,
      the

    

      factories from the factory owners, and money capital from the bankers, to
      abolish their private property and turn it over to the whole
      working people throughout the country. When that is done the workers’
      labour will be made use of not by rich people living on the labour of
      others, but by the workers themselves and by those elected by them. The
      fruits of common labour and the advantages from all improvements and
      machinery will then benefit all the working people, all the
      workers. Wealth will then grow at a still faster rate because the workers
      will work better for them selves than they did for the capitalists; the
      working day will be shorter; the workers’ standard of living will be
      higher; all their conditions of life will be completely changed.
    

      But it is not an easy matter to change the existing order throughout the
      country. That requires a great deal of effort, a long and stubborn
      struggle. All the rich, all the property-owners, all the

      bourgeoisie[1]

      will defend their riches with all their might. The officials and the army
      will rise to defend all the rich class, because the government it
      self is in the hands of the rich class. The workers must rally as one man
      for the struggle against all those who live on the labour of others; the
      workers themselves must unite and help to unite all the poor in a single
      working class, in a single proletarian class. The
      struggle will not be easy for the working class, but it will certainly end
      in the workers’ victory because the bourgeoisie, or those who live on the
      labour of others, are an insignificant minority of the population, while
      the working class is the vast majority. The workers against the
      property-owners means millions against thousands.
    

      The workers in Russia are already beginning to unite for this great
      struggle in a single workers’ Social-Democratic Party. Difficult as it is
      to unite in secret, hiding from the police, nevertheless, the organisation
      is growing and gaining strength. When the Russian people have won

    

      political liberty, the work of uniting the working class, the cause of
      socialism, will advance much more rapidly, more rapidly than it is
      advancing among the German workers.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]

      Bourgeois means a property-owner. The bourgeoisie are all the
      property-owners taken together. A big bourgeois is the owner of big
      property. A petty bourgeois is the owner of small property. The words
      bourgeoisie and proletariat mean the same as property-owners and workers,
      the rich and the poor, or those who live on the labour of others end those
      who work for others for wages.
    —Lenin
 

 
  

1. The Struggle of the Urban Workers

|

3. Riches and Poverty, Property-Owners and Workers in the Countryside

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Riches and Poverty, Property-Owners and Workers









Lenin: 1903/rp: 3. Riches and Poverty, Property-Owners and Workers in the Countryside







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Rural Poor
An Explanation for the Peasants of What the Social-Democrats Want



    

3. Riches and Poverty, Property-Owners and Workers in the Countryside


We know now what the Social-Democrats want. They want to fight the whole
of the rich class to free the people from poverty. In our countryside
there is no less and, perhaps, even more poverty than there is in the
towns. We shall not speak here about how great the poverty in the
countryside is. Every worker who has been in the country and every
peasant are well acquainted with want, hunger, and ruin in the
countryside.
      

But the peasant does not know the cause of his distress, hunger
and destitution, or how to rid himself of this want. To know
this one must first find out what causes all want and poverty in both
town and countryside. We have already dealt with this briefly, and we
have seen that the poor peas ants and rural workers must unite with the
urban workers. But that is not enough. We must also find out what sort
of people in the countryside will follow the rich, the property-owners,
and what sort of people will follow the workers, the
Social-Democrats. We must find out whether there are many peasants who,
no less than the landlords, are able to acquire capital and live on the
labour of others. Unless we get to the bottom of this matter, no amount
of talking about poverty will be of any use, and the rural poor will not
know who in the countryside must unite among themselves and
with the urban Workers, or what must be done to make it a
dependable union and to prevent the peasant from being
hoodwinked by his own kind, the rich peasant, as well as by the
landlord.
      

To get to the bottom of this let us now see how strong the landlords are
and how strong the rich peasants are in the countryside.
      

Let us begin with the landlords. We can judge of their strength in the
first place by the amount of land they own as private property. The
total amount of land in European Russia, including peasant allotment
land and privately

    

      owned land, has been calculated at about 240,000,000

      dessiatines[1]

      (except the state lands, of which we shall speak separately). Out of this
      total of 240,000,000 dessiatines, 131,000,000 dessiatines of allotment
      land are held by the peasants, that is to say, by over ten million
      households; whereas 109,000,000 dessiatines are held by private
      owners, i.e., by less than half a million families. Thus, even if
      we take the average, every peasant family holds 13 dessiatines, while
      every family of private owners owns 218 dessiatines! But the distribution
      of the land is much more unequal, as we shall presently see.
    

      Of the 109,000,000 dessiatines owned by private owners seven
      million are royal demesnes, in other words, the private property
      of the members of the imperial family. The tsar, with his family, is the
      first landlord, the biggest landowner in Russia. One family
      possesses more land than half a million peasant
      families! Further, the churches and monasteries own about six
      million dessiatines of land. Our priests preach frugality and abstinence
      to the peasants, but they themselves have, by fair means and foul,
      accumulated an enormous amount of land.
    

      Further, about two million dessiatines are owned by the cities and towns,
      and an equal amount by various commercial and industrial companies and
      corporations. Ninety-two million dessiatines (the exact figure is
      91,605,845, but to simplify matters we will quote round figures) belong to
      less than half a million (481,358) families of private
      owners. Half these families are quite small owners, owning less than ten
      dessiatines of land each, and all of them together own less than one
      million dessiatines. On the other hand, sixteen thousand families
      own over one thousand dessiatines each; and the total land owned
      by them amounts to sixty-five million dessiatines. What vast
      areas of land are concentrated in the hands of the big land owners is also
      to be seen in the fact that just under one

    

      thousand families (924) own more than ten thousand
dessiatines each, and all together they own twenty-seven
million dessiatines! One thousand families own as much land as is
owned by two million peasant families.
    

      Obviously, millions and tens of millions of people are bound to
      live in poverty and starvation and will go on living in poverty
      and starvation as long as such vast areas of land are owned by a few
      thousand of the rich. Obviously, the state authorities, the government
      itself (even the tsar’s government) will always dance to the tune of these
      big land owners. Obviously, the rural poor can expect no help from anyone,
      or from any quarter, until they unite, combine in a single class to wage a
      stubborn, desperate struggle against the landlord class.
    

      At this point we must observe that very many people in this country
      (including even many people of education) have a totally wrong idea about
      the strength of the landlord class; they say that the “state”
      owns much more land. These bad counsellors of the peasant say: “A
      large portion of the territory [i. e., of all the land] of Russia already
      belongs to the state.”  (These words are taken from the news paper
      Revolutsionnaya Rossiya, No. 8, p. 8.) The mistake these people
      make arises from the following. They have heard that the state
      owns 150,000,000 dessiatines of land in European Russia. That is true. But
      they forget that these 150,000,000 dessiatines consist almost entirely of
      uncultivable land and forests in the Far North, in the Archangel,
      Vologda, Olonets, Vyatka, and Perm gubernias. Thus, the state has retained
      only that land which up to the present has been quite unfit for
      cultivation. The cultivable land owned by the state amounts to less
      than four million dessiatines. And these cultivable state lands (for
      example, in Samara Gubernia, where they are particularly extensive), are
      leased for very low rents, for next to nothing, to the rich. The rich
      lease thousands and tens of thous ands of dessiatines of these lands and
      then sublet them to the, peasants at exorbitant rents.
    

      The people who say that the state owns a great deal of land are very bad
      counsellors of the peasant. The actual case is that the big private
      landowners (including the tsar personally) own a lot of good land, and the
      state itself is

    

      in the hands of these big landowners. As long as the rural poor fail to
      unite, and by uniting become a formidable force, the “state”
      will always remain the obedient servant of the landlord class. There is
      another thing that must not be forgotten: formerly almost all the
      landlords were nobles. The nobility still owns a vast amount of land (in
      1877-78, 115,000 nobles owned 73,000,000 dessiatines). But today money,
      capital, has become the ruling power. Merchants and well-to-do peasants
      have bought very large amounts of land. It is estimated that in the course
      of thirty years (from 1863 to 1892) the nobility lost (i. e., sold more
      than they bought) land to the value of over six hundred million
      rubles. And merchants and honorary citizens have acquired land to the
      value of 250,000,000 rubles. Peasants, Cossacks, and “other rural
      inhabitants” (as our government calls the common folk, to
      distinguish them from the “gentry,” the “clean public”) have
      acquired land to the value of 300,000,000 rubles. Thus, on the average,
      every year, the peasants in the whole of Russia acquire land as private
      property to the value of 10,000,000 rubles.
    

      And so, there are different sorts of peasants: some live in poverty and
      starvation; others grow rich. Consequently, the number of rich peasants
      who incline towards the landlords and will take the side of the rich
      against the workers is increasing. The rural poor who want to unite with
      the urban workers must carefully ponder over this and find out whether
      there are many rich peasants of this kind, how strong they are, and what
      kind of a union we need to fight this force. We have just mentioned the
      bad counsellors of the peasant. Those bad counsellors are fond of saying
      that the peasants already have such a union. That union is the
      mir, the village commune. The mir, they say, is a great
      force. The mir unites the peasants very closely; the organisation
      (i.e., the association, unity) of the peasants in the mir is
      colossal (i.e., enormous, boundless).
    

      That is wrong. It is a tale. A tale invented by kind hearted people, but a
      tale nevertheless. If we listen to tales we shall only wreck our cause,
      the cause of uniting the rural poor with the urban workers. Let every
      rural inhabitant look round carefully: is the unity of the mir,
      is the peasant commune, at all like a union of the poor to fight
      all
    

      the rich, all those who live on the labour of others? No, it is
      not, and it cannot be. In every village, in every commune, there are many
      farm labourers, many impoverished peasants, and there are rich peasants
      who employ farm labourers and buy land “in perpetuity.” These rich
      peasants are also members of the commune, and it is they who lord it in
      the commune because they are a force. But do we need a union to which the
      rich belong, and which is lorded over by the rich? Of course not. We need
      a union to fight the rich. And so, the unity of the mir
      is no good to us at all.
    

      What we need is a voluntary union, a union only of people who have
      realised that they must unite with the urban workers. The village commune,
      however, is not a voluntary union; it is enforced by the state. The
      village commune does not consist of people who work for the rich and who
      want to unite to fight the rich. The village commune consists of all sorts
      of people, not because they want to be in it, but because their parents
      lived on the same land and worked for the same landlord, because the
      authorities have registered them as members of that commune. The poor
      peasant are not free to leave the commune; they are not free to accept in
      the commune a man whom the police have registered in another volost, but
      whom we may need for our union in a particular village. No, we need a very
      different kind of union, a voluntary union consisting only of labourers
      and poor peasants to fight all those who live on the labour of others.
    

      The times when the mir was a force have long passed, never to
      return. The mir was a force when hardly any of the peasants were
      farm labourers, or workers wandering over the length and breadth of Russia
      in search of a job, when there were hardly any rich peasants, when all
      were equally ground down by the feudal landlords. But now money has become
      the principal power. Members of the same commune will now fight one
      another for money like wild beasts. The moneyed peasants sometimes oppress
      and fleece their fellow peasants more than the landlords do. What we need
      today is not .the unity of the mir, but a union against the
      power of money, against the rule of capital, a union of all the
      rural labourers and of all the poor peasants of different communes, a
      union of all the rural poor with the urban workers to fight both the
      landlords and the rich peasants.
    
 

      We have seen how strong the landlords are. We must now see whether there
      are many rich peasants and how strong they are.
    

      We estimate the strength of the landlords by the size of their estates, by
      the amount of land they own. The landlords are free to dispose of their
      land, free to buy land and to sell it. That is why it is possible to judge
      their strength very accurately by the amount of land they own.

      The peas ants, 

      however, still lack the right freely to dispose of their land; they are
      still semi-serfs, tied to their village commune. Hence, the strength of
      the rich peasants cannot be judged by the amount of allotment land they
      hold. The rich peasants do not grow rich on their allotments; they
      buy a considerable amount of land, buying both “in
      perpetuity” (i.e., as their private property) and “for a
      number of years” (i.e., on lease); they buy both from the landlords
      and from their fellow peasants, from those peasants who leave the land, or
      are compelled by want to let their holdings. It will therefore be more
      correct to divide the rich, middle, and poor peasants according to the
      number of horses they own. A peasant who owns many horses will nearly
      always be a rich peasant; if he keeps many draught animals it shows that
      he cultivates a lot of land, owns land besides his communal allotment, and
      has money saved up. Moreover, we are in a position to calculate the number
      of peasants owning many horses in the whole of Russia (European Russia,
      exclusive of Siberia and the Caucasus). Of course, it must not be
      forgotten that we can speak of the whole of Russia only in averages: the
      different uyezds and gubernias vary to a considerable degree. For
      instance, in the neighbourhood of cities we often find rich peasant
      farmers who keep very few horses. Some of them engage in
      market-gardening—a profitable business; others keep few horses but
      many cows and sell milk. In all parts of Russia there are also peasants
      who do not make money out of the land, but engage in trade: they run
      creameries, hulling-mills, and other enterprises. Everybody who lives in
      the country very well knows of rich peasants in his own village or
      district. But we want to know how many there are in the whole of Russia
      and how strong they are, so that the poor peasant shall not have to guess
      and go about blind fold, as it were, but know exactly his friends and his
      foes.
    
 

      Well then, let us see whether there are many peasants who are rich or poor
      in horses. We have already said that the total number of peasant
      households in Russia is estimated at about ten million. Between
      them they now own, probably, about fifteen million horses (about
      fourteen years ago the number was seventeen million, but it is smaller
      now). Thus, on the average, every ten households have
      fifteen horses. But the whole point is that some of them—a
      few— own many horses, while others—very many—own no
      horses, or very few. There are at least three million peasants,
      who own no horses, and about three and a half million own one horse
      each. All these are either utterly ruined or very poor peasants. We
      call these the rural poor. They number six and a half million out
      of a total of ten million, that is to say, almost two-thirds!
      Next come the middle peasants who own a pair of draught animals
      each. These peasants number about two million households, owning
      about four million horses. Then come the rich peasants each of
      whom owns more than one pair of draught animals. Such comprise one
      and a half million households, but they own seven and a
      half million

      horses.[2]

      Thus, about one-sixth of the total house holds own half the total number
      of horses.
    

      Now that we know this we are in a position to judge fairly accurately the
      strength of the rich peasants. In number they are very few: in the
      different communes and volosts they will comprise ten to twenty households
      in every hundred. But these few households are the richest. Taking

    

      Russia as a whole, they own almost as many horses as all the other
      peasants taken together. That means that their land under crops must also
      amount to nearly half the total area sown to crops by the peasants. Such
      peasants harvest much more grain than they require for their
      families. They sell large quantities of grain. They grow grain not merely
      to feed themselves, but grow it chiefly for sale, to make money. Peasants
      like these can save money. They deposit it in savings-banks and
      banks. They buy land as property. We have already said how much land the
      peasants all over Russia buy every year; nearly all this land goes to
      these few rich peasants. The rural poor have to think not of buying land,
      but of getting enough to eat. Often they have not enough money to buy
      grain, let alone land. Therefore, the banks in general and the Peasants’
      Bank in particular do not help all peasants to buy land (as is sometimes
      asserted by people who try to deceive the muzhik or by the very
      simple-minded), but only an insignificant number of peasants, only the
      rich peasants. Therefore, the peasant’s evil counsellors whom we have
      mentioned tell an untruth when they say that the land is being bought by
      the peasants, that it is passing from capital to labour. The land can
      never pass to labour, that is, to the poor working man, because land has
      to be paid for with money. But the poor never have any money to spare. The
      land can go only to the rich, moneyed peasants, to capital, to those
      people against whom the rural poor must fight in alliance with
      the urban workers.
    

      The rich peasants not only buy land in perpetuity; most often they take
      land for a number of years, on lease. By renting large plots they prevent
      the rural poor from getting land. For example, it has been calculated how
      much land rich peasants have rented in a single uyezd (Konstantinograd) in
      Poltava Gubernia. And what do we find? The number who rented thirty
      dessiatines or more per house hold is very small, only two out of every
      fifteen households. But these rich peasants have gained possession of
      one half of all the rented land, and each of them has on the
      average seventy-five dessiatines of the rented land! Or take
      Taurida Gubernia, where a calculation has been made of how much of the
      land rented by the peasants from the state through the mir,
      through the village commune, has been grabbed

    

      by the rich. It has been found that the rich, who account for only
      one-fifth of the total number of households, have grabbed
      three-fourths of the rented land. Everywhere land goes to those
      who have money, and only the few rich have money.
    

      Further, much land is now let by the peasants themselves. The peasants
      abandon their holdings because they have no livestock, no seed, nothing
      with which to run their farms. Today even land is of no use unless you
      have money. For instance, in Novouzensk Uyezd in Samara Gubernia, one,
      sometimes even two, out of every three rich peasant house holds rent
      allotment land in their own or in another commune. The allotments are
      let by those who have no horses, or only one horse. In Taurida Gubernia as
      much as one-third of all peasant households let their
      allotments. One-fourth of the peasant allotments, a quarter of a
      million dessiatines, are let. Of this quarter of a million dessiatines,
      one hundred and fifty thousand dessiatines (three-fifths) are rented by
      rich peasants! This, too, shows whether the unity of the mir, the
      commune, is of any use to the poor. In the village commune, he who has
      money has power. What we need is the unity of the poor of all communes.
    

      Just as with land purchase, the peasants are deceived by talk about buying
      cheap ploughs, harvesters, and all sorts of improved implements. Zemstvo
      stores and artels are set up and it is said: improved implements will
      better the conditions of the peasantry. That is mere deception. All these
      improved implements always go to the rich; the poor get next to
      nothing. They cannot think of buying ploughs and harvesters; they have
      enough to do to keep body and soul together!  All this sort of
      “helping the peasants” is nothing but helping the rich. As for
      the mass of the poor, who have neither land, livestock, nor reserves, they
      will not benefit by the fact that the better implements will be
      cheaper. Here is an example. In an uyezd in Samara Gubernia all the
      improved implements belonging to the poor and to the rich peasants have
      been taken stock of. It was found that one-fifth of all
      households, i.e., the most well-to-do, owned almost three-fourths
      of the improved implements, while the poor—half the
      households—had only one-thirtieth. Out of a total of 28,000
      households, 10,000 possessed one horse

    

      each, or none; these 10,000 had only seven improved implements
      out of a total of 5,724 improved implements owned by all the peasant
      households in the uyezd. Seven out of 5,724—that is the share of the
      rural poor in all these farm improvements, in all this increase in the
      number of ploughs and harvesters which are supposed to help “all the
      peasantry”!  That is what the rural poor must expect from those who talk
      about “improving peasant farming”!
    

      Finally, one of the main features of the rich peasants is that they
hire farm-hands and day labourers. Like the landlords, the rich
peasants also live on the labour of others. Like the landlords, they
grow rich because the mass of the peasants are ruined and
pauperised. Like the landlords, they try to squeeze as much work as they
can out of their farm-hands and to pay them as little as possible. If
millions of peasants were not utterly ruined and compelled to go to work
for others, become hired labourers, sell their labour-power—the
rich peasants could not exist, could not carry on their farms. There
would be no “abandoned” allotments for them to pick up and
no labourers for them to hire. The million and a half rich peasants
throughout Russia certainly hire no less than a million
farm-hands and day labourers. Obviously, in the great struggle between
the propertied class and the class of the propertyless, between masters
and workers, between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, the rich
peasants will take the side of the property-owners against the working
class.
    

      We now know the position and the strength of the rich peasantry. Let us
      examine the conditions of the rural poor.
    

      We have already said that the rural poor comprise the vast majority,
      almost two-thirds, of the peasant households throughout Russia. To begin
      with, the number of households without horses cannot be less than
      three million—probably more than that today, perhaps three
      and a half million. Every famine year, every crop failure, ruins tens of
      thou sands of farms. The population grows, life on the land becomes more
      crowded, but all the best land has been grabbed by the landlords and the
      rich peasants. And so, every year more and more people are ruined, go to
      the towns and the factories, take work as farm-hands, or become unskilled
      labourers. A peasant who has no horse is one who has become

    

      quite poor. He is a proletarian. He gains a living (if you can call it
      living; it would be truer to say that he just contrives to keep body and
      soul together) not from the land, not from his farm, but by working
      for hire. He is brother to the town worker. Even land is of no use to
      the peasant without a horse: half the households without horses let
      their allotments, while some even surrender them to the commune for
      nothing (and sometimes even pay the difference between the taxes and the
      expected income from the land!) because they are not in a position to till
      their land. A peasant who has no horse sows one dessiatine, or two at the
      most. He always has to buy additional grain (if he has the money to buy it
      with)— his own crop will never suffice to feed him. Peasants who own
      one horse each, and there are about three and a half million such
      households throughout Russia, are not very much better off. Of course,
      there are exceptions, and we have already said that, here and there, there
      are peasants with one horse each who are doing middling well, or are even
      rich. But we are not speaking of exceptions, of individual localities, but
      of Russia as a whole. If we take the entire mass of peasants who have one
      horse each, there can be no doubt that they are a mass of paupers. Even in
      the agricultural gubernias the peasant who has one horse sows only three
      or four dessiatines, rarely five; his crop does not suffice either. Even
      in a good year his food is no better than that of a peasant without a
      horse—which means that he is always underfed, always starves. His
      farm is in decay, his livestock is poor and short of fodder, and he is not
      in a position to look after his land properly. The peasant who owns one
      horse—in Voronezh Gubernia, for instance—can afford to spend
      (not counting expenditure on fodder) not more than twenty rubles a
      year on the whole of his farm! (A rich peasant spends ten times
      as much.) Twenty rubles a year for rent, to buy livestock, repair his
      wooden plough and other implements, pay the shepherd, and for everything
      else! Do you call that farming? It is sheer misery, hard labour, endless
      drudgery. It is natural that some of the peasants with one horse each, and
      not a few, should also let their allotments. Even land is of
      little use to a pauper. He has no money and his land does not even provide
      him with enough to eat, let alone with money. But money is needed for
      everything: for food,

    

      for clothing, for the farm, and to pay taxes. In Voronezh Gubernia, a
      peasant who owns one horse usually has to pay about eighteen
      rubles a year in taxes alone, while he cannot make more than
      seventy-five rubles a year to meet all his expenses. Under these
      circumstances it is sheer mockery to talk about buying land, about
      improved implements, about agricultural banks: those things were not
      invented for the poor.
    

      Where is the peasant to get the money from? He has to look for
      “earnings” on the side. A peasant who owns one horse, like the
      peasant who owns none, ekes out a living only with the help of
      “earnings.”  But what does “earnings” mean? It means
      working for others, working for hire. It means that the peasant who owns
      one horse has half ceased to be an independent farmer and has become a
      hireling, a proletarian. That is why such peasants are called semi
      proletarians. They, too, are brothers to the town workers because
      they, too, are fleeced in every way by all sorts of employers. They, too,
      have no way out, no salvation, except by uniting with the Social-Democrats
      to fight all the rich, all the property-owners. Who works on the building
      of railways? Who is fleeced by the contractors? Who goes out lumbering and
      timber-floating? Who works as farm-hand? Or as day labourer? Who does the
      unskilled work in the towns and ports? It is always the rural poor, the
      peasants who have no horses or only one each. It is always the rural
      proletarians and semi-proletarians. And what vast numbers of these there
      are in Russia! It has been calculated that throughout Russia (exclusive of
      the Caucasus and Siberia) eight and sometimes even nine million
      passports are taken out yearly. Those are all for migratory workers. They
      are peasants only in name; actually, they are hirelings,
      wage-labourers. They must all unite in one union with the town
      workers—and every ray of light and knowledge that reaches the
      countryside will strengthen and consolidate this unity.
    

      There is one more point about “earnings” that must not be
      forgotten. All kinds of officials and people who think as the officials do
      are fond of saying that the peasant, the muzhik, “needs” two
      things: land (but not very much of it— besides, he cannot get much,
      because the rich have grabbed

    

      it all!) and “earnings.” Therefore, they say, in order to help the
      people, it is necessary to introduce more trades in the rural districts,
      to “provide” more “earnings.” Such talk is sheer
      hypocrisy. For the poor, “earnings” mean wage-labour. To
      “provide earnings” for the peasant means transforming him into
      a wage-labourer. Fine sort of assistance this! For the rich peasants there
      are other kinds of “earnings,” which require capital, for instance,
      the building of a flour-mill or some other plant, the purchase of
      threshing-machines, trade, and so on. To confuse the earnings of moneyed
      people with the wage-labour of the poor means deceiving the
      poor. Of course, this deception is to the advantage of the rich; it is to
      their advantage to make it appear that all kinds of “earnings”
      are open to and within the reach of all the peasants. But he who
      really cares for the welfare of the poor will tell the whole truth and
      nothing but the truth.
    

      It remains for us to consider the middle peasants. We have already seen
      that, on the average, taking Russia as a whole, we must regard as a middle
      peasant one who has a pair of draught animals, and that out of a total of
      ten million households there are about two million middle peas ant
      households in the country. The middle peasant stands between the rich
      peasant and the proletarian, and that is why he is called a middle
      peasant. His standard of living, too, is middling: in a good year he makes
      ends meet on his farm, but poverty is always knocking at the door. He has
      either very few savings or none at all. That is why his farm is in a
      precarious position. He finds it hard to get money: only very seldom can
      he make as much money out of his farm as he needs, and if he does, it is
      just barely enough. To go out for earnings would mean neglecting the farm
      and everything would go to rack and ruin. Nevertheless, many of the middle
      peasants cannot get along with out earnings: they, too, have to hire
      themselves to others; want compels them to go into bondage to the
      landlord, to fall into debt. And once in debt the middle peasant is hardly
      ever able to get out of it, for unlike the rich peasant he has no steady
      income. Therefore, once he falls into debt it is as if he had put his neck
      in a halter. He remains a debtor until he is utterly ruined. It is chiefly
      the middle peasant

    

      who falls into bondage to the landlord, because for work paid on a job
      basis the landlord needs a peasant who is not ruined, one who owns a pair
      of horses and all implements required in farming. It is not easy for the
      middle peas ant to go elsewhere in search of earnings, so he goes into
      bondage to the landlord in return for grain, permission to use pasture
      land, the lease of the cut-off lands, and money advances during the
      winter. The middle peasant is hard pressed, not only by the landlord and
      the kulak, but also by his rich neighbour, who is always one jump ahead
      when he wants to acquire more land and never misses an opportunity to
      squeeze him in some way or other. Such is the life of the middle peasant;
      he is neither fish nor fowl. He can be neither a real master nor a
      worker. All the middle peasants strive to become masters: they want to be
      property-owners, but very few succeed. There are a few, a very few, who
      even hire farm-hands or day labourers, try to become rich on the labour of
      others, to rise to wealth on the backs of others. But most middle peasants
      have no money to hire labourers— in fact, they have to hire
      themselves out.
    

      Wherever a struggle begins between the rich and the poor, between the
      property-owners and the workers, the middle peasant remains in between,
      not knowing which side to take. The rich call him to their side: you, too,
      are a master, a man of property, they say to him, you have nothing to do
      with the penniless workers. But the workers say: the rich will cheat and
      fleece you, and there is no other salvation for you but to help us in our
      fight against all the rich. This struggle for the middle peasant is going
      on everywhere, in all countries, wherever the Social-Democratic workers
      are fighting to emancipate the working people. In Russia the struggle is
      just beginning. That is why we must most care fully study the matter and
      understand clearly the deceits the rich resort to in order to win over the
      middle peasant; we must learn how to expose these deceits and help the
      middle peasant to find his real friends. If the Russian Social-Democratic
      workers at once take the right road, we shall establish a firm alliance
      between the rural workers and the urban workers more quickly than our
      comrades, the German workers, and we shall speedily achieve victory over
      all the enemies of the working people.
    
    

     

Notes
 

[1]

      These and all subsequent figures concerning the amount of land are very
      much out of date. They refer to the years 1877-78. But we have no more
      up-to-date figures. The Russian Government can only survive by keeping
      things in the dark, and that is why complete and truthful information
      about the life of the people throughout our country is so rarely
      collected. (A dessiatine=2.7 acres,—Ed.)
    —Lenin

[2]

      We repeat that the figures quoted are average, approximate figures. The
      number of rich peasants may not be exactly a million and a half, but a
      million and a quarter, or a million and three-quarters, or even two
      million. That is not a big difference. The important thing here is not to
      count them up to the last thousand or last hundred thousand, but clearly
      to realise the strength and the position of the rich peasants so that we
      may be able to recognise our enemies and our friends, that we shall not
      allow ourselves to be deceived by tales or empty talk, but get to know
      accurately the position of the poor and especially the position of the
      rich.
    

      Let every rural worker carefully study his own volost and the neighbouring
      volosts. He will see that we have counted correctly, and that, on the
      average, this will be the position everywhere: out of every hundred
      households there will be ten, at the most twenty, rich families, some
      twenty middle peasants, and all the rest are poor.
    —Lenin
 

 
  

2. What Do the Social-Democrats Want?

|

4. What Path Should the Middle Peasant Take? Should He Take the Side of the Property-Owners and the Rich or the Side of the Workers and the Poor?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## What Path Should the Middle Peasant Take?









Lenin: 1903/rp: 4. What Path Should the Middle Peasant Take? Should He Take the Side of the Property-Owners and the Rich or the Side of the Workers and the Poor?







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Rural Poor
An Explanation for the Peasants of What the Social-Democrats Want



    

4. What Path Should the Middle Peasant Take?  Should He Take the Side of the Property-Owners and the Rich or the Side of the Workers and the Poor?


      All property-owners, the entire bourgeoisie, try to win over the middle
      peasant by promising him all sorts of ways to improve his farm (cheap
      ploughs, agricultural banks, the introduction of grass sowing, cheap
      livestock and fertilisers, and so on) and also by inducing the peasant to
      join all sorts of agricultural societies (co-operatives, as they are
      called in books) which unite all kinds of farmers with the object of
      improving farming methods. In this way the bourgeoisie try to keep the
      middle and even the small peasant, even the semi-proletarian, from uniting
      with the workers, and try to induce them to side with the rich, with the
      bourgeoisie, in their fight against the workers, the proletariat.
    

      To this the Social-Democratic workers reply: improved farming is an
      excellent thing. There is no harm in buying cheaper ploughs; nowadays even
      a merchant, if he is not a fool, tries to sell more cheaply to attract
      customers. But when a poor or a middle peasant is told that improved
      farming and cheaper ploughs will help all of them to escape from poverty
      and to get on their feet, without touching the rich, this is
      deception. All these improvements, lower prices, and co-operatives
      (societies for the sale and purchase of goods) benefit the rich far
      more than anybody else. The rich grow stronger and oppress the poor
      and middle peasants more and more. As long as the rich remain rich, as
      long as they own most of the land, livestock, implements, and
      money—as long as all this lasts, not only the poor but even the
      middle peasants will never be able to escape from want. One or
      two middle peasants may be able to climb into the ranks of the rich with
      the aid of all these improvements and co-operatives, but the people as a
      whole, and all the middle peasants, will sink deeper and deeper into
      poverty. For all middle peasants to become rich, the rich
      themselves must be turned out, and they can be turned out only if the
      urban workers and the rural poor are united.
    

      The bourgeoisie say to the middle (and even to the small) peasant: we will sell
      you land at a low price, and ploughs

    

      at a low price, but in return you must sell yourselves to us and give up
      fighting all the rich.
    

      The Social-Democratic worker says: if you are really offered goods at a
      low price, why not buy them, if you have the money; that is sound
      business. But you should never sell yourselves. To give up the fight in
      alliance with the urban workers against the entire bourgeoisie would mean
      remaining in poverty and want for ever. If goods become cheaper, the rich
      will gain still more and become richer. But those who never have money to
      spare will gain nothing from cheaper goods until they take that money from
      the bourgeoisie.
    

      Let us take an example. Those who support the bourgeoisie make much ado
      about all sorts of co-operatives (societies for buying cheap and selling
      profitably). There are even people who call themselves
      “Socialist-Revolutionaries,” who, echoing the bourgeoisie, also talk
      loudly about the peasant needing nothing so much as co-operatives. All
      sorts of co-operatives are beginning to spring up in Russia, too, although
      there are still very few of them here, and there will not be many until we
      enjoy political liberty. Take Germany: there the peasants have many
      co-operatives of all kinds. But see who gains most from these
      co-operatives. In all Germany, 140,000 farmers belong to societies for the
      sale of milk and dairy products, and these 140,000 farmers (we again take
      round figures for the sake of simplicity) own 1400,000 cows. It is
      calculated that there are four million poor peasants in
      Germany. Of these, only 40,000 belong to co-operatives: thus, only
      one out of every hundred poor peasants enjoys the benefits of these
      co-operatives. These 40,000 poor peasants own only 100,000 cows in
      all. Further, the middle farmers, the middle peasants, number one
      million; of these, 50,000 belong to co-operatives (that is to say,
      five out of every hundred) and they own a total of 200,000 cows. Finally,
      the rich farmers (i.e., both land lords and rich peasants) number
      one-third of a million; of these, 50,000 belong to co-operatives
      (that is to say, seven teen out of every hundred!) and they own
      800,000 cows!
    

      That is whom the co-operatives help first and foremost. That is how the
      peasant is deceived by those people who talk loudly about saving the
      middle peasant by means

    

      such societies for buying cheap and selling profitably. It is, indeed, at
      a very low price that the bourgeoisie want to “buy off” the
      peasant from the Social-Democrats, who call upon both the poor and the
      middle peasant to join them.
    

      In our country, too, co-operative cheese dairies and amalgamated dairies
      are beginning to be formed. In our country, too, there are plenty of
      people who shout: artels, the mir, and co-operatives—that
      is what the peasant needs. But see who gains by these artels,
      co-operatives, and renting by the mir. Out of every hundred
      households in our country, at least twenty own no cows at all; thirty own
      only one cow each: these sell milk from dire need, their own children have
      to go without milk, starve, and die off like flies. The rich peasants,
      however, own three, four and more cows each, and these rich peasants own
      half the total number of cows owned by peasants. Who, then, gains from
      co-operative cheese dairies? Obviously, the landlords and the peasant
      bourgeoisie gain first of all. Obviously, it is to their
      advantage that the middle peasants and the poor should follow in
      their wake and that they should believe that the means of escaping from
      want is not the struggle of all the workers against the entire
      bourgeoisie, but the striving of individual small farmers to climb out of
      their present position and get into the ranks of the rich.
    

      This striving is fostered and encouraged in every way by all the champions
      of the bourgeoisie, who pretend to be the champions and friends of the
      small peasant. And many simple-minded people fail to see the wolf in
      sheep’s clothing, and repeat this bourgeois deception in the belief that
      they are helping the poor and middle peasants. For instance, they argue in
      books and in speeches that small-scale farming is the most profitable,
      most remunerative form of farming, that small-scale farming is
      flourishing, and that Is why, they say, there are so many small producers
      in agriculture everywhere, and why they cling to their land (and not
      because all the best lands are owned by the bourgeoisie, and all the
      money, too, while the poor have to live in drudgery all their lives
      crowded on tiny patches of land!). The small peasant does not need much
      money, these smooth tongued people say; the small and the middle peasants
      are more thrifty and more industrious than the big farmers, and

    

      know how to live a simpler life; instead of buying hay for their cattle,
      they are content to feed them on straw. Instead of buying an expensive
      machine, they get up earlier and toil longer and do as much as a machine
      does; instead of paying money to strangers for doing repairs, the peasant
      himself takes his hatchet on a Sunday and does a bit of
      carpentry—and that is much cheaper than the way a big farmer goes
      about it; instead of feeding an expensive horse or an ox, he uses his cow
      for ploughing. In Germany all the poor peasants use cows to haul their
      ploughs, and in our country, too, the people have become so impoverished
      that they are beginning to use not only cows, but men and women to pull
      ploughs! How profitable, how cheap all this is! How praiseworthy of the
      middle and small peasants to be so industrious, so diligent, to live such
      simple lives, and not to waste their time on nonsense, not to think of
      socialism, but only of their farms, not to strive towards the workers who
      organise strikes against the bourgeoisie, but towards the rich and try to
      join the ranks of respectable folk! If only all were so industrious and so
      diligent, and lived frugally, and did not drink, and saved more money, and
      spent less on calico, and had fewer children—all would be happy and
      there would be no poverty and no want!
    

      Such are the sweet songs the bourgeoisie sings to the middle peasant, and
      there are simpletons who believe these songs and repeat

      them![1]

      Actually, all these honeyed words are nothing but deceit and mockery of
      the peasant. What these smooth-tongued people call cheap and profitable
      farming is the want, the dire need, which forces the middle and small
      peasant to work from morning till night, to begrudge himself a crust of
      bread, to grudge every penny he spends. Of course, what can be
      “cheaper” and “more profitable” than to wear

    

      the same pair of trousers for three years, go about barefoot in summer,
      repair one’s wooden plough with a piece of rope, and feed one’s cow on
      rotten straw from the roof! Put a bourgeois or a rich peasant on such a
      “cheap” and “profitable” farm, and he will soon
      forget all this honeyed talk!
    

      The people who extol small-scale farming sometimes want to help the
      peasant, but actually they only do him harm. With their honeyed words they
      deceive the peasant in the same way as people are deceived by a
      lottery. I shall tell you what a lottery is. Let us suppose I
      have a cow, worth 50 rubles. I want to sell the cow by means of a lottery,
      so I offer everyone tickets at a ruble each. Everyone has a chance of
      getting the cow for one ruble! People are tempted and the rubles pour
      in. When I have collected a hundred rubles I proceed to draw the lottery:
      the one whose ticket is drawn gets the cow for a ruble, the others get
      nothing. Was the cow “cheap” for the people? No, it was very
      dear, because the total money they paid was double the value of the cow,
      because two persons (the one who ran the lottery and the one who won the
      cow) gained without doing any work, and gained at the expense of the
      ninety-nine who lost their money. Thus, those who say that lotteries are
      advantageous to the people are simply practising deceit on the
      people. Those who promise to deliver the peasants from poverty and want by
      means of co-operatives of every kind (societies for buying cheap and
      selling profitably), improved farming, banks, and all that sort of thing,
      are deceiving them in exactly the same way. Just as in a lottery where
      there is one winner and all the rest are losers, so it is with these
      things: one middle peasant may manage to get rich, but ninety-nine of his
      fellow peasants bend their backs all their lives, never escape from want,
      and even sink more deeply into poverty. Let every villager examine his
      commune and the whole district a little more closely: are there many
      middle peasants who become rich and forget want? And how many are there
      who can never rid themselves of want? How many are ruined and leave their
      villages? As we have seen, it has been calculated that in the whole of
      Russia there are not more than two million middle peasant farms. Suppose
      there were ten times as many societies of all kinds for buying cheap and
      selling profitably as there are

    

      now. What would the result be? It would be a big figure if a hundred
      thousand middle peasants succeeded in raising themselves to the level of
      the rich. What would that mean? It would mean that out of every hundred
      middle peasants, five would become rich. But what about the other
      ninety-five?  They would be in the same straits as ever, and many of them
      would be in even greater difficulties I And the poor would only be
      Impoverished all the more!
    

      Of course, the bourgeoisie want nothing more than that the largest
      possible number of middle and small peasants should strive to get rich,
      believe in the possibility of escaping from poverty without
      fighting the bourgeoisie, place their hopes in diligence and
      frugality and in becoming rich, and not in uniting with the rural and
      urban workers. The bourgeoisie do all they can to foster this deceptive
      faith and hope in the peasant, and try to lull him with honeyed words.
    

      To expose the deception practised by these smooth-tongued people it is
      sufficient to ask them three questions.
    

      Question one: can the working people rid themselves of want and poverty
      when, in Russia, a hundred million dessiatines out of two hundred and
      forty million dessiatines of arable land belong to private landowners?
      When sixteen thousand very big landowners possess sixty-five million
      dessiatines?
    

      Question two: can the working people rid themselves of want and poverty
      when one and a half million rich peasant households (out of a total of ten
      million) have concentrated in their hands half of all peasants’ land under
      crops, half the total number of horses and livestock owned by peasants,
      and much more than half the total peasant stocks and savings? When this
      peasant bourgeoisie is growing richer and richer, oppressing the poor and
      middle peasants, making money out of the labour of others, of the
      farm-hands and day labourers? When six and a half million households
      consist of poor peasants, destitute, always starving, and reduced to
      winning a miserable crust of bread by all kinds of wage-labour?
    

      Question three: can the working people rid themselves of want and poverty
      when money has become the ruling power, when everything can be bought for
      money—factories and land, and even men and women can be bought to
      serve as wage-workers, wage-slaves? When no one can live

    

      or run a farm without money? When the small farmer, the poor peasant, has
      to wage a struggle against the big farmer to get money? When a few
      thousand landlords, merchants, factory owners, and bankers have
      concentrated in their hands hundreds of millions of rubles, and, moreover,
      control all the banks, where thousands of millions of rubles are
      deposited?
    

      No honeyed words about the advantages of small-scale farming or of
      co-operatives will enable you to evade these questions. To these questions
      there can be only one answer: the real “co-operation” that can
      save the working people is the union of the rural poor with the
      Social-Democratic workers in the towns to fight the entire
      bourgeoisie. The faster this union grows and becomes strong, the
      sooner will the middle peasant realise that the promises of the
      bourgeoisie are all lies, and the sooner will the middle peasant come over
      to our side.
    

      The bourgeoisie know this, and that is why, in addition to honeyed words,
      they spread all sorts of lies about the Social-Democrats. They say that
      the Social-Democrats want to deprive the middle and small peasants of
      their property. That is a lie. The Social-Democrats want to
      deprive of their property only the big proprietors, only those who
      live on the labour of others. The Social-Democrats will never
      take away the property of the small and middle farmers who do not hire
      labourers. The Social-Democrats defend and champion the interests of
      all the working people, not only the interests of the urban workers, who
      are more class-conscious and more united than the others, but also of the
      agricultural workers, and of those small artisans and peasants who do not
      hire workers, do not strive towards the rich, and do not go over to the
      side of the bourgeoisie. The Social-Democrats are fighting for all
      improvements in the conditions of the workers and peasants which can
      be introduced immediately, when we have not yet destroyed the rule of the
      bourgeoisie, and which will help them in the struggle against the
      bourgeoisie. But the Social-Democrats do not deceive the peasant; they
      tell him the whole truth, plainly tell him in advance that no
      improvements will rid the people of want and poverty as long as the
      bourgeoisie is in power. To enable all the people to know what
      the Social-Democrats are and what

    

      they want, the Social-Democrats have drawn up a programme. A
      programme is a brief, clear, and precise statement of all the things a
      party is striving and fighting for. The Social-Democratic Party is
      the only party that advances a clear and precise programme for all the
      people to know and see, and for the party to consist only of people who
      really want to fight for the emancipation of all the working people from
      the yoke of the bourgeoisie, and who properly understand who must unite
      for this fight and how the fight must be conducted. Furthermore, the
      Social-Democrats believe that they must explain in their
      programme, in a direct, frank, and precise way, the causes of the
      poverty and want among the working people, and why the unity of the
      workers is becoming wider and stronger. It is not enough to say that life
      is hard and to call for revolt; every tub-thumper can do that, but it is
      of little use. The working people must clearly under stand why
      they are living in such poverty and with whom they must unite in
      order to fight to liberate themselves from want.
    

      We have already stated what the Social-Democrats want; we have explained
      the causes of the working people’s want and poverty; we have indicated
      whom the rural poor must fight and with whom they must unite for this
      fight.
    

      We shall now explain what improvements we can win at
      once by fighting for them, improvements in the lives of the workers
      and in the lives of the peasants.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]

      In Russia these simpletons who wish the peasant well, but who every now
      and then start this sort of honeyed talk, are called
      “Narodniks” or the “advocates of small-scale farming.”
      The “Socialist-Revolutionaries”, for lack of understanding,
      follow in their footsteps. In Germany also there are many smooth-tongued
      people. One of them, Eduard David, has recently written a big book, in
      which he says that small farms are infinitely more profitable than large
      ones, because the small peasant does not spend money needlessly, keeps no
      horses for ploughing, and is content to use his cow instead, from which be
      also gets milk.
    —Lenin
 

 
  

3. Riches and Poverty, Property-Owners and Workers in the Countryside

|

5. What Improvements are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain for the Whole People and for the Workers?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## What Improvements Are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain









Lenin: 1903/rp: 5. What Improvements are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain for the Whole People and for the Workers?







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Rural Poor
An Explanation for the Peasants of What the Social-Democrats Want



    

5. What Improvements are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain for the
  Whole People and for the Workers?


      The Social-Democrats are fighting for the liberation of all the working
      people from all robbery, oppression, and in justice. To become free the
      working class must first of all become united. And to become united it
      must have freedom to unite, have the right to unite, have political
      liberty. We have already said that autocratic government means
      enslavement of the people by the officials and the police. Political
      liberty is therefore needed by the whole people, except a handful of
      courtiers and a few money-bags and high

    

      dignitaries who are received at Court. But most of all, political liberty
      is needed by the workers and the peasants. The rich can escape the
      self-will and the tyranny of officials and the police by buying them
      off. The rich can make their complaints heard in the highest places. That
      is why the police and the officials take much fewer liberties with the
      rich than with the poor. The workers and the peasants have no money to buy
      off the police or the officials; they have no one to complain to and are
      not in a position to sue them in court. The workers and the peasants will
      never rid themselves of the extortions, tyranny, and insults of the police
      and the officials as long as there is no elective government, as
      long as there is no national assembly of deputies. Only such a
      national assembly of deputies can free the people from enslavement by the
      officials. Every intelligent peasant must support the Social-Democrats,
      who first and foremost demand of the tsarist government the
      convocation of a national assembly of deputies. The deputies must be
      elected by all, irrespective of social-estate, irrespective of wealth or
      poverty. The elections must be free, without any interference on the part
      of the officials; they must be carried out under the supervision of such
      that enjoy the people’s confidence, and not of police officers or the
      rural superintendents. Under such conditions, deputies representing the
      entire people will be able to discuss all the needs of the people, and
      introduce a better state of affairs in Russia.
    

      The Social-Democrats demand that the police be deprived of the power to
      imprison anyone without trial. Officials must be severely punished for
      arbitrarily arresting anyone. To put an end to their self-assumed power,
      they must be chosen by the people, and everyone must have the right to
      lodge a complaint against any official directly in a court. What is the
      use of complaining to the rural superintendent about a police officer, or
      to the governor about the rural superintendent? The rural superintendent
      will, of course, always protect the police officer and the governor will
      always protect the rural superintendent, while the complainant will get
      into trouble. He runs a fair chance of being put into prison or deported
      to Siberia. The officials will be curbed only. when everyone in Russia (as
      in all other countries) has the right to complain both to the national
      assembly and to the

    

      elected courts, and to speak freely of his needs, to write about them in
      the newspapers.
    

      The Russian people are still in feudal dependence upon the
      officials. Without permission from the officials the people cannot call
      meetings, or get books and newspapers printed. Is that not feudal
      dependence? If meetings cannot be freely called, or books freely printed,
      how can one obtain redress against the officials, or against the rich? Of
      course, the officials suppress every book, every utterance that tells the
      truth about the people’s poverty. The present pamphlet, too, has to be
      printed by the Social-Democratic Party secretly and circulated secretly:
      anyone who is found in possession of this pamphlet will make the
      acquaintance of courts and prisons. But the Social-Democratic workers are
      not afraid of this: they print more and more, and give the people more and
      more truthful books to read. And no prisons, no persecution can halt the
      fight for the people’s freedom!
    

      The Social-Democrats demand that the social-estates be abolished, and that
      all the citizens of the state enjoy exactly the same rights. Today the
      social-estates are divided into tax-paying and non-tax-paying, into
      privileged and non-privileged; we have blue blood and common blood; even
      the birch has been retained for the common people. In no other country are
      the workers and peasants in such a position of inferiority. In no country
      except Russia are there different laws for different social-estates. It is
      time the Russian people, too, demanded that every muzhik should possess
      all the rights possessed by the nobility. Is it not a disgrace
      that the birch should still be used and that a tax paying social-estate
      should be in existence more than forty years after the abolition of
      serfdom?
    

      The Social-Democrats demand that the people shall have complete freedom of
      movement and occupation. What does freedom of movement mean? It
      means that the peasant should be free to go wherever he pleases, to move
      to whatever place he wants to, to live in any village or town he chooses
      with out having to ask for permission from anyone. It means that passports
      should be abolished in Russia too (in other countries passports were
      abolished long ago), that no local police officer or rural superintendent
      should dare to hinder any

    

      peasant from settling or working wherever he pleases. The Russian peasant
      is still so much the serf of the officials that he is not free to move to
      a town, or to settle in a new district. The minister issues orders that
      the governors should not allow unauthorised settlement! A
      governor knows better than the peasant what place is good for the peasant!
      The peas ant is a little child and must not move without permission of the
      authorities! Is that not feudal dependence? Is it not an insult to the
      people when any profligate nobleman is allowed to lord it over grown-up
      farmers?
    

      There is a book called Crop Failure and the Distress of the
      People (famine), written by the present “Minister of
      Agriculture” Mr. Yermolov. This book says in so many words: the
      peasant must not change residence as long as their worships the landlords
      need hands. The minister says this quite openly, without the least
      embarrassment: he thinks the peas ant will not hear what he is saying and
      will not understand. Why allow people to go away when the landlords need
      cheap labour? The more crowded the people are on the land the more that is
      to the landlords’ advantage; the poorer the peasants are, the more cheaply
      can they be hired and the more meekly will they submit to oppression of
      every kind. Formerly, the bailiffs looked after the landlord’s interests,
      now the rural superintendents and governors do that. Formerly, the
      bailiffs ordered the flogging of peasants in the stables; now the rural
      superintendent in the volost administration office orders the flogging.
    

      The Social-Democrats demand that the standing army be abolished and that a
      militia be established in its stead, that all the people be armed. A
      standing army is an army that is divorced from the people and trained to
      shoot down the people. If the soldier were not locked up for years in
      barracks and inhumanly drilled there, would he ever agree to shoot down
      his brothers, the workers and the peasants? Would he go against the
      starving peasants? A standing army is not needed in the least to protect
      the country from attack by an enemy; a people’s militia is sufficient. If
      every citizen is armed, Russia need fear no enemy. And the people would be
      relieved of the yoke of the military clique. The upkeep of this clique
      costs hundreds of millions of rubles a year, and all this money
      is collected from the people; that is why the taxes

    

      are so heavy and why it becomes increasingly difficult to live. The
      military clique still further increases the power of the officials and
      police over the people. This clique is needed to plunder foreign peoples,
      for instance, to take the land from the Chinese. This does not ease but,
      on the contrary, increases the people’s burden because of greater
      taxation. The substitution of the armed nation for the standing army would
      enormously ease the burden of all the workers and all the peasants.
    

      Similarly, the abolition of indirect taxation, which the
      Social-Democrats demand, would be an enormous relief. Indirect taxes are
      such taxes that are not imposed directly on land or on a house but are
      paid by the people indirectly, in the form of higher prices for
      what they buy. The state imposes taxes on sugar, vodka, kerosene, matches,
      and all sorts of articles of consumption; these taxes are paid to the
      Treasury by the merchant or by the manufacturer, but, of course, he does
      not pay it out of his own pocket, but out of the money his customers pay
      him. The price of vodka, sugar, kerosene, and matches goes up, and every
      purchaser of a bottle of vodka or of a pound of sugar has to pay the tax
      in addition to the price of the goods. For instance, if, say, you pay
      fourteen kopeks for a pound of sugar, four kopeks (approximately)
      constitute the tax: the sugar-manufacturer has already paid the tax to the
      Treasury and is now exacting from every customer the sum he has
      paid. Thus, indirect taxes are taxes on articles of consumption, taxes
      which are paid by the purchaser in the form of higher prices for the
      articles he buys. It is sometimes said that indirect taxation is the
      fairest form of taxation: you pay according to the amount you buy. But
      this is not true. Indirect taxation is the most unfair form of taxation,
      because it is harder for the poor to pay indirect taxes than it is for the
      rich. The rich many s income is ten times or even a hundred times as large
      as that of the peasant or worker. But does the rich man need a hundred
      times as much sugar? Or ten times as much vodka, or matches, or kerosene?
      Of course not! A rich family will buy twice, at most, three times as much
      kerosene, vodka, or sugar as a poor family. But that means that the rich
      man will pay a smaller part of his income in taxes than the poor
      man. Let us suppose that the poor peasant’s income is two

    

      hundred rubles a year; let us suppose he buys sixty rubles’ worth of such
      goods as are taxed and which are consequently dearer (the tax on sugar,
      matches, kerosene, is an excise duty, i.e., the manufacturer pays
      the duty before placing the goods on the market; in the case of vodka, a
      state monopoly, the State simply raises the price; cotton goods, iron and
      other goods have risen in price because cheap foreign goods are not
      admitted into Russia unless a heavy duty is paid on them). Of these sixty
      rubles twenty rubles will constitute the tax. Thus, out of every
      ruble of his income the poor peas ant will pay ten kopeks in
      indirect taxes (exclusive of direct taxes, land redemption payments,
      quit-rent, land tax, Zemstvo, volost and mir taxes). The rich
      peasant has an income of one thousand rubles; he will buy one hundred and
      fifty rubles’ worth of taxed goods and pay fifty rubles in taxes
      (included in the one hundred and fifty rubles). Thus, out of every ruble
      of his income the rich peasant will pay only five kopeks in
      indirect taxes. The richer the man, the smaller Is the share of
      his income that he pays in indirect taxes. That is why indirect taxation
      is the most unfair form of taxation. Indirect taxes are taxes on
      the poor. The peas ants and workers together form nine-tenths of the
      population and pay nine-tenths or eight-tenths of the total indirect
      taxation. And, in all probability, the income of the peasants and workers
      amounts to no more than four-tenths of the whole national income! And so,
      the Social-Democrats demand the abolition of indirect taxation and the
      introduction of a progressive tax on incomes and
      inheritances. That means that the higher the income the higher the
      tax. Those who have an income of a thousand rubles must pay one kopek in
      the ruble; if the income is two thousand, two kopeks in the ruble must be
      paid, and so on. The smallest incomes (let us say incomes of under four
      hundred rubles) do not pay anything at all. The richest pay the highest
      taxes. Such a tax, an income-tax, or more exactly, a
      progressive income-tax, would be much fairer than indirect
      taxes. And that is why the Social-Democrats are striving to secure the
      abolition of indirect taxation and the introduction of a progressive
      income-tax. Of course, all the property-owners, all the bourgeoisie,
      object to this measure and resist it. Only through a firm alliance between
      the rural poor and

    

      the urban workers can this improvement be won from the
      bourgeoisie.
    

      Finally, the free education of children, which the
      Social-Democrats demand, would be a very important improvement for the
      whole of the people, and for the rural poor in particular. Today there are
      far fewer schools in the country side than in the towns, and everywhere it
      is only the rich classes, only the bourgeoisie, who are in a position to
      give their children a good education. Only free and compulsory education
      for all children can get the people, at least to some extent, out
      of their present state of ignorance. The rural poor suffer most from this
      ignorance and stand in particular need of education. But, of course, we
      need real, free education, and not the sort the officials and the priests
      want to give.
    

      The Social-Democrats further demand that everybody shall have full and
      unrestricted right to profess any religion he pleases. Of the European
      countries Russia and Turkey are the only ones which have retained shameful
      laws against persons belonging to any other faith than the Orthodox, laws
      against schismatics, sectarians, and Jews. These laws either totally ban a
      certain religion, or prohibit its propagation, or deprive those who belong
      to it of certain rights. All these laws are as unjust, as arbitrary and as
      disgraceful as can be. Everybody must be perfectly free, not only to
      profess whatever religion he pleases, but also to spread or change his
      religion. No official should have the right even to ask anyone about
      his religion: that is a matter for each person’s conscience and no one has
      any right to interfere. There should be no
      “established” religion or church. All religions and
      all churches should have equal status in law. The clergy of the various
      religions should be paid salaries by those who belong to their religions,
      but the state should not use state money to support any religion whatever,
      should not grant money to maintain any clergy, Orthodox, schismatic,
      sectarian, or any other. That is what the Social-Democrats are fighting
      for, and until these measures are carried out without any reservation and
      without any subterfuge, the people will not be freed from the disgraceful
      police persecution of religion, or from the no less disgraceful police
      hand-outs to any one of those religions.
    
    

     *     *  * 

      We have seen what improvements the Social-Democrats are out to achieve for
      all the people, and especially for the poor. Now let us see what
      improvements they strive to achieve for the workers; not only for factory
      and urban workers, but for agricultural workers too. The factory workers
      live in more cramped conditions; they work in large workshops, so it is
      easier for them to avail themselves of the assistance of educated
      Social-Democrats. For all these reasons the urban workers started the
      struggle against the employers much earlier than the others and have
      achieved more considerable improvements; they have also obtained the
      passing of factory laws. But the Social-Democrats are fighting for the
      extension of these improvements to all the workers: to
      handicraftsmen both in town and country, who work for employers at home;
      to the wage-workers employed by petty masters and artisans; to workers in
      the building trades (carpenters, bricklayers, etc.); to lumbermen and
      unskilled labourers, and also the agricultural labourers. All
      over Russia, all these workers are now beginning to unite, following the
      example of, and aided by, the factory workers, to unite for the struggle
      for better conditions of life, for a shorter working day, for higher
      wages. And the Social-Democratic Party has set itself the task of
      supporting all workers in their struggle for a better life, of
      helping them to organise (to unite) the most resolute and reliable workers
      in strong unions, of helping them by circulating pamphlets and leaflets,
      by sending experienced workers to those new to the movement, and in
      general helping all the workers in every possible way. When we have won
      political liberty, we shall have our people in a national assembly of
      deputies, worker deputies, Social-Democrats, and, like their comrades in
      other countries, they will demand laws for the benefit of the workers.
    

      We shall not enumerate here all the improvements the
      Social-Democratic Party is striving to obtain for the workers: they have
      been set out in our programme and explained in detail in the pamphlet,
      The Workers’ Cause in Russia. Here it will be sufficient to
      mention the most important of those improvements. The, working day must
      not be longer

    

      than eight hours. One day a week must always be a day of rest. Overtime
      must be absolutely banned, and so must night-work. Children up to the age
      of sixteen must he given free education and, consequently, must not be
      allowed to work for hire until that age. Women must not work in trades
      injurious to their health. The employer must compensate the workers for
      all injury caused during work, for example, for injury caused when working
      on threshing-machines, winnowing-machines, and so forth. All wage-workers
      must always be paid weekly, and not once in two months or once in
      a quarter as is often the case with agricultural labourers. It is very
      important for the workers to be paid regularly every week and, moreover,
      to be paid in cash, and not in goods. Employers are very fond of making
      the workers accept all sorts of worthless goods at exorbitant prices in
      payment of wages; to put an end to this disgraceful practice. the payment
      of wages in goods must be absolutely prohibited by law. Further, aged
      workers must receive state pensions. By their labour the workers maintain
      all the rich classes, and the whole state, and that gives them as much
      right to pensions as government officials, who get pensions. To prevent
      employers from taking advantage of their position to disregard regulations
      introduced to protect the workers, inspectors must be appointed to
      supervise, not only the factories, but also the big landlord farms and, in
      general, all enterprises where wage-labour is employed. But those
      inspectors must not be government officials, or be appoint ed by ministers
      or governors, or be in the service of the police. The inspectors must
      be elected by the workers; the state must pay salaries to persons
      who enjoy the confidence of the workers and whom they have freely
      elected. These elected deputies of the workers must also see to it that
      the workers’ dwellings are kept in proper condition, that the employers
      dare not compel the workers to live in what is like pigsties or in mud
      huts (as is often the case with agricultural labourers), that the rules
      concerning the workers’ rest are observed, and so on. It must not be
      forgotten, however, that no elected workers’ deputies will be of any use
      as long as there is no political liberty, as long as the police are
      all-powerful, and are not responsible to the people. Everyone knows that
      at present the police will arrest

    

      without trial, not only workers’ deputies but any worker who will dare
      speak in the name of all his fellow workers, expose breaches of the law,
      or call on the workers to unite. But when we have political liberty, the
      workers’ deputies will be of very great use.
    

      All employers (factory owners, landlords, contractors, and rich peasants)
      should be absolutely forbidden to make any arbitrary deductions
      from the wages of their workers, for example, deductions for defective
      goods, deductions in the form of fines, etc. It is unlawful and tyrannical
      for employers arbitrarily to make deductions from workers’
      wages. The employer must not reduce a worker’s wage by means of any
      deductions, or in any way whatsoever. The employer should not be allowed
      to pass and execute judgement (a fine sort of judge, who pockets the
      deductions from the worker’s wages!); he should appeal to a proper
      court, and this court must consist of deputies elected by the workers
      and the employers in equal numbers. Only such a court will be able to
      judge fairly all the grievances of the employers against the workers and
      of the workers against the employers.
    

      Such are the improvements the Social-Democrats are striving to obtain for
      the whole of the working class. The workers on every landed estate, on
      every farm, in the employ of every contractor, must meet and discuss with
      trustworthy persons what improvements they must strive to obtain and what
      demands they should advance (for the demands of the workers will, of
      course, be different at different factories, on different estates, and
      with different con tractors).
    

      All over Russia Social-Democratic committees are helping the
      workers to formulate their demands in a clear and precise way, and are
      helping them to issue printed leaflets where these demands are set out, so
      that they may be known to all workers, and to the employers and the
      authorities. When the workers unite as one man in support of their
      demands, the employers always have to give way and agree to them. In the
      towns the workers have already obtained many improvements in this way, and
      now handicraftsmen, artisans, and agricultural labourers are also
      beginning to unite (to organise) and fight for their demands. As long as
      we have no political liberty, we carry on the fight in

    

      secret, hiding from the police, who prohibit the publication of all
      leaflets and associations of workers. But when we have won political
      liberty, we shall carry on the fight on a wider scale and openly, so that
      working people all over Russia may unite and defend themselves more
      vigorously from oppression. The larger the number of workers who unite
      in the workers’ Social-Democratic Party, the stronger will they
      be, the sooner will they be able to achieve the complete emancipation of
      the working class from all oppression, from all wage-labour, from all toil
      for the benefit of the bourgeoisie.
    
 *     *  * 

      We have already said that the Social-Democratic Labour Party is striving
      to obtain improvements, not only for the workers, but also for all the
      peasants. Now let us see what improvements it is striving to obtain
      for all the peasants.
    
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

4. What Path Should the Middle Peasant Take? Should He Take the Side of the Property-Owners and the Rich or the Side of the Workers and the Poor?

|

6. What Improvements are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain for all the Peasants?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## What Improvements Are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain









Lenin: 1903/rp: 6. What Improvements are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain for all the Peasants?







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Rural Poor
An Explanation for the Peasants of What the Social-Democrats Want



    

6. What Improvements are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain for
      all the Peasants?


      To secure the complete emancipation of all working people, the rural poor
      must, in alliance with the urban workers, wage a fight against the whole
      of the bourgeoisie, including the rich peasants. The rich peasants will
      strive to pay their farm labourers as little as possible and make them
      work as long and as hard as possible; but the workers in town and
      countryside will try to secure better wages, better conditions, and
      regular rest periods for farm labourers working for the rich
      peasants. That means that the rural poor must form their own unions apart
      from the rich peasants. We have already said this, and we shall always
      repeat it.
    

      But in Russia, all peasants, rich and poor, are still serfs in many
      respects; they are an inferior, “black,” tax-paying
      social-estate; they are all serfs of the police officers and rural
      superintendents; very often they have to work for the

      land lord 

      in payment for the use of the cut-off lands, watering places, pastures or
      meadows, just as they worked for the feudal lord under the serf-owning
      system. All the peasants want to be free of this new serfdom;
      all of them want to have

    

      full rights; all of them hate the landlords, who still compel
      them to perform serf labour, to pay “labour rent” for
      the use of the gentry’s land and pastures, watering places and meadows, to
      work also “for damage” done by straying cattle and to send
      their womenfolk to reap the landlord’s field merely “for the honour
      of it.” All this labour rent for the landlord is a heavier burden for the
      poor peasants than for the rich peasants. The rich peasant is sometimes
      able to pay the landlord money in lieu of this work, but as a rule even
      the rich peasant is badly squeezed by the landlord. Hence, the rural poor
      must fight side by side with the rich peasants against their lack of
      rights, against every kind of serf labour, against every kind of labour
      rent. We shall be able to abolish all bondage, all
      poverty only when we defeat the bourgeoisie as a whole (including
      the rich peasants). But there are forms of bondage which we can abolish
      before that time, because even the rich peasant suffers badly
      from them. There are many localities and many districts in Russia where
      very often all the peasants are still quite like serfs. That is why all
      Russian workers and all the rural poor must fight with both hands and
      on two sides: with one hand—fight against all the
      bourgeois, in alliance with all the workers; and with the other
      hand—fight against the rural officials, against the feudal
      landlords, in alliance with all the peasants. If the rural poor do
      not form their own union separately from the rich peasants they will be
      deceived by the rich peasants, who will become landlords themselves, while
      the landless poor will not only remain poor and without land but will not
      even be granted freedom to unite. If the rural poor do not fight side by
      side with the rich peasants against feudal bondage, they will remain
      fettered and tied down to one place, neither will they gain full freedom
      to unite with the urban workers.
    

      The rural poor must first strike at the landlords and throw off at least
      the most vicious and most pernicious forms of feudal bondage; in this
      fight many of the rich peasants and adherents of the bourgeoisie will also
      take the side of the poor, because everybody is disgusted with the
      arrogance of the landlords. But as soon as we have curtailed the power of
      the landlords, the rich peasant will at once reveal his true character and
      stretch out greedy hands to grab

    

      everything; these are rapacious hands and they have already grabbed a
      great deal. Hence, we must be on our guard and form a strong,
      indestructible alliance with the urban workers. The urban workers will
      help to knock the old aristocratic habits out of the landlords and also
      tame the rich peasants a bit (as they have already somewhat tamed their
      own bosses, the factory owners). Without an alliance with the urban
      workers the rural poor will never rid them selves of all forms of
      bondage, want, and poverty; except for the urban workers, there is no
      one to help the rural poor, and they can count on no one but
      themselves. But there are improvements which we can obtain earlier, which
      we can obtain immediately, at the very outset of this great
      struggle. There are many forms of bondage in Russia which have long ceased
      to exist in other countries, and it is from this bondage imposed by the
      officials and landlords, this feudal bondage, that the Russian
      peasantry as a whole can free itself immediately.


      Let us now see what improvements the workers’ Social-Democratic Party is
      striving first of all to obtain so as to free the Russian peasantry as a
      whole from at least the most vicious forms of feudal bondage, and so as to
      untie the hands of the rural poor for their struggle against the Russian
      bourgeoisie as a whole.
    

      The first demand of the workers’ Social-Democratic Party is the immediate
      abolition of all land redemption payments, all quit-rent, and all the dues
      imposed upon the “tax-paying” peasantry. When the committees
      of nobles and the Russian tsar’s government, consisting of nobles,
      “emancipated” the peasants from serfdom, the peasants were
      compelled to buy out their own land, to buy out the land which
      they had tilled for generations! That was robbery. The committees
      of nobles, assisted by the tsarist government, simply robbed the
      peasants. The tsarist government sent troops to many places to impose the

      title-deeds[1]
      upon the peasants by force, to take military punitive measures
      against the peasants, who were unwilling to accept the curtailed
      “pauper” allotments. Without the help of the troops, without
      brutality and shootings, the committees of nobles would never have been
      able to rob the peasants in the brazen way they did at the time of the
      emancipation

    

      from serfdom. The peasants must always remember how they were cheated and
      robbed by those committees of land-owning nobles, because even today the
      tsarist government always appoints committees of nobles or officials
      whenever it is a question of passing new laws concerning the peasants. The
      tsar recently issued a manifesto (February 26, i903), in which he promises
      to revise and improve the laws concerning the peasants. Who will do the
      revising? Who will do the improving? Again the nobility, again the
      officials! The peasants will always be defrauded until they secure the
      setting up of peasant committees for the purpose of improving
      their conditions of life. It is time to put a stop to the landlords, rural
      superintendents, and all kinds of officials lording it over the peasants!
      It is time to put a stop to this feudal dependence of the peasant upon
      every police officer, upon every drink-sodden scion of the nobility who is
      called a rural superintendent, a police chief, or a governor! The peasants
      must demand freedom to manage their affairs themselves, freedom
      to consider, propose, and carry out new laws themselves. The
      peasants must demand the setting up of free, elected peasant
      committees, and until they obtain this they will always be defrauded
      and robbed by the nobility and the officials. No one will free the
      peasants from the official leeches, if they do not free themselves, if
      they do not unite and take their fate into their own hands.
    

      The Social-Democrats not only demand the complete and immediate abolition
      of land redemption payments, quit-rent, and imposts of all kinds; they
      also demand that money taken from the people in the form of land
      redemption payments should be restituted to the people. Hundreds
      of millions of rubles have been paid up by peasants all over Russia since
      they were emancipated from serfdom by the committees of nobles. The
      peasants must demand that this money be returned to them. Let the
      government impose a special tax on the big landed nobility; let the land
      be taken from the monasteries and from the Department of Demesnes (i.e.,
      from the tsar’s family); let the national assembly of deputies use this
      money for the benefit of the peasants. Nowhere in the world is the peasant
      so downtrodden or so impoverished as is in Russia. Nowhere do millions of
      peasants die so horribly of starvation as they do in Russia. The

    

      peasants in Russia have been reduced to dying of starvation because they
      were robbed long ago by the committees of nobles, and are being robbed to
      this day by being forced to pay tribute to the heirs of the feudal
      landlords every year in the form of redemption payments and quit-rent. The
      robbers must be made to answer for their crimes! Let money be taken away
      from the big landed nobility so as to provide effective relief for the
      famine-stricken. The starving peasant does not need charity, he does not
      need paltry doles; he must demand the return of the money he has paid for
      years and years to the landlords and to the state. The national assembly
      of deputies and the peasant committees will then be able to give real and
      effective assistance to the starving.
    

      Further. The Social-Democratic Labour Party demands the immediate
      abolition of collective liability and of all laws restricting the
      peasant in the free disposal of his land. The tsar’s Manifesto of
      February 26, 1903, promises the abolition of collective liability. A law
      to this effect has already been passed. But this is not enough. All
      laws that prevent the peasant from freely disposing of his land must
      be abolished immediately; otherwise, even without collective liability the
      peasant will not be quite free and will remain a semi-serf. The peasant
      must be quite free to dispose of his land: to let or sell it to
      whomsoever he pleases, without having to ask for permission from
      anyone. That is what the tsar’s ukase does not permit: the gentry, the
      merchants, and the townspeople are free to dispose of their land, but the
      peasant is not. The peasant is a little child, who must have a rural
      superintendent to look after him like a nurse. The peasant must not be
      allowed to sell his allotment, for he will squander the money! That is how
      the feudal die-hards argue, and there are simpletons who believe them and,
      wishing the peasant well, say that he must not he allowed to sell his
      land. Even the Narodniks (of whom we have already spoken) and the people
      who call themselves “Socialist-Revolutionaries” also yield to
      this argument and agree that it is better for the peasant to remain
      somewhat of a serf rather than be allowed to sell his land.
    

      The Social-Democrats say: that is sheer hypocrisy, aristocratic talk,
      merely honeyed words! When we have attained socialism, and the working
      class has defeated the

    

      bourgeoisie, the land will be owned in common and nobody will
      have the right to sell land. But what in the meantime? Are the nobleman
      and the merchant to be allowed to sell their land, while the peasant is
      not!? Are the nobleman and the merchant to be free while the peasant
      remains a semi-serf!? Is the peasant to continue to have to beg permission
      from the authorities!?
    

      All this is mere deceit, though covered up with honeyed words, but it is
      deceit for all that.
    

      As long as the nobleman and the merchant are allowed to sell land, the
      peasant must also have full right to sell his land and to dispose
      of it with complete freedom, in exactly the same way as the
      nobleman and the merchant.
    

      When the working class has defeated the entire bourgeoisie, it will take
      the land away from the big proprietors and introduce co-operative
      farming on the big estates, so that the workers will farm the land
      together, in common, and freely elect delegates to manage the farms. They
      will have all kinds of labour-saving machines, and work in shifts for not
      more than eight (or even six) hours a day. The small peasant who prefers
      to carry on his farm in the old way on individual lines will not then
      produce for the market, to sell to the first comer, but for the workers’
      co-operatives; the small peasant will supply the workers’ co-operatives
      with grain, meat, vegetables, and the workers in return will provide him
      free of charge with machines, livestock, fertilisers, clothes, and
      whatever else he needs. There will then be no struggle for money between
      the big and the small farmer; there will then be no working for hire for
      others; all workers will work for themselves, all improvements in methods
      of production and all machines will benefit the workers themselves and
      help to make their work easier, improve their standard of living.
    

      But every sensible man understands that socialism can not be attained at
      once: to attain it a fierce struggle must be waged against the entire
      bourgeoisie and all governments; all urban workers all over Russia must
      unite in a firm and unbreakable alliance with all the rural poor. That is
      a great cause, and to that cause it is worth devoting one s whole
      life. But until we have attained socialism, the big owner will always
      fight the small owner for money. Is the

    

      big landowner to be free to sell his land, while the small peasant is not?
      We repeat: the peasants are not little children and will not allow anyone
      to lord it over them; the peasants must receive, without any restriction,
      all the rights enjoyed by the nobility and the merchants.
    

      It is also said: the peasant’s land is not his own, but communal
      land. Everyone cannot be allowed to sell communal land. This, too, is a
      deception. Have not the nobles and the merchants their associations too?
      Do not the nobles and the merchants combine to float companies for the
      joint purchase of land, factories, or any other thing? Why then are no
      restrictions invented for the associations of the nobility, while the
      police scoundrels zealously think up restrictions and prohibitions for the
      peasantry? The peasants have never received anything good from the
      officials, except beatings, extortions, and bullying. The peasants will
      never receive anything good until they take their affairs into their own
      hands, until they obtain complete equality of rights and complete
      liberty. If the peasants want their land to be communal, no one will dare
      to interfere with them; and they will voluntarily form an association
      which will include whomsoever they like, and on whatever terms they like;
      they will quite freely draw up a communal contract in what ever form they
      like. And let no official dare poke his nose into the communal affairs of
      the peasants. Let no one dare exercise his wits on the peasants and invent
      restrictions and prohibitions for them.
    
 *     *  * 

      Lastly, there is another important Improvement which the Social-Democrats
      are striving to obtain for the peasants. They want immediately to impose
      limits on the peasants’ bondage to the nobility, their serf bondage. Of
      course bondage cannot be completely abolished as long as poverty exists,
      and poverty cannot be abolished as long as the land and the factories are
      in the hands of the bourgeoisie, as long as money is the principal power
      in the world, and until a socialist society has been
      established. But in the Russian countryside there is still much bondage of
      a particularly vicious sort which does not exist in other countries,
      although

    

      socialism has not yet been established there. There is still much serf
bondage in Russia which is profitable to all the landlords, weighs
heavily on all the peasants, and can and must be abolished immediately,
in the first place.
    

      Let us explain the sort of bondage we call serf bondage.
    

      Everyone who lives in the country knows cases like the following. The
      landlord’s land adjoins the peasant’s land. At the time of the
      emancipation the peasants were deprived of land that was indispensable to
      them: pasture, woodland, and watering places were cut off. The peasants
      cannot do without this cut-off land, without pastures and watering
      places. Whether they like it or not the peasants are forced to go to the
      landlord to ask him to let their cattle to go to the water, to graze on
      the paatures, and so forth. The land lord does not farm any land himself
      and, perhaps, has no money; he lives only by keeping the peasants in
      thrall. In return for the use of the cut-off lands the peasants work for
      him for nothing; they plough his land with their horses, harvest his grain
      and mow his hay, thresh his grain, and in some places even have to cart
      their manure to the landlord’s fields, or bring him homespun cloth, and
      eggs and poultry. Just as under serfdom! Under serfdom the peasants had to
      work for nothing for the landlord on whose estate they lived, and today
      they very often have to work for nothing for the landlord in return for
      the very same land which the com mittees of nobles filched from them at
      the time of the eman cipation. It is just the same as the corvbe
      system. In some gubernias the peasants themselves call this system
      barshehina, or panshchina. Well, that is what we call
      serf bond age. At the time of the emancipation from serfdom the committees
      of landowning nobles deliberately arranged matters in such a way as to
      keep the peasants in bondage in the old way. They would deliberately dock
      the peasants’ allot ments; they would drive a wedge of the landlord’s land
      in between peasants’ holdings so as to make it impossible for the peasant
      even to let his poultry out without trespass ing; they would deliberately
      transfer the peasants to inferior land, deliberately block the way to the
      watering place by a strip of landlord’s land—in short, they arranged
      matters in such a way that the peasants should find them selves in a trap,
      and, just as before, could easily be taken

    

      captive. There are still countless numbers of villages where the peasants
      are in captivity to nearby landlords, just as much as they were under
      serfdom. In villages like these, both the rich peasant and the poor
      peasant are bound hand and foot and at the mercy of the landlords. The
      poor peasant fares even worse than the rich peasant from this state of
      affairs. The rich peasant sometimes owns some land and sends his labourer
      to work for the landlord instead of going himself, but the poor peasant
      has no way out, and the land lord does what he likes to him. Under this
      bondage the poor peasant often has not even a moment’s breathing-space; he
      cannot go to look for work elsewhere because of the work he has to do for
      his landlord; he cannot even think of freely uniting in one union, in one
      party, with all the rural poor and the urban workers.
    

      Well then, are there no means by which it would be possible to abolish
      this sort of bondage at once, forthwith, immediately? The
      Social-Democratic Labour Party proposes to the peasants two means
      to this end. But we must repeat that only socialism can deliver all the
      poor from bondage of every kind, for as long as the rich have power they
      will always oppress the poor in one way or another. It is impossible to
      abolish all bondage at once, but it is possible greatly to restrict the
      most vicious, the most revolting form of

      bond age, 

      serf bondage, which weighs heavily on the poor, on the middle and even on
      the rich peasants; it is possible to obtain immediate relief for the
      peasants.
    

      There are two means to this end.
    

      First means: freely elected courts consisting of delegates of the farm
      labourers and poor peasants, as well as of the rich peasants and
      landlords.
    

      Second means: freely elected peasant committees. These peasant
      committees must have the right, not only to discuss and adopt all kinds of
      measures for abolishing the corvée, for abolishing the remnants of
      serfdom, but they must also have the right to expropriate the cut-off
      lands and restore them to the peasants.
    

      Let us consider these two means a little more closely. The freely elected
      delegate courts will consider all cases arising out of complaints of
      peasants against bondage. Such courts will have the right to reduce rents
      for land if the

    

      landlord, taking advantage of the peasants’ poverty, has fixed them too
      high. Such courts will have the right to free the peasants from exorbitant
      payments; when a landlord engages a peasant in the winter for summer work
      at an excessively low wage, the court will judge the case and fix a fair
      wage. Of course, such courts must not consist of officials, but of freely
      elected delegates, and the agricultural labourers and the rural poor must
      also without fail elect their delegates, whose number must not in any case
      be less than those elected by the rich peasants and the landlords. Such
      courts will also try disputes between labourers and employers. When such
      courts exist it will be easier for the labourers and all the rural poor to
      defend their rights, to unite and to find out exactly what people can be
      trusted to stand up faithfully for the poor and for the labourers.
    

      The other means is still more important: the establishment of free
      peasant committees consisting of elected delegates of the farm
      labourers and poor, middle and rich peas ants in every uyezd (or, if the
      peasants think fit, they may elect several committees in each uyezd;
      perhaps they will even prefer to establish peasant committees in every
      volost and in every large village). No one knows better than the peasants
      themselves what bondage oppresses them. No one will be able to expose the
      landlords, who to this day live by keeping the peasants in thrall, better
      than the peas ants themselves. The peasant committees will decide what
      cut-off lands, what meadows, pastures, and so forth, were taken from the
      peasants unfairly; they will decide whether those lands shall be
      expropriated without compensation, or whether those who bought such lands
      should be paid compensation at the expense of the high nobility. The
      peasant committees will at least release the peasants from the traps into
      which they were driven by very many committees of the land-owning
      nobles. The peasant committees will rid the peasants of interference by
      officials; they will show that the peasants themselves want to, and can,
      manage their own affairs; they will help the peasants to reach agreement
      among themselves about their needs and to recognise those who are really
      able to stand up for the rural poor and for an alliance with the urban
      workers. The peasant committees will be the first step towards
      enabling the peasants even in

    

      remote villages to get on to their feet and to take their fate into their
      own hands.
    

      That is why the Social-Democratic workers warn the peasants:
    

Place no faith in any committees of nobles, or in any commissions
consisting of officials.
    

Demand a national assembly of deputies.
    

Demand the establishment of peasant committees.
    

Demand complete freedom to publish pamphlets and news papers of every
kind.
    

      When all have the right freely and fearlessly to express their opinions
      and their wishes in the national assembly of deputies, in the peasant
      committees, and in the newspapers, it will very soon be seen who is on the
      side of the working class and who is on the side of the
      bourgeoisie. Today, the great majority of the people do not think about
      these things at all; some conceal their real views, some do not yet know
      their own minds, and some lie deliberately. But when this right has been
      won, everyone will begin to think about these things; there will be no
      reason for concealing anything, and everything will soon become clear. We
      have already said that the bourgeoisie will draw the rich peasants to its
      side. The sooner and the more completely we succeed in abolishing serf
      bondage, and the more real freedom the peasants obtain for themselves, the
      sooner will the rural poor unite among themselves, and the sooner will the
      rich peasants unite with all the bourgeoisie. Let them unite: we are not
      afraid of that, although we know perfectly well that this will strengthen
      the rich peasants. But we, too, will unite, and our union, the
      union between the rural poor and the urban workers, will embrace far more
      people. It will be a union of tens of millions against a union of hundreds
      of thousands. We also know that the bourgeoisie will try (it is already
      trying!) to attract the middle and even the small peasants to its side; it
      will try to deceive them, entice them, sow dissension among them, and
      promise to raise each of them into the ranks of the rich. We have already
      seen the means and the deceit the bourgeoisie resort to in order to lure
      the middle peasant. We must therefore open the eyes of the rural poor
      beforehand, and consolidate in advance their separate union with the urban
      workers against the entire bourgeoisie.
    
 

      Let every villager look around carefully. How often we hear the rich
      peasants talking against the nobility, against the landlords! How they
      complain of the oppression the people suffer from! Or of the landlords’
      land lying idle! How they love to talk (in private conversation) about
      what a good thing it would be if the peasants took possession of the land!
    

      Can we believe what the rich peasants say? No. They do not want the land
      for the people; they want it for them selves. They have already got hold
      of a great deal of land, bought outright or rented, and still they are not
      satisfied. Hence, the rural poor will not long have to march side by
      side with the rich peasants against the landlords. Only the first
      step will have to be taken in their company, and after that their ways
      will part.
    

That is why we must draw a clear distinction between this first step
and subsequent steps, and our final and most important step. The
first step in the countryside will be the complete emancipation of the
peasant, full rights for the peasant, and the establishment of peasant
committees for the purpose of restoring the cut-off lands. But our final
step will be the same in both town and country: we shall take all
the land and all the factories from the landlords and the bourgeoisie
and set up a socialist society. We shall have to go through a big
struggle in the period between our first step and the final, and
whoever confuses the first step with the final weakens that struggle and
unwittingly helps to hood wink the rural poor.
    

      The rural poor will take the first step together with all the peasants: a
      few kulaks may fall out, perhaps one peasant in a hundred is willing to
      put up with any kind of bondage. But the overwhelming mass of the peasants
      will, as yet, advance as one whole: all the peasants want equal
      rights. Bondage to the landlords ties everyone hand and foot. But the
      final step will never be taken by all the peasants together: then, all the
      rich peasants will turn against the farm labourers. Then, it is a strong
      union of the rural poor and the urban Social-Democratic workers
      that we need. Whoever tells the peasants that they can take the first and
      the final step simultaneously is deceiving them. He forgets about the
      great struggle that is going on among the peasants them-

    

      selves, the great struggle between the rural poor and the rich
      peasants.
    

      That is why the Social-Democrats do not promise the peasants
      immediately a land flowing with milk and honey. That is why the
      Social-Democrats first of all demand complete freedom for the struggle,
      for the great, nation-wide struggle of the entire working class against
      the entire bourgeoisie. That is why the Social-Democrats advise a
      small but sure first step.
    

      Some people think that our demand for the establishment of peasant
      committees for the purpose of restricting bondage and of restoring the
      cut-off lands is a sort of fence or barrier, as if we meant to say: stop,
      not a step farther! These people have given insufficient thought to what
      the Social-Democrats want. The demand for peasant committees to be set up
      for the purpose of restricting bondage and of restoring the cut off lands
      is not a barrier. It is a door. We must first pass through this
      door in order to go farther, to march along the wide and open
      road to the very end, to the complete emancipation of all working
      people in Russia. Until the peasants pass through this door they will
      remain in ignorance and bondage, without full rights, without complete and
      real liberty; they will not even be able to decide definitely among
      themselves who is the friend of the working man and who his enemy. That is
      why the Social-Democrats point to this door and say that the entire people
      must all together first force this door and smash it in. But there are
      people who call them selves Narodniks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, who
      also wish the peasant well, shout and make a noise, wave their arms about
      and want to help him, but they do not see that door! Those people
      are so blind that they even say: there is no need at all to give the
      peasant the right freely to dispose of his land! They wish the peasant
      well, but some times they argue exactly like the feudal die-hards! Such
      friends can be of little help. What is the use of wishing the peasant all
      the best if you don’t clearly see the very first door that must be
      smashed? What is the use of wanting socialism if you don’t see how to
      enter on the road of a free, people’s struggle for socialism, not only in
      the towns, but also in the countryside, not only against the landlords,
      but also against the rich peasants in the village commune, the
      “mir”?
    
 

      That is why the Social-Democrats point so insistently to this first and
      nearest door. The difficult thing at this stage is not to express a lot of
      good wishes, but to point to the right road, to understand clearly how
      the very first step should be taken. All friends of the peasant have
      been talking and writing for the past forty years about the Russian
      peasant being crushed by bondage and about his remaining a semi-serf. Long
      before there were any Social-Democrats in Rus sia, the friends of the
      peasant wrote many books describing how shamefully the landlords robbed
      and enslaved the peas ant by means of the various cut-off lands. All
      honest people now realise that the peasant must be given assistance at
      once, immediately, that he must get at least some relief from this
      bondage; even officials in our police government are be ginning to talk
      about this. The whole question is: how to set about it, how
      totake the first step, which door must be forced first?
    

      To this question different people (among those who wish the peasant well)
      give two different answers. Every rural proletarian must try to understand
      these two answers as clearly as possible and form a definite and firm
      opinion about them. One answer is given by the Narodniks and the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. The first thing to be done, they say, is to
      develop all sorts of societies (co-operatives) among the peasants. The
      unity of the mir must be strengthened. Every peasant should not
      be given the right to dispose of his land freely. Let the rights of the
      commune, the mir, be extended, and let all the land in Russia
      gradually become communal land. The peasants must be granted every
      assistance to purchase land, so that the land may more easily pass from
      capi tal to labour.
    

      The other answer is given by the Social-Democrats. The peasant must first
      of all obtain for himself all the rights possessed by the nobility and the
      merchants, all without exception. The peasant must have full right to
      dispose freely of his land. In order to abolish the most revolting forms
      of bondage, peasant committees must be set up for the purpose of restoring
      the cut-off lands. We need not the unity of the mir, but unity of
      the rural poor in the different village communes all over Russia, unity of
      the rural proletarians with the urban proletarians. All sorts of societies

    

      (co-operatives) and the communal purchase of land will always benefit the
      rich peasants most, and will always serve to hoodwink the middle peasants.
    

      The Russian Government realises that some relief must be given to the
      peasants, but it wants to make shift with trifles; it wants everything to
      be done by the officials. The peasants must be on the alert, because
      commissions of officials will cheat them just as they were cheated by the
      committees of nobles. The peasants must demand the election of free
      peasant committees. The important thing is not to expect improvement from
      the officials, but for the peasants to take their fate into their own
      hands. Let us at first take only one step, at first abolish only the
      vicious forms of bondage—so that the peasants should become
      conscious of their strength, so that they should freely reach a common
      agreement and unite! No honest person can deny that the cut-off lands
      often serve as the instruments of the most outrageous serf bondage. No
      honest person can deny that our demand is the primary and fairest of
      demands: let the peasants freely elect their own committees,
      without the officials, for the purpose of abolishing all serf bondage.
    

      In the free peasant committees (just as in the free all-Russian assembly
      of deputies) the Social-Democrats will at once do all in their power to
      consolidate a distinct union of the rural proletarians with the urban
      proletarians. The Social-Democrats will make a stand for all measures for
      the benefit of the rural proletarians and will help them to follow up the
      first step, as quickly as possible and as unitedly as possible, with the
      second and the third step, and so on to the very end, to the complete
      victory of the proletariat. But can we say today, at once, what
      demand will be appropriate tomorrow for the second step? No, we cannot,
      because we do not know what stand will be taken tomorrow by the rich
      peasants, and by many educated people who are concerned with all kinds of
      co-operatives and with the land passing from capital to labour.
    

      Perhaps they will not yet succeed in reaching an under standing with the
      landlords on the morrow; perhaps they will want to put an end to landlord
      rule completely. Very good! The Social-Democrats would very much like this
      to happen, and they will advise rural and urban proletarians

    

      to demand that all the land be taken from the landlords and transferred to
      the free people’s state. The Social-Democrats will vigilantly see to it
      that the rural proletarians are not cheated in the course of this, and
      that they still further consolidate their forces for the final struggle
      for the complete emancipation of the proletariat.
    

      But things may turn out quite differently. In fact, it is more likely that
      they will turn out differently. On the very day after the worst forms of
      bondage have been restricted and curtailed, the rich peasants and many
      educated people may unite with the landlords, and then the entire rural
      bourgeoisie will rise against the entire rural proletariat. In that event
      it would be ridiculous for us to fight only the landlords. We would then
      have to fight the entire bourgeoisie and demand first of all the greatest
      possible freedom and elbow-room for this fight, demand better conditions
      of life for the workers in order to facilitate this struggle.
    

      In any case, whichever way things turn out, our first, our principal and
      indispensable task is to strengthen the alliance of the rural
      proletarians and semi-proletarians with the urban proletarians. For
      this alliance we need at once, immediately, complete political liberty
      for the people, complete equality of rights for the peasants and the
      abolition of serf bondage. And when that alliance is established and
      strengthened, we shall easily expose all the deceit the bourgeoisie
      resorts to in order to attract the middle peasant; we shall easily and
      quickly take the second, the third and the last step against the entire
      bourgeoisie, against all the government forces, and we shall unswervingly
      march to victory and rapidly achieve the complete emancipation of all
      working people.
    
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The title-deeds—the name given to the deeds drawn up by the
      landlords at the time of the “emancipation” of the peasants
      under the 1861 Reform. The deeds recorded the amount of land in use by the
      peasants before the Reform, and determined the land the despoiled peasants
      kept after the “emancipation.” The deeds also enumerated the
      services the serf peasants had previously performed for the landlord, and
      served as the basis in determining the amount of land redemption payment.
    

 
  

5. What Improvements are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain for the Whole People and for the Workers?

|

7. The Class Struggle in the Countryside

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Class Struggle in the Countryside









Lenin: 1903/rp: 7. The Class Struggle in the Countryside







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Rural Poor
An Explanation for the Peasants of What the Social-Democrats Want



    

7. The Class Struggle in the Countryside



      What is the class struggle? It is a struggle of one part of the
      people against the other; a struggle waged by the masses of those who have
      no rights, are oppressed and engage in toil, against the privileged, the
      oppressors and drones; a struggle of the wage-labourers, or proletarians,
      against the property-owners, or bourgeoisie. This great struggle has
      always gone on and is now going on in the Russian countryside

    

      too, although not everyone sees it, and although not everyone understands
      its significance. In the period of serfdom the entire mass of the peasants
      fought against their oppressors, the landlord class, which was protected,
      defended, and supported by the tsarist government. The peasants were then
      unable to unite and were utterly crushed by ignorance; they had no helpers
      and brothers among the urban workers; nevertheless they fought as best
      they could. They were not deterred by the brutal persecution of the
      government, were not daunted by punitive measures and bullets, and did not
      believe the priests, who tried with all their might to prove that serfdom
      was approved by Holy Scripture and sanctioned by God (that is what
      Metropolitan Philaret actually said!); the peasants rose in rebellion, now
      in one place and now in another, and at last the government yielded,
      fearing a general uprising of all the peasants.
    

      Serfdom was abolished, but not altogether. The peasants remained without
      rights, remained an inferior, tax-paying, “black”
      social-estate, remained in the clutches of serf bondage. Unrest among the
      peasants continues; they continue to seek complete, real
      freedom. Meanwhile, after the abolition of serfdom, a new class struggle
      arose, the struggle of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie.
      Wealth increased, railways and big factories were built, the towns grew
      still more populous and more luxurious, but all this wealth was
      appropriated by a very few, while the people became poorer all the time,
      became ruined, starved, and had to leave their homes to go and hire
      themselves out for wages. The urban workers started a great, new struggle
      of all the poor against all the rich. The urban workers have united in the
      Social-Democratic Party and are waging their struggle stubbornly,
      staunchly, and solidly, advancing step by step, preparing for the great
      final struggle, and demanding political liberty for all the people.
    

      At last the peasants, too, lost patience. In the spring of last year,
      1902, the peasants of Poltava, Kharkov, and other gubernias rose against
      the landlords, broke open their barns, shared the contents among
      themselves, distributed among the starving the grain that had been sown
      and reaped by the peasants but appropriated by the landlords, and demanded
      a new division of the land. The peasants could no longer

    

      bear the endless oppression, and began to seek a better lot. The peasants
      decided—and quite rightly so—that it was better to die
      fighting the oppressors than to die of starvation without a struggle. But
      they did not win a better lot for themselves. The tsarist government
      proclaimed them common rioters and robbers (for having taken from the
      robber landlords grain which the peasants themselves had sown and
      reaped!); the tsarist government sent troops against them as against an
      enemy, and the peasants were defeated; peasants were shot down, many were
      killed; peas ants were brutally flogged, many were flogged to death; they
      were tortured worse than the Turks torture their enemies, the
      Christians. The tsar’s envoys, the governors, were the worst torturers,
      real executioners. The soldiers raped the wives and daughters of the
      peasants. And after all this, the peasants were tried by a court of
      officials, were compelled to pay the landlords 800,000 rubles, and at the
      trials, those infamous secret trials, trials in a torture chamber,
      counsels for the defence were not oven allowed to tell how the peasants
      had been ill-treated and tortured by the tsar’s envoys, Governor
      Obolensky, and the other servants of the tsar.
    

      The peasants fought in a just cause. The Russian working class will always
      honour the memory of the martyrs who were shot down and flogged to death
      by the tsar’s servants. Those martyrs fought for the freedom and happiness
      of the working people. The peasants were defeated, but they will rise
      again and again, and will not lose heart because of this first defeat. The
      class-conscious workers will do all in their power to inform the largest
      possible number of working people in town and country about the peasants’
      struggle and to help them prepare for another and more successful
      struggle. The class-conscious workers will do all in their power to help
      the peasants clearly to understand why the first peasant uprising
      (1902) was crushed and what must be done in order to secure victory
      for the peasants and workers and not for the tsar’s servants.
    

      The peasant uprising was crushed because it was an up rising of an
      ignorant and politically unconscious mass, an uprising without clear and
      definite political demands, i.e., without the demand for a change
      in the political order. The

    

      peasant uprising was crushed because no preparations had been
      made for it. The peasant uprising was crushed because the rural
      proletarians had not yet allied themselves with the urban
      proletarians. Such were the three causes of the peasants’ first
      failure. To be successful an insurrection must have a conscious political
      aim; preparations must be made for it in advance; it must spread
      throughout the whole of Russia and be in alliance with the urban
      workers. And every step in the struggle of the urban workers, every
      Social-Democratic pamphlet or newspaper, every speech made by a
      class-conscious worker to the rural proletarians will bring nearer the
      time when the insurrection will be repeated and end in victory.
    

      The peasants rose without a conscious political aim, simply because they
      could not bear their sufferings any longer, because they did not want to
      die like dumb brutes, without resistance. The peasants had suffered so
      much from every manner of robbery, oppression, and torment that they could
      not but believe, if only for a moment, the vague rumours about the tsar’s
      mercy; they could not but believe that every sensible man would regard it
      as just that grain should be distributed among starving people, among
      those who had worked all their fives for others, had sown and reaped, and
      were now dying of starvation, while the “gentry’s” barns were
      full to bursting. The peasants seemed to have forgotten that the best land
      and all the factories had been seized by the rich, by the landlords and
      the bourgeoisie, precisely for the purpose of compelling the starving
      people to work for them. The peasants forgot that not only do the priests
      preach sermons in defence of the rich class, but the entire tsarist
      government, with its host of bureaucrats and soldiers, rises in its
      defence. The tsarist government re minded the peasants of that. With
      brutal cruelty, the tsarist government showed the peasants what state
      power is, whose servant and whose protector it is. We need only remind the
      peasants of this lesson more often, and they will easily understand why it
      is necessary to change the political order, and why we need
      political liberty. Peasant uprisings will have a conscious
      political aim when that is understood by larger and larger numbers of
      people, when every peasant who can read and write and who thinks for
      himself becomes

    

      familiar with the three principal demands which must be fought
      for first of all. The first demand—the convocation of a national
      assembly of deputies for the purpose of establishing popular elective
      government in Russia in place of the autocratic government. The
      second demand—freedom for all to publish all kinds of books and
      newspapers. The third demand—recognition by law of the
      peasants’ complete equal ity of rights with the other social-estates, and
      the institution of elected peasant committees with the primary object of
      abolishing all forms of serf bondage. Such are the chief and
      fundamental demands of the Social-Democrats, and it will now be very easy
      for the peasants to understand them, to understand what to begin
      with in the struggle for the people’s freedom. When the peasants
      understand these demands, they will also understand that long, persistent
      and persevering preparations must be made in advance for the
      struggle, not in isolation, but together with the workers in the
      towns— the Social-Democrats.
    

      Let every class-conscious worker and peasant rally around himself the most
      intelligent, reliable, and fearless comrades. Let him strive to explain to
      them what the Social-Democrats want, so that every one of them may
      understand the struggle that must be waged and the demands that must be
      advanced. Let the class-conscious Social-Democrats begin gradually,
      cautiously, but unswervingly, to teach the peasants the doctrine of
      Social-Democracy, give them Social-Democratic pamphlets to read and
      explain those pamphlets at small gatherings of trustworthy people.
    

      But the doctrine of Social-Democracy must not be taught from books alone;
      every instance, every case of oppression and injustice we see around us
      must be used for this purpose. The Social-Democratic doctrine is one of
      struggle against all oppression, all robbery, all injustice. Only he who
      knows the causes of oppression and who all his life fights every case
      of oppression is a real Social-Democrat. How can this be done? When
      they gather in their town or village, class-conscious Social-Democrats
      must themselves decide how it must be done to the best advantage of the
      entire working class. To show how it must be done I shall cite one or two
      examples. Let us suppose that a Social-Democratic worker has come on a
      visit to his village, or that some urban Social-Democratic

    

      worker has come to any village. The entire village is in the clutches of
      the neighbouring landlord, like a fly in a spider’s web; it has always
      been in this state of bondage and cannot escape from it. The worker must
      at once pick out the most sensible, intelligent, and trustworthy peasants,
      those who are seeking justice and will not be frightened by the first
      police agent who comes along, and explain to them the causes of this
      hopeless bondage, tell them how the landlords cheated the peasants and
      robbed them with the aid of the committees of nobles, tell them how strong
      the rich are and how they are supported by the tsarist government, and
      also tell them about the demands of the Social-Democratic workers. When
      the peasants understand all these simple things they must all put their
      heads together and discuss whether it is possible to put up united
      resistance to the landlord, whether it is possible to put forward the
      first and principal demands (in the same way as the urban workers present
      their demands to the factory owners). If the landlord holds one big
      village, or several villages, in bondage, the best thing would be to
      obtain, through trustworthy people, a leaflet from the nearest
      Social-Democratic committee. In the leaflet the Social-Democratic
      committee will correctly describe, from the very be ginning, the bondage
      the peasants suffer from and formulate their most immediate demands
      (reduction of rent paid for land, proper rates, and not half-rates, of pay
      for winter hire, or less persecution for damage done by straying cattle or
      various other demands). From such a leaflet all peasants who can read and
      write will get to know very well what the issue is, and those who cannot
      read will have it explained to them. The peasants will then clearly see
      that the Social-Democrats support them, that the Social-Democrats condemn
      all robbery. The peasants will then begin to under stand what relief, if
      only slight, but relief for all that, can be obtained now, at once, if all
      stand together, and what big improvements for the whole country they must
      seek to obtain by a great struggle in conjunction with the
      Social-Democratic workers in the towns. The peasants will then prepare
      more and more for that great struggle; they will learn how to find
      trustworthy people and how to stand unitedly for their demands. Perhaps
      they may sometimes succeed in organising a strike, as the urban workers
      do.

    

      True, this is more difficult in the countryside than in the towns, but it
      is sometimes possible for all that; in other countries there have been
      successful strikes; for instance, in the busy seasons, when the landlords
      and rich farmers are badly in need of hands. If the rural poor are
      prepared to strike, if an agreement has long been reached about the
      general demands, if those demands have been explained in leaflets, or
      properly explained at meetings, all will stand together, and the landlord
      will have to yield, or at least put some curb on his greed. If the strike
      is unanimous and is called during the busy season, the landlord, and even
      the authorities with their troops, will find it hard to do any
      thing—time will be lost, the landlord will be threatened with ruin,
      and he will soon become more tractable. Of course, strikes are a new
      thing, and new things do not come off well at first. The urban workers,
      too, did not know. how to fight unitedly at first; they did not know what
      demands to put forward in common; they simply went out to smash machinery
      and wreck a factory. But now the workers have learned to conduct a united
      struggle. Every new job must first be learned. The workers now understand
      that immediate relief can be obtained only if they stand together; mean
      while, the people are getting used to offering united resistance and are
      preparing more and more for the great and decisive struggle. Similarly,
      the peasants will learn to stand up to the worst robbers, to be united in
      their demands for some measure of relief and to prepare gradually,
      persistently, and everywhere for the great battle for freedom. The number
      of class-conscious workers and peasants will constantly grow, and the
      unions of rural Social-Democrats will become stronger and stronger; every
      case of bondage to the land lord, of extortion by the priest, of police
      brutality and bureaucratic oppression, will increasingly serve to open the
      eyes of the people, accustom them to putting up united resistance and to
      the idea that it is necessary to change the political order by force.
    

      At the very beginning of this pamphlet we said that at the present time
      the urban workers come out into the streets and squares and publicly
      demand freedom, that they inscribe on their banners and cry out:
      “Down with the autocracy!” The day will soon come when the urban
      workers will rise not

    

      merely to march shouting through the streets, but for the great and final
      struggle; when the workers will declare as one man: “We shall win
      freedom, or die in the fight!”; when the places of the hundreds who have
      been killed, fallen in the fight will be taken by thousands of fresh and
      still more resolute fighters. And the peasants, too, will then rise all
      over Russia and go to the aid of the urban workers, will fight to the end
      for the freedom of the workers and peasants. The tsar’s hordes will be
      unable to withstand that onslaught. Victory will go to the working people,
      and the working class will march along the wide, spacious road to the
      liberation of all working people from any kind of oppression. The working
      class will use its freedom to fight for socialism!
    

 
Notes
 
 

 
  

6. What Improvements are the Social-Democrats Striving to Obtain for all the Peasants?

|

The Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Proposed by the Newspaper Iskra in Conjunction with the Magazine Zarya

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Proposed by the Newspaper Iskra in Conjunction with the Magazine Zarya









Lenin: 1903/rp: The Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Proposed by the Newspaper Iskra in Conjunction with the Magazine Zarya







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Rural Poor
An Explanation for the Peasants of What the Social-Democrats Want



    

The Programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
      Proposed by the Newspaper Iskra in Conjunction with the
      Magazine Zarya


      We have already explained what a programme is, why one is needed, and why
      the Social-Democratic Party is the only party that comes out with a clear
      and definite programme. A programme can be finally adopted only by the
      congress of our Party, i.e., the assembly of representatives of all Party
      workers. Preparations for such a congress are now being made by the
      Organising Committee. But very many commit tees of our Party have already
      openly declared their agreement with Iskra, and their recognition
      of Iskra as the leading newspaper. Therefore, prior to the
      congress our draft (proposed) programme can fully serve as a precise
      indication of what the Social-Democrats want, and we consider it necessary
      to give that draft in full as an appendix to our pamphlet.
    

      Of course, without an explanation not every worker will understand
      everything that is said in the programme. Many great socialists worked to
      create the doctrine of Social-Democracy, which was completed by Marx and
      Engels; the workers of all countries went through a great deal to acquire
      the experience that we want to utilise and make the basis of

    

      our programme. Therefore the workers must learn the teachings of
      Social-Democracy in order to understand every word of the programme,
      their programme, their banner of the struggle. And the
      workers are learning and understanding the Social-Democratic programme
      with particular ease because that programme speaks of what every thinking
      worker has seen and experienced. Let nobody be deterred by the
      “difficulty” of understanding the programme all at once: the
      more every worker reads and thinks, the more experience he acquires in the
      struggle, the more fully will he understand it. But let everybody think
      over and discuss the whole programme of the Social-Democrats; let
      everybody constantly keep in mind all that the Social-Democrats want,
      and what they think about the emancipation of all working people. The
      Social-Democrats want everybody to know clearly and precisely the truth,
      the whole truth, about what the Social-Democratic Party is.
    

      We cannot here explain the whole programme in detail. A separate pamphlet
      would be needed for that. We shall merely indicate briefly what the
      programme says, and advise the reader to get hold of two pamphlets to use
      as aids. One pamphlet is by the German Social-Democrat Karl Kautsky, and
      its title is The Erfurt Programme. It has been translated into
      Russian. The other pamphlet is by the Russian Social-Democrat L. Martov,
      and its title is The Workers’ Cause in Russia. These pamphlets
      will help the reader to understand the whole of our programme.
    

      Let us now indicate each part of our programme by a separate letter (see
      the programme below) and show what is spoken about in each part.
    

      A) At the very beginning it says that the proletariat all over the world
      is fighting for its emancipation, and the Russian proletariat is only a
      detachment in the world army of the working class of all countries.
    

      B) It then goes on to explain the bourgeois order of things in nearly all
      countries in the world, including Russia: how the majority of the
      population, working for the Landowners and capitalists, live in poverty
      and want; how the small artisans and peasants are being ruined while the
      big factories grow bigger; how capital crushes the worker and also his
      wife and children; how the conditions of the working

    

      class are growing worse and worse and unemployment and want are
      increasing.
    

      C) It then speaks of the union of the workers, of their struggle, of the
      great aim of that struggle: to liberate all the oppressed and completely
      abolish all oppression of the poor by the rich. This part also explains
      why the working class is growing stronger and stronger, and why it will
      certainly defeat all its enemies, all those who defend the bourgeoisie.
    

      D) Then it explains why Social-Democratic parties have been formed in all
      countries, how they help the working class to wage its struggle, unite and
      guide the workers, enlighten them and prepare them for the great struggle.
    

      E) Further, it explains why the conditions of the people in Russia are
      even worse than in other countries, what a great evil the tsarist
      autocracy is, and why we must first of all overthrow that autocracy and
      establish popular, elective government in Russia.
    

      F) What improvements must elective government bring the whole people? We
      explain that in our pamphlet, and it is also explained in the programme.
    

      G) Then the programme indicates what improvements for the whole of the
      working class we must strive to immediately achieve in order to make life
      easier for it and enable it to fight more freely for socialism.
    

      H) Special reference is made in the programme to those improvements which
      we must first of all strive to achieve for all the peasants so as to
      enable the rural poor to wage the class struggle more easily and freely
      against both the rural bourgeoisie and the entire Russian bourgeoisie.
    

      I) Lastly, the Social-Democratic Party warns the people not to believe any
      police or bureaucratic promises or honeyed words, but to fight firmly for
      the immediate convocation of a free national assembly of deputies.
    

 
Notes
 
 

 
  

7. The Class Struggle in the Countryside

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Les Beaux Esprits Se Rencontrent









Lenin: Les Beaux Esprits Se Rencontrent







V. I.  

      Lenin
Les Beaux Esprits Se Rencontrent
(Which May Be Interpreted Roughly as: Birds of a Feather Flock Together)




Published:
Iskra, No. 38, April 15, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 433-437.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      In June 1902 the much-vaunted minimum agrarian programme of our
      Socialist-Revolutionaries (co-operatives and socialisation) enriched
      Russian socialist thought and the Russian revolutionary movement. The
      German book, Socialism and Agriculture, by Eduard David, the
      well-known opportunist (and Bernsteinite), appeared in February
      1903. There can evidently be no question of the consequent product of
      opportunist thought including the original of the earlier
      “Socialist-Revolutionary” mental gymnastics. If that is so,
      how is one to explain the amazing, the striking similarity and even the
      identity of principles in the programme of the Russian
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and that of the German opportunists? Is it not
      perhaps a case of Revolutsionnaya Rossiya being the
      “original,” while David’s “fundamental” (according to a
      review in Russkiye Vedomosti) work is the copy? Two basic ideas,
      and, correspondingly, two main points in the programme, run through the
      pattern of David’s “work.” He glorifies agricultural co-operatives,
      expecting all possible blessings from them, demanding that the
      Social-Democrats help develop them, and (just like our
      Socialist-Revolutionaries) failing to see the bourgeois nature of these
      alliances between petty proprietors and agrarian capitalists, big and
      small. David demands the conversion of large farms into small ones, and
      waxes enthusiastic over the profitableness and efficiency, the thrifty
      management and productivity of the farms “des
      Arbeitsbauern”—literally, “of the working
      peasant”—emphasising the society’s supreme right to landed property

    

      and the right of these same small “working peasants” to the
      use of the land. Without any doubt, this German opportunist has
      plagiarised from the Russian “Socialist-Revolutionaries”! Of course
      neither the German petty-bourgeois opportunist nor the Russian
      petty-bourgeois, the “Socialist-Revolutionaries,” see anything at
      all of the petty-bourgeois nature of the “working peasant” in
      present-day society, his intermediate, transitional position between the
      bourgeoisie and the proletariat, his ambition to “make his way in
      the world” (i.e., become a full-fledged bourgeois) through
      frugality, diligence, semi-starvation, and excessive labour, and his
      striving to exploit the labour of rural “workers.”
    

      Yes, indeed, les beaux esprits se rencontrent, and herein lies
      the key to a puzzle which at first glance seems so difficult: to determine
      which is the copy and which the original. Ideas expressing the needs,
      interests, strivings, and aspirations of a certain class are in the very
      air, and their identity cannot be concealed by any differences of garb, by
      any variations of opportunist or “Socialist-Revolutionary”
      phraseology. Murder will out.
    

      In all the countries of Europe, Russia included, the petty bourgeoisie is
      steadily being “thrust to the wall” and falling into decline,
      a process which does not always express itself in the outright and direct
      elimination of the petty bourgeoisie, but in most cases leads to a
      reduction of its role in economic life, to deterioration of its living
      conditions, and greater insecurity. Everything militates against it:
      technical progress in big industrial and agricultural enterprises, the
      development of the big shops, the growth of manufacturers’ associations,
      cartels and trusts, and even the growth of consumers’ societies and
      municipal enterprises. And, while the petty bourgeoisie is being
      “thrust to the wall” in the sphere of agriculture and
      industry, a “new middle social-estate,” as the Germans say, is
      emerging and developing, a new stratum of the petty bourgeoisie, the
      intelligentsia, who are also finding life in capitalist society harder and
      harder and for the most part regard this society from the viewpoint of the
      small producer. It is quite natural that this must inevitably lead to
      widespread dissemination and constant revival of petty-bourgeois ideas and
      doctrines in the most varied forms. It is quite natural that the Russian
      “Socialist-

    

      Revolutionaries,” who are wholly in thrall to the ideas of petty-bourgeois
      Narodism, inevitably turn out to be “birds of a feather” with
      the European reformists and opportunists, who, when they would be
      consistent, inevitably arrive at Proudhonism. And this was the very term
      that Kautsky quite justly used to describe David’s programme and stand
      point.
    

      We have said, “when they would be consistent,” and this brings us to
      an essential feature—one that distinguishes the present-day
      Socialist-Revolutionaries from both the old Russian Narodniks and at least
      some of the European opportunists—which can only be called
      adventurism. Adventurism is not concerned with consistency, but endeavours
      to grasp at the fleeting opportunity and make use of the battle of ideas
      in order to justify and preserve its ideological poverty. The old Russian
      Narodniks wanted to be consistent and they upheld, preached, and professed
      their own, distinct programme. David wants to be consistent and rises up
      resolutely against the whole “Marxist agrarian theory,” emphatically
      preaches and professes the conversion of large farms into small farms,
      and, at least, has the courage of his convictions, and is not afraid to
      come out openly as the champion of small-scale farming. Our
      Socialist-Revolutionaries are, to put it as mildly as possible, far more
      “prudent.” They never rise up resolutely against Marx—God
      forbid! On the contrary, they come forward with quotations plucked at
      random from Marx and Engels, assuring us with tears in their eyes that
      they agree with the latter almost in every thing. They do not
      come out against Liebknecht and Kautsky—on the contrary, they are
      profoundly and sincerely convinced that Liebknecht was a
      Socialist-Revolutionary—in very truth, a
      Socialist-Revolutionary. They do not come forward as the champions of
      small-scale farming on principle—on the contrary, they are heart and
      soul for the “socialisation of the land,” and it is only by accident
      that they sometimes blurt out that this all-embracing Russo-Dutch
      socialisation can mean anything and everything: either the transference of
      the land to society, to be used by the working people (exactly as David
      puts it!), or simply the transference of the land to the peasants, or,
      finally, quite “simply” the addition of plots of land
      gratis....
    
 

      Our Socialist-Revolutionaries’ “prudent” methods are so well
      known to us that we shall take the liberty, in conclusion, of giving them
      a piece of good advice.
    

      You have obviously landed in a rather awkward situation, gentlemen. All
      along you have been assuring us that you have nothing in common either
      with the opportunism and reformism in the West, or with the
      petty-bourgeois sympathies for the “profitable” small-scale
      farming—and suddenly a book by an avowed opportunist and champion of
      small-scale farming appears, in which your
      “Socialist-Revolutionary” programme is “copied”
      with touching scrupulosity! An awkward situation indeed. But don’t let it
      distress you: there is an easy way out. All you have to do is ... to quote
      Kautsky.
    

      Nor should the reader think that this is a slip on our part. Nothing of
      the sort. Kautsky comes out against the Proudhonist David—for
      this very reason the Socialist-Revolutionaries, who are in agreement
      with David, have to quote Kautsky just as they once quoted Engels. Take
      No. 14 of Revolutsionnaya Rossiya and there you will read on page
      seven that the Social-Democrats’ “change of tactics” with
      regard to the peasantry “was legitimised” (H) by one of the
      fathers of scientific socialism, by Engels—Engels, who took up arms
      against the French comrades that had changed their tactics! How can one
      prove this pettifogging statement? Quite simply. First, one must
      “quote” Engels’ words that he is absolutely on the side of the
      small peasant (and say nothing about the fact that this very thought is
      expressed in the programme of the Russian Social-Democrats, which calls on
      all the working people to come over to the side of the
      proletariat!). Secondly, one must say with regard to the
      “concessions to Bernsteinism” made by the French comrades who
      changed their tactics: “See Engels’ superb criticism of these
      concessions.” It is this selfsame tried method that we advise the
      Socialist-Revolutionary gentlemen to use now too. David’s book has
      legitimised the change in tactics on the agrarian question. One cannot but
      admit now that, with a programme of “co-operatives and
      socialisation,” it is possible to remain in the ranks of the
      Social-Democratic Party; only dogmatists and the orthodox can fail to see
      this. But, on the other hand, it must be admitted

    

      that David, unlike the noble Socialist-Revolutionaries, makes some
      concessions to Bernsteinism. “See Kautsky’s superb criticism of
      these concessions.”


      Indeed, gentlemen, try it. Perhaps something will come of it once more.
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Reply to Criticism of Our Draft Programme









Lenin: Reply to Criticism of Our Draft Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Reply to Criticism of Our Draft Programme




Written: Written in June 1903 

Published:

      First printed in July 1903 in a pamphlet published by the League of Russian Social-Democracy Abroad.

      Published according to the text in the pamphlet.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 438-453.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      Comrade X[9]

      rejects the third and fourth points of the agrarian section of our draft
      and submits his own draft, in which all the points of the agrarian
      programme, as well as the preamble to it, are revised. We shall first
      examine Comrade X’s objections to our draft, and then his own draft.
    

      Against the third point, Comrade X advances the objection that the
      confiscation of the monasterial (and we would willingly add: church)
      estates and the royal demesnes as proposed by us would mean that the
      capitalists would grab the lands for next to nothing. It would be
      precisely those who plunder the peasants, he says, who would buy up these
      lands on the money they had plundered. To this we must remark that, in
      speaking about the sale of the confiscated estates, Comrade X draws an
      arbitrary conclusion that our programme does not contain. Confiscation
      means alienation of property without compensation. It is only of such
      alienation that our draft speaks. Our draft programme says nothing as to
      whether these lands are to be sold, and if so to whom and how, in what
      manner and on what terms. We are not binding ourselves, but reserve
      judgement as to the most expedient form in which to dispose of the
      confiscated properties when they are confiscated, when all the social and
      political conditions of such confiscation are clear. In this respect
      Comrade X’s draft differs from our draft in demanding, not only
      confiscation, but the transference of the confiscated lands “to the
      democratic state for their most advantageous utilisation by the
      population.” Thus, Comrade X excludes one of the forms of the disposal of
      what has been confiscated (sale) and does not suggest any definite form
      (since it remains unclear just what constitutes or

    

      will constitute or should constitute the “most advantageous”
      utilisation, and just what classes of the “population” will
      receive the right to this utilisation and on what terms). Hence, Comrade X
      fails in any case to bring complete definiteness into the question of how
      the confiscated lands should be disposed of (nor can this be determined in
      advance), while he wrongly excludes their sale as one of the methods. It
      would be wrong to say that, under all circumstances and at all times, the
      Social-Democrats will be opposed to the sale of the land. In a
      police-controlled class state, even if it is a constitutional state, the
      class of property-owners may not infrequently be a far stauncher pillar of
      democracy than the class of tenant farmers dependent on that state. That
      is on the one hand. On the other hand, our draft makes for greater
      provision than Comrade X’s draft does against confiscated lands being
      turned into “gift& to the capitalists” (insofar as any
      provision against this can be spoken of in general in the wording of a
      programme). And indeed, let us imagine the worst: let us imagine that,
      despite all its efforts, the workers’ party will be unable to curb the
      capitalists’ wilfulness and

      greed.[1]

      In that, case, Comrade X’s formulation affords free scope for the
      “most advantageous” utilisation of the confiscated lands, by
      the capitalist class of the “population.” On the contrary, our
      formulation, while it does not link up the basic demand with the form of
      its realisation, nevertheless envisages a strictly definite application of
      sums received from such realisation. When Comrade X says that “the
      Social-Democratic Party cannot undertake in advance to decide in what
      concrete form the popular representative body will utilise the land which
      it will have at its command,” he is confusing two different things: the
      method of realising (in other words: “the form of
      utilising”) this land and the application of the sums received
      from this realisation. By leaving the question of the application of these
      sums absolutely indefinite and tying his hands, even in part, in the
      question of the method of realisation, Comrade X introduces a double
      impairment into our draft.
    

      In our opinion, Comrade X is just as wrong when he presents the following
      objection to us: “It is likewise impossible

    

       to recover land redemption payments from the nobles, since many of them
      have squandered them all.” As a matter of fact, this is no objection at
      all, since we do not even propose that these sums should simply be
      “recovered,” but propose a special tax. In his article Comrade X
      himself cites facts showing that the big landowners “cut off”
      a particularly large share of the peasants’ land for themselves, in some
      cases seizing as much as three-quarters of the land. Hence the
      demand for a special tax on the big landed nobility in particular is quite
      natural. It is likewise quite natural to designate funds thus obtained for
      the special use we demand, for in addition to the general task of
      returning to the people all revenues received by the state (a task which
      can be fully accomplished only under socialism), liberated Russia will
      Inescapably be faced with the special and most pressing task of raising
      the peasants’ standard of living, rendering serious aid to the
      poverty-stricken and hungry masses, whose ranks are swelling so extremely
      rapidly under our autocratic system.
    

      Let us pass to the fourth point, which Comrade X rejects in full, although
      he analyses only the first part of this point—about the cut-off
      lands—without any mention of the second part, envisaging eradication
      of the remnants of serfdom, which vary in different parts of the
      country. We shall begin with a formal remark by the author: he sees a
      contradiction in the fact that we demand abolition of the social-estates
      and the establishment of peasant, i.e., social-estate, committees. In
      fact, the contradiction is only a seeming one: the abolition of the
      social-estates requires a “dictatorship” of the lowest,
      oppressed social-estate, just as the abolition of classes in general,
      including the class of proletarians, requires the dictatorship of the
      proletariat. The object of our entire agrarian programme is the
      eradication of feudal and social-estate traditions in the sphere of
      agrarian relations, and to bring that about the only possible appeal can
      be to the lowest social-estate, to those who are oppressed by these
      remnants of the serf-owning system.
    

      The-author’s principal objection boils down.to the following: “it is
      hardly provable” that the cut-off lands are the principal basis of
      the labour-rent system, since the size of

    

      these cut-off lands depended on whether the serf peasants were quit-rent
      peasants, and hence had much land, or corvée peasants, and hence
      had little land. “The size of the cut off lands and their importance
      depend on a combination of historical conditions”; for instance, the
      percentage of cut off lands is negligible on the small estates in Volsk
      Uyezd, while on the large estates it is enormous. This is how the author
      reasons, without noticing that he is getting away from the point. The
      cut-off lands were indubitably distributed most unevenly, depending on a
      combination of the most varied conditions (including a condition such as
      the existence of the corvée system or quit-rent under the
      serf-owning system). But what does that prove? Is not the labour-rent
      system also most unevenly distributed? Is not the existence of this system
      also determined by a combination of the most varied historical conditions?
      The author undertakes to disprove the connection between the
      cut-off lands and the labour-rent system, but talks only about the reasons
      for the cut-off lands and the differences in their size, without refer
      ring by as much as a single word to this connection. Only once does the
      author make an assertion which approaches immediately the substance of his
      thesis, and yet it is in this very assertion that he is absolutely
      wrong. “Consequently,” he says, summing up his arguments about
      the influence of quit-rent or the corvée system, “where the
      peasants were corvée peasants (mainly in the central
      agricultural area), these cut-off lands will be negligible, whereas
      in those places where they were quit-rent peasants, all of the landlords’
      land may consist of ’cut-off lands.’" The words italicised by us contain a
      blunder which destroys the author’s whole line of argument. It is
      precisely in the central agricultural area, this main centre of the
      labour-rent system and all sorts of remnants of serfdom, that the cut-off
      lands are not “negligible” but enormous, much greater than in
      the non-black-earth zone, where quit-rent predominates over
      corvée. Here are data on this question, received from a comrade who
      is a professional statistician. He has compared data given in the
      Military-Statistical Abstract on the holdings of landlords’
      peasants prior to the Reform with the figures showing land holdings in
      1878, thus determining the size of the cut-off lands in each gubernia. It
      appeared that in nine gubernias

    

      of the non-black-earth

      zone[2]

      the landlords’ peasants held 1 0,421,000 dessiatines prior to the Reform,
      whereas only 9,746,000 dessiatines were left to them in 1878, i.e.,
      675,000 dessiatines, or 6.5 per cent of the land, were cut off, the
      average per gubernia being 72,800 dessiatines. On the other hand, in
      fourteen black-earth

      gubernias[3]

      the peasants held 12,795,000 dessiatines and were left with 9,996,000
      dessiatines, i.e., 2,799,000 dessiatines, or 21.9 per cent, were cut off,
      an average of 199,100 dessiatines per gubernia. The only exception was the
      third area, in the steppes, where in five

      gubernias[4]

      the peasants held 2,203,000 dessiatines and they were left with 1,580,000,
      i.e., 623,000, or 28.3 per cent, were cut off, the average per gubernia
      being 124,600

      dessiatines.[5]

      This area is an exception, since here the capitalist system predominates
      over the labour-rent system, while the percentage of cut-off lands is the
      highest here. But this exception only goes to prove the general rule, for
      here the influence of the cut-off lands has been paralysed by such
      important circumstances as the peasants possessing the largest allotments,
      despite the cut-off lands, and the greatest amount of free land available
      here for renting. Thus, the author’s attempt to cast doubt on the
      existence of a connection between the cut-off lands and the labour-rent
      system is quite unsuccessful. On the whole, there is no doubt
      that the centre of the labour-rent system in Russia (the central
      black-earth

    

      area) Is at the same time the centre of the cut-off lands. We emphasise
      “on the whole” in reply to the following question put by the
      author. Against the words in our programme about restitution of land which
      has been cut off and is now used as a means of bondage, the author has put
      in brackets the following question: “but what about that which is
      not used as such?” Our reply to him is that the programme is not a
      legislative bill on the restitution of the cut-off lands. We define and
      explain the general significance of the cut-off lands, but do not speak of
      individual cases. Is it really still possible, after all the Narodnik
      literature on the position of the post-Reform peasantry, to have any
      doubts about the fact that on the whole the cut-off lands serve as a means
      of serf bondage? Is it really possible, we ask further, to deny the
      connection between the cut-off lands and the labour-rent system, when this
      connection follows from the most elementary concepts on the post-Reform
      economy of Russia? The labour-rent system is a combination of the
      corvée system and capitalism, of the “old regime” and
      “modern” economy, of the system of exploitation through land
      allotment and the system of exploitation through separation from the
      land. What could be a more glaring example of present-day corvée
      than a system of farming based on labour rendered in return for the use of
      cut-off lands (a system described as such, as a special system,
      and not something incidental, in Narodnik literature in the good old days,
      when nobody had even heard of the hackneyed and narrow-minded Marxists)?
      Is it really possible to believe that today the peasant is tied down to
      the land only because there is no law granting freedom of
      movement, and not because of the existence, in addition to that (and
      partly at the root 01 that), of bondage service for the use of the
      cut-off lands?
    

      After failing to prove in any way that there is any basis for his doubting
      the existence of a connection between the cut-off lands and bondage, the
      author continues his argument as follows: restitution of the cut-off lands
      is the allotting of small plots of land based not so much on the
      requirements of peasant farming as on historical “tradition.” Like
      any allotment of an insufficient quantity of land (there can be no
      question of an adequate allotment), it will not destroy bond age hut will
      rather create it, since it will cause renting of

    

      land that is lacking, renting because of need, subsistence tenancy, and
      will consequently be a reactionary measure.
    

      Here too the argument misses the mark, for the agrarian section of our
      programme does not at all “promise” to do away with all want
      in general (this promise is given only in the general socialist section of
      the programme), but promises only to eradicate (at least in part) the
      remnants of the serf-owning system. Our programme refers, not to allotment
      of all sorts of small plots of land in general, but specifically to doing
      away with at least one of the already existing forms of bondage. The
      author has departed from the trend of thought underlying our programme,
      and arbitrarily and incorrectly attributed another meaning to it. Indeed,
      just examine his line of reasoning. He rejects (and in this respect, he is
      of course right) the interpretation of cut-off lands as implying just
      strips of land belonging to different owners, and says: “If the
      cut-off lands are to constitute additional allotment land, it is necessary
      to see whether there are enough cut-off lands to remove relationships
      entailing bond age, since from this standpoint bondage relationships are a
      result of land-hunger.” Absolutely nowhere in our programme is the
      assertion made that there are enough cut-off lands to do away with
      bondage. Only the socialist revolution can do away with all bondage,
      whereas in the agrarian programme we take our stand on the ground of
      bourgeois relationships and demand certain measures “with a view to
      eradicating” (we do not even say that this can be complete
      eradication) the remnants of the serf-owning system. The whole essence of
      our agrarian programme is that the rural proletariat must fight together
      with the rich peasantry for the abolition of the remnants of serfdom, for
      the cut-off lands. Anyone who examines this proposition closely will grasp
      the incorrectness, the irrelevance and illogicality of an
      objection such as: why only the cut-off lands, if that is not
      enough? Because together with the rich peasantry the proletariat
      will be unable to go, and must not go, beyond the
      abolition of serfdom, beyond restitution of the cut-off lands,
      etc. Beyond that, the proletariat in general and the rural
      proletariat in particular will march alone; not together with the
      “peasantry,” not together with the rich peasant, but against
      him. The reason we do not go beyond the demand for the cut-off

    

      lands is not because we do not wish the peasant well or because we are
      afraid of scaring the bourgeoisie, but be cause we do not want the rural
      proletarian to help the rich peasant more than is necessary, more
      than is essential to the proletariat. Both the proletarian and the rich
      peasant suffer from serf bondage; against this bondage they can
      and should go together; but against the other forms of bondage,
      the proletariat will go alone. Hence the distinction made in our programme
      between serf bondage and all other bondage necessarily follows from the
      strict observance of the class interests of the proletariat. We
      would be running counter to these interests and would be abandoning the
      class standpoint of the proletariat, if we allowed our programme to state
      that the “peasantry” (i.e., the rich plus the poor) will go
      together beyond eradication of the remnants of serfdom; we would thereby
      be putting a brake on this absolutely essential, and, from the
      standpoint of the Social-Democrat, the most important, process of the
      final separation of the rural proletariat from the land-holding
      peasantry, the process of the development of proletarian
      class-consciousness in the countryside. When the Narodniks, people of the
      old faith, and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, people without faith or
      convictions of any kind, shrug their shoulders at our agrarian programme,
      that is because they (for instance, Mr. Rudin and Co.) have no idea of the
      real economic system in our countryside and its evolution, have no idea of
      the bourgeois relations which have been developing and have almost taken
      shape within the village commune, or of the strength of the bourgeois
      peasantry. They approach our agrarian programme with the old Narodnik
      prejudices, or more frequently with fragments of these prejudices, and
      begin to criticise individual points or their wording, without even
      comprehending the aim of our agrarian programme or the social and economic
      relations it has in view. When they are told that our agrarian programme
      does not refer to the struggle against the bourgeois system, but to the
      evolution of bourgeois relations in the countryside, they merely rub their
      eyes in amazement, unaware (because of their characteristic indifference
      to theory) that their perplexity is simply an echo of the struggle between
      the Narodnik and the Marxist world outlook.
    

    

      To the Marxist who undertakes to draft an agrarian programme, the question
      of the remnants of serfdom in the bourgeois and capitalistically
      developing Russian country side is one that has already been settled, and
      it is only owing to their utter lack of principle that the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries are unable to see that if they want to offer any
      material criticism they must contrapose to our solution of this
      question something that is at least coherent and integral. To the Marxist
      the problem is simply to avoid either of two extremes: on the one hand,
      not to fall into the error of those who say that, from the standpoint of
      the proletariat, we are in no way concerned with any immediate and
      temporary non-proletarian tasks, and on the other, not to allow the
      proletariat’s co-operation in the attainment of the immediate, democratic
      tasks to dim its class-consciousness and its class distinctiveness. In the
      sphere of agrarian relationships proper, this task reduces itself to the
      following: the bringing forward of a slogan of such an agrarian reform on
      the basis of the existing society as would most completely sweep away the
      remnants of serfdom and most rapidly single out the rural proletariat from
      the undifferentiated mass of the peasantry as a whole.
    

      We believe that our programme has coped with this task. Moreover, we are
      not at all put out by Comrade X’s question: what should we do if the
      peasant committees demand not the cut-off lands but all the land? We
      ourselves demand all the land, only, of course, not “with a view to
      eradicating the remnants of the serf-owning system” (to which end
      the agrarian section of our programme limits itself), but with a
      view to the socialist revolution. And it is precisely this goal that we
      are always and under all circumstances tirelessly pointing out to the
      “rural poor.”  There is no grosser error than to think that the
      Social-Democrat can go to the villages only with the agrarian section of
      his programme, that he can even for a moment furl his socialist banner. If
      the demand for all the land is a demand for the nationalisation of the
      land or its transference to the land-holding peasants of today, we shall
      appraise this demand from the standpoint of the proletariat’s interests,
      taking all factors into consideration: we cannot, for instance, say in
      advance whether, when the revolution awakens them to political life, our
      land-holding

    

      peasants will come out as a democratic revolutionary party or as a party
      of Order. We must draft our programme so as to be prepared even for the
      worst, and If the best combinations ensue, then that will only facilitate
      our work and give it a new stimulus.
    

      It remains for us to deal with the following argument by Comrade X on the
      question under discussion. “To this,” he writes concerning his
      thesis that the allotment of the cut-off lands will strengthen subsistence
      farming tenancy, “to this, exception might be taken on the ground
      that the allotment of the cut-off lands is important as a means of
      abolishing bondage forms of renting these lands, and not as a
      means of increasing and strengthening small subsistence farming. However,
      it is easy to see that there is a logical contradiction in this
      objection. The allotment of small plots of land is the allotment of
      land in insufficient quantity for the conduct of progressive farming
      but sufficient to strengthen subsistence farming. Hence, subsistence
      farming is strengthened by the allotment of an insufficient quantity of
      land. But as to whether bondage forms of renting will be abolished by
      this—that still remains to be proved. We have shown that they will
      become stronger be cause of the increase in the number of petty
      proprietors— competitors in renting the landlord’s land.”
    

      We have quoted this argument of Comrade X’s in full so as to make it
      easier for the reader to judge where the “logical
      contradiction” actually lies. As a general rule, the peasants are at
      present using the cut-off lands on terms of serf bondage. Upon the
      restitution of the cut-off lands, the peasants will use them as free
      owners. Does it really “still remain to be proved” that this
      restitution will abolish the serf bondage resulting from these
      cut-off lands? It is a matter of special plots of land that have already
      given rise to a special form of bondage, but the author substitutes for
      this particular concept the general category of “an insufficient
      quantity of land”! This means skipping the question. It means assuming
      that at present the cut-off lands do not engender any special form of
      bondage: in which case their restitution would really be simply
      the “allotment of an insufficient quantity of land,” and then we
      would really be unable to support this measure. But it is perfectly
      obvious to everyone that this is not the case.
    

    

      Further. The author should not confuse serf bondage (the labour-rent
      system of farming) engendered by the cut-off lands with
      subsistence farming tenancy, with renting as a result of need in
      general. The latter form of renting exists in all European countries:
      under the capitalist system of farming, the competition of petty
      proprietors and small

      ten ants 
everywhere and always inflates
      land prices and land rent to the proportions of “bondage.” We cannot
      do away with this kind of

      bondage[6]

      until we get rid of capitalism. But can this be regarded as an objection
      to particular measures of struggle against particular and purely Russian
      forms of bondage?  Comrade X reasons as though he objected to a reduction
      of the working day on the grounds that the intensity of labour would be
      increased as a result of this reduction. The reduction of the working day
      is a partial reform, which eradicates only one form of bondage, viz.,
      enslavement by means of longer working hours. Other forms of bondage, as,
      for instance, “speeding up” the workers, are not eliminated by
      this reform, and all forms of bondage in general cannot be
      eradicated by any reforms on the basis of capitalism.
    

      When the author says: “Allotment of the cut-off lands is a
      reactionary measure which reinforces bondage,” be is advancing a
      proposition which stands in such glaring contradiction to all the data on
      post-Reform peasant farming that he himself is unable to maintain this
      stand. He contradicts himself when he says somewhat earlier: “...It
      goes without saying that it is not the business of the Social-Democratic
      Party to implant capitalism. This will take place irrespective of the
      desire of any party, if peasant tenure extends....” But if the extension
      of peasant tenure in general leads to the development of capitalism, how
      much the more inevitably will this result from the extension of
      peasant land ownership to the special plots of land which
      engender a specifically serf form of bondage. The restitution of the
      cut-off lands will raise the peasants’ standard of living, expand the home
      market, increase the demand for wage-workers in the towns, and likewise
      the demand for wage-labourers among the rich peasants and landlords, who
      lose a certain mainstay of the labour-rent system of farming. As to the
      “implanting
    

      of capitalism,” that is an altogether queer objection. The restitution of
      the cut-off lands would signify the implanting of capitalism only were
      that restitution necessary and advantageous solely to the
      bourgeoisie. But that is not the case. It is no less, if not more,
      necessary and advantageous to the rural poor, who are suffering from
      bondage and the labour-rent system. The rural proletarian is oppressed
      together with the rural bourgeois by serf bondage, which is based
      to a considerable degree on these very cut-off lands. That is why the
      rural proletarian cannot emancipate himself from this bondage without
      thereby emancipating the rural bourgeois too. Only Messrs. the
      Rudins and similar Socialist-Revolutionaries, who have forgotten their
      kinship with the Narodniks, can see in this an “implanting” of
      capitalism.
    

      Still less convincing are Comrade X’s arguments on the question of the
      feasibility of restituting the cut-off lands. The Volsk Uyezd data he
      cites speak against him: almost one-fifth of the estates (18 out of 99)
      have remained in the hands of the old proprietors, i.e., the cut-off lands
      could be transferred to the peasants directly and without any
      redemption. Another third of the estates have changed hands entirely,
      i.e., here it would be necessary to redeem the cut-off lands at the
      expense of the big landed nobility. And only in 16 cases out of 99 would
      it be necessary to redeem land from peasants and other owners who
      purchased it in portions. We simply cannot understand how the restitution
      of the cut-off lands can be “unfeasible” under such
      circumstances. Let us take the data referring to the selfsame Saratov
      Gubernia. We have before us the latest “Materials on the Question of
      the Needs of the Agricultural Industries in Saratov Gubernia”
      (Saratov, 1903). The size of all the cut-off lands held by for mer
      landlords’ peasants is given as 600,000 dessiatines, or 42.7
per cent.[7]

      If in 1896 the Zemstvo statisticians could determine the size of the
      cut-off lands on the basis of extracts

    

      from the title-deeds and other documents, why can their size not be
      determined even more accurately by the peasant committees in, say, 1906?
      And if the figures for Volsk Uyezd are taken as a standard, then it would
      appear that approximately 120,000 dessiatines could be returned to the
      peasants at once and without any redemption, that about 200,000
      dessiatines could be redeemed at once (at the expense of the noblemen’s
      land) from estates which changed hands in their entirety, and that only
      with regard to the remaining land would the process of redemption (at the
      expense of the landed nobility), exchange, etc., be somewhat more
      complicated. but in any case by no means “unfeasible.” The
      significance the restitution of their 600,000 dessiatines of land would
      have for the peasants is, for example, evident from the fact that the
      total amount of privately owned land rented in Saratov Gubernia at the end
      of the nineties was approximately 900,000 dessiatines. Naturally, we do
      not intend to assert that all cut-off lands are being rented at the
      present time; we merely want to show graphically the proportion of the
      amount of land to be returned as property, to the amount of land which is
      now being rented very often on terms entailing bondage and serf
      bondage. This comparison testifies most eloquently to the force of the
      blow which the restitution of the cut-off lands would deal at relations
      entailing serf bondage, to the stimulus it would give to the revolutionary
      energy of the “peasantry” and—what is most important
      from the viewpoint of the Social-Democrat—to the tremendous impetus
      it would give to the ideological and political cleavage between the
      rural. proletariat and the peasant bourgeoisie. For the peasant
      committees’ work of expropriation would immediately and inevitably bring
      about just such a decided and irrevocable cleavage, and by no means a
      union of the entire “peasantry” for
      “semi—socialist” “equalitarian” demands for
      all the land, as the modern epigones of Narodism fondly imagine. The more
      revolutionary the action of the “peasantry” against the
      landlords, the more rapid and deep will this cleavage be, which will then
      be made manifest not by the statistical computations of Marxist research
      but by the political action of the peasant bourgeoisie, by the struggle of
      parties and classes within the peasant committees.
    

    

      And note: by advancing the demand for the restitution of the cut-off lands
      we are deliberately confining our task to the framework of the existing
      order; we are obliged to do this if we are to speak of a minimum
      programme and if we do not want to lapse into that kind of barefaced
      scheme-making, verging on charlatanry, in which “first place”
      is given to co-operatives, on the one hand, and to socialisation, on the
      other. We are replying to a question that has been raised but not by

      us,[8]

      to the question of the reforms of tomorrow, which are being discussed by
      the illegal press, “society,” by the Zemstvos, and, perhaps, even by
      the government. We would be anarchists or simply windbags if we held

      our selves 

      aloof from this pressing, but by no means socialist, problem which has
      been raised by the entire post-Reform

    

      history of Russia. We must provide a correct solution, from the
      Social-Democratic standpoint, to this problem which has not been raised by
      us; we must define our position with regard to the agrarian reforms which
      all liberal society has already demanded and without which no reasonable
      person can imagine the political emancipation of Russia. And we define
      our stand on this liberal reform (liberal in the scientific, that
      is the Marxist, sense of the word), while remaining wholly true to our
      principle of support for the genuinely democratic movement, coupled with
      steady and persistent work to develop the class-consciousness of the
      proletariat. We lay down a practical line of conduct with regard to this
      kind of reform, which the government or the liberals must very soon
      adopt. We advance a slogan that impels towards a revolutionary issue a
      reform which has actually been prompted by life itself and not concocted
      from the fantasy of a hazy, humanitarian

      Allerwelts[Acceptable to
all.—Ed.]

      socialism.
    

      It is in this latter respect that the draft programme of Comrade X is in
      error. No answer whatever is given to the question of the attitude to be
      taken towards the forthcoming liberal reforms in agrarian
      relationships. Instead, we are offered (in points 5 and 7) an inferior and
      contradictory formulation of the demand for the nationalisation of the
      land. Contradictory, because the abolition of rent is at one time proposed
      by means of a tax, at another by means of transferring the land to
      society; inferior, because rents cannot be abolished by taxes, and because
      the land should (generally speaking) preferably be transferred to a
      democratic state, and not to small public organisations (like the
      present or future Zemstvos). The reasons for non-inclusion in our
      programme of the demand for the nationalisation of the land have already
      been given more than once, and we shall not repeat them here.
    

      Point 8 does not at all bear upon the practical section of the programme,
      while Point 6 has been formulated by Comrade X in such a way as to have
      nothing “agrarian” left in it. Why he deletes the point on the
      courts and reduction of rents remains a mystery.
    

    

      The author formulates Point 1 less clearly than is done in our draft,
      while his addition: “in the interests of defending the petty
      proprietor (and not of developing petty proprietorship),” is once again
      non-“agrarian,” inaccurate (we are not out to defend petty proprietors who
      employ wage-labour) and superfluous, for, inasmuch as we defend the
      person and not the property of the petty bourgeois, we do this
      through our demand for strictly defined social, financial, and other
      reforms.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      And if we are able to curb-them, then the sale of the land will
      not turn into plundering and gifts to the capitalists.
    —Lenin

[2]

      Pskov, Novgorod, Tver, Moscow, Vladimir, Smolensk, Kaluga, Yaroslavl, and
      Kostroma gubernias.
    —Lenin

[3]

      Orel, Tula, Ryazan, Kursk, Voronezh, Tambov, Nizhni-Novgorod, Simbirsk,
      Kazan, Penza, Saratov, Chernigov, Kharkov, and Poltava gubernias (37 per
      cent of the land cut off).
    —Lenin

[4]

      Kherson, Ekaterinoslav, Taurida, Don (approximate figure), and Samara
      gubernias.
    —Lenin

[5]

      Comparing these figures on the cut-off lands in three areas with the
      figures on the proportion of corvée peasants to the total number of
      peasants (according to the data of the Drafting Commissions: see Vol. 32,
      p. 686 of the Encyclopaedic Dictionary, the article “The
      Peasants”), we get the following relationship. Non-black-earth area
      (9 gubernias): cut-off lands—6 .5 per cent; corvée
      peasants—43.9 per cent (average for 9 gubernias). Central
      black-earth area (14 gubernias): cut-off lands—21 .9 per cent;
      corvée peasants—76 per cent. Steppe area (5 gubernias):
      cut-off lands—28.3 per cent; corvée peas ants—95.3 per
      cent. Hence the relationship is just the opposite to what Comrade X wants
      to make out.
    —Lenin

[6]

      This bondage may be limited, kept in check, by empowering the courts to
      reduce rents—a demand we advance in our programme.
    —Lenin

[7]

      These latest Zemstvo statistics, we might note, fully bear out the
      contention of the aforementioned statistician that the data he submitted
      on the cut-off lands are an underestimation. According to
      those data the cut-off lands in Saratov Gubernia amounted only to
      512,000 dessiatines (=38 per cent). As a matter of fact, even 600,000
      dessiatines is below the actual size of the cut-off lands, for,
      in the first place, it does not include all the village
      communes of the former land lords’ peasants, and, secondly, it covers
      only cultivable lands.
    —Lenin

[8]

      To what extent the question of agrarian reforms on the basis of the
      existing order has been raised “not by us” is evident, for
      example, from the following quotation which we have taken from an article
      by Mr. V. V., one of the most prominent theoreticians of
      Narodism, which dates back to the best period of his activity
      (Otechestvenniye

Zapiski,[10]
      1882, Nos. 8 and 9). “The order which we are analysing,”
      Mr. V. V. wrote at the time about our system of agriculture, “has
      been inherited by us from the serf-owning system... Serfdom has collapsed,
      but so far only in its juridical aspect and a few others; the system of
      agriculture, however, has remained the same as it was prior to the
      Reform.... The peasants were unable to continue running their farms solely
      on their own curtailed allotments; they absolutely had to use the lands
      that had been taken from them.... In order to secure the proper running of
      the small farms, it is necessary to guarantee the peasant the use of at
      least those lands that ... in one way or another were at his disposal at
      the time of serfdom. This is the minimum desideratum that can be advanced
      on behalf of small scale farming.”  This is how the question was put by
      those who believed in Narodism and openly preached it, instead of
      unseemingly playing at hide-and-seek as the Socialist-Revolutionary
      gentlemen do. And Social Democracy has appraised this Narodnik
      presentation in its essence, as it always appraises bourgeois and
      petty-bourgeois demands. It took over in full the positive and progressive
      side of the demands (the struggle against all remnants of serfdom),
      rejecting petty-bourgeois illusions and pointing out that the eradication
      of the remnants of the serf-owning system will clear the road for, and
      speed up, capitalist development and not any other kind. It is precisely
      in the interests of social development and of untying the proletarian’s
      hands, and not “for the sake of small-scale farming” that we
      present our demand for the restitution of the cut-off lands, while by no
      means pledging ourselves to assist the “small” peasant
      bourgeoisie either against serfdom or even against the big
      bourgeoisie.
    —Lenin
 



[9]

      X—pseudonym of the Menshevik P. P. Maslov.
    



[10]

Otechestuennige Zapiski (Fatherland Noles)—a magazine which
      began publication in 1820, and after 1839 appeared as a regular
      monthly. Contributors to the magazine included Belinsky, Nekrasov,
      Saltykov-Shchedrin, Yeliseyev, and others. The revolutionary-democratic
      intelligentsia were grouped round 0techestvenniye Zapiski, which
      was constantly persecuted by the censorship until it was closed down by
      the tsarist government in 1884.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The National Question in Our Programme









Lenin: The National Question in Our Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
The National Question in Our Programme




Published:
Iskra, No. 44, July 15, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 454-463.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      In our draft Party programme we have advanced the demand for a republic
      with a democratic constitution that would guarantee, among other things,
      “recognition of the right to self-determination for all nations
      forming part of the state.” Many did not find this demand in our programme
      sufficiently clear, and in issue No. 33, in speaking about the Manifesto
      of the Armenian Social-Democrats, we explained the meaning of this point
      in the following way. The Social-Democrats will always combat every
      attempt to influence national self-determination from without by violence
      or by any injustice. However, our unreserved recognition of the struggle
      for freedom of self-determination does not in any way commit us to
      supporting every demand for national self-determination. As the party of
      the proletariat, the Social-Democratic Party considers i to be its
      positive and principal task to further the self-determination of the
      proletariat in each nationality rather than that of peoples or nations. We
      must always and unreservedly work for the very closest unity of
      the proletariat of all nationalities, and it is only in isolated and
      exceptional cases that we can advance and actively support demands
      conducive to the establishment of a new class state or to the substitution
      of a looser federal unity, etc., for the complete political unity of a

      state.[* See pp. 326-29 of this
volume.—Ed.]
    

      This explanation of our programme on the national question has evoked a
      strong protest from the Polish Socialist Party

      (P.S.P.).[1]

      In an article
      entitled “The Attitude of the Russian Social-Democrats Towards the
      National Question”

    

      (Przedświt,[Dawn.—Ed.]

      March 1903), the P.S.P. expresses indignation at this
      “amazing” explanation and at the “vagueness” of
      this “mysterious” self-determination of ours; it accuses us
      both of doctrinairism and of holding the “anarchist” view that
      “the worker is concerned with nothing but the complete abolition of
      capitalism, since, we learn, language, nationality, culture, and the like
      are mere bourgeois inventions,” and so on. It is worth considering this
      argument in detail, for it reveals almost all the misconceptions in the
      national question so common and so widespread among socialists.
    

      What makes our explanation so “amazing”? Why is it considered a
      departure from the “literal” meaning? Does recognition of the
      right of nations to self-determination really imply
      support of any demand of every nation for self-determination?
      After all, the fact that we recognise the right of all citizens
      to form free associations does not at all commit us, Social-Democrats, to
      supporting the formation of any new association; nor does it
      prevent us from opposing and campaigning against the formation of a given
      association as an inexpedient and unwise step. We even recognise the
      right of the Jesuits to carry on agitation freely, but we fight
      (not by police methods, of course) against an alliance between the Jesuits
      and the proletarians. Consequently, when the Przedświt says;
      “If t.his demand for the right to free self-determination is to be
      taken literally [and that is how we have taken it hitherto], then it would
      satisfy us”—it is quite obvious that it is precisely the P.S.P. that
      is departing from the literal meaning of the programme. Its conclusion is
      certainly illogical from the formal point of view.
    

      We do not, however, wish to confine ourselves to a formal verification of
      our explanation. We shall go straight to the root of the matter: is
      Social-Democracy in duty bound to demand national independence always and
      unreservedly, or only under certain circumstances; if the latter is the
      case then under what circumstances? To this question the P.S.P. has always
      replied in favour of unreserved recognition; we are not in the least
      surprised, therefore, at the fondness it displays towards the Russian
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, who

    

      demand a federal state system and speak in favour of “complete and
      unreserved recognition of the right to national self-determination”
      (Revolutsionnaya Rossiya, No. 18, the article entitled
      “National Enslavement and Revolutionary Socialism”). Unfortunately,
      this is nothing more than one of those bourgeois-democratic phrases which,
      for the hundredth and thousandth time, reveal the true nature of the
      so-called Party of so-called Socialist-Revolutionaries. By falling for the
      bait presented by these phrases and yielding to the allurement of this
      clamour, the P.S.P. in its turn proves how weak in theoretical background
      and political activities is its link with the class struggle of the
      proletariat. But it is to the interests of this struggle that we must
      subordinate the demand for national self-determination. It is
      this that makes all the difference between our approach to the national
      question and the bourgeois-democratic approach. The bourgeois democrat
      (and the present-day socialist opportunist who follows in his footsteps)
      imagines that democracy eliminates the class struggle, and that is why he
      presents all his political demands in an abstract way, lumped together,
      “without reservations,” from the standpoint of the interests of the
      “whole people,” or even from that of an eternal and absolute moral
      principle. Always and every where the Social-Democrat ruthlessly exposes
      this bourgeois illusion, whether it finds expression in an abstract
      idealist philosophy or in an absolute demand for national independence.
    

      If there is still need to prove that a Marxist can recognise the demand
      for national independence only conditionally, namely, on the condition
      indicated above, let us quote a writer who defended from the
      Marxist viewpoint the Polish proletarians’ demand for an independent
      Poland. In 1896 Karl Kautsky wrote in an article entitled “Finis

      Poloniae?” [“The End of
Poland?”—Ed.]:

      “Once the proletariat tackles the Polish question it cannot but take
      a stand in favour of Poland’s independence, and, consequently, it cannot
      but welcome each step that can be taken in this direction at the present
      time, insofar as this step is at all compatible with the class interests
      of the international militant

      proletariat ." 


    

      “This reservation,” Kautsky goes on to say, “should be made in
      any case. National independence is not so inseparably linked with the
      class interests of the militant proletariat as to make it necessary to
      strive for it unconditionally, under any

circumstances.[Italics ours.]

      Marx and Engels took a most deter mined stand in favour of the unification
      and liberation of Italy, but this did not prevent them from coming out in
      1859 against an Italy allied with Napoleon.” (Neue Zeit, XIV, 2,
      5. 520.)
    

      As you see, Kautsky categorically rejects the
      unconditional· demand for the independence of nations, and
      categorically demands that the question be placed not merely on a
      historical basis in general, but specifically on a class basis. And if we
      examine how Marx and Engels treated the Polish question, we shall see that
      this was precisely their approach to it from the very outset. Die Neue
      Rheinische

Zeitung[2]
      devoted much space to the Polish question, and emphatically demanded,not
      only the independence of Poland, but also that Germany go to war with
      Russia for Poland’s freedom. At the same time Marx, however, attacked
      Ruge, who had spoken in favour of Poland’s freedom in the Frankfort
      Parliament and had tried to settle the Polish question solely by means of
      bourgeois-democratic phrases about “shameful injustice,” without
      making any attempt to analyse it historically. Marx was not like those
      pedants and philistines of the revolution who dread nothing more than
      “polemics” at revolutionary moments in history. Marx poured
      pitiless scorn on the “humane” citizen Ruge, and showed him,
      from the example of the oppression of the south of France by the north of
      France, that it is not every kind of national oppression that invariably
      inspires a desire for independence which is justified from the viewpoint
      of democracy and the proletariat. Marx referred to special social
      circumstances as a result of which “Poland ... became the
      revolutionary part of Russia, Austria, and Prussia.... Even the Polish
      nobility, although their foundations were still partly feudal, adhered to
      the democratic agrarian revolution with unparalleled selflessness. Poland
      was already a seat of East-European democracy at a time when Ger

    

      many was still groping her way through the most platitudinous
      constitutional and high-flown philosophical ideology...

      So long as we [Germans] ... help to oppress Poland, so long as we keep
      part of Poland fettered to Germany, we shall remain fettered to Russia and
      Russian policy, we shall be unable completely to smash patriarchal feudal
      absolutism at home. The creation of a democratic Poland is the primary
      prerequisite of the creation of a democratic

      Germany.”[3]


      We have quoted these statements in such detail because they graphically
      show the historical background at a time when the attitude of
      international Social-Democracy to the Polish problem took shape in a way
      which held good almost throughout the second half of the nineteenth
      century. To ignore the changes which have taken place in that back ground
      and to continue advocating the old solutions given by Marxism, would mean
      being true to the letter but not to the spirit of the teaching, would mean
      repeating the old conclusions by rote, without being able to use the
      Marxist method of research to analyse the new political situation. Those
      times and today—the age of the last bourgeois revolutionary
      movements, and the age of desperate reaction, extreme tension of all
      forces on the eve of the proletarian revolution— differ in the most
      obvious way. In those times Poland as a whole, not only the
      peasantry, but even the bulk of the nobility, was revolutionary. The
      traditions of the struggle for national liberation were so strong and
      deep-rooted that, after their defeat at home, Poland’s best sons went
      wherever they could find a revolutionary class to support; the memory of
      Dąbrowski and of

      Wróblewski[4]
      is inseparably associated with the greatest movement of the proletariat in
      the nineteenth century, with the last—and let us hope the last
      unsuccessful—insurrection of the Paris workers. In those
      times complete victory for democracy in Europe was indeed impossible
      without the restoration of Poland. In those times Poland was
      indeed the bulwark of civilisation against tsarism, and the vanguard of
      democracy. To day the Polish ruling classes, the gentry in
      Germany and in Austria, and the industrial and financial magnates in
      Russia are supporting the ruling classes of the countries that oppress
      Poland, while the German and the Russian proletariat are fighting for
      freedom side by side with the Polish

    

      proletariat, which has heroically taken over the great traditions of the
      old revolutionary Poland. Today the advanced representatives of
      Marxism in the neighbouring country, while attentively watching the
      political evolution of Europe and fully sympathising with the heroic
      struggle of the Poles, nevertheless frankly admit that “at present
      St. Petersburg has become a much more important revolutionary centre than
      Warsaw, and the Russian revolutionary movement is already of greater
      international significance than the Polish movement.” This is what Kautsky
      wrote as early as 1896, in defending the inclusion in the Polish
      Social-Democrats’ programme of the demand for Poland’s restoration. And in
      1902 Mehring, who has been studying the evolution of the Polish question
      since 1848, arrived at the following conclusion: “Had the Polish
      proletariat desired to inscribe on its banner the restoration of a Polish
      class state, which the ruling classes themselves do not want to hear of,
      it would be playing a historical farce; this may well happen to the
      propertied classes (as, for instance, the Polish nobility in 1791), but it
      should never happen to the working class. If, on the other hand, this
      reactionary Utopia comes out to win over to proletarian agitation those
      sections of the intelligentsia and of the petty bourgeoisie which still
      respond in some measure to national agitation, then that Utopia is doubly
      untenable as an outgrowth of that unworthy opportunism which sacrifices
      the long-term interests of the working class to the cheap and paltry
      successes of the moment.
    

      “Those interests dictate categorically that, in all three states that
      have partitioned Poland, the Polish workers should fight unreservedly side
      by side with their class comrades. The times are past when a bourgeois
      revolution could create a free Poland: today the renascence of Poland is
      possible only through a social revolution, in the course of which the
      modern proletariat will break its

      chains.”[5]


      We fully subscribe to Mehring’s conclusion. We shall only remark that this
      conclusion remains unassailable even if we do not go as far as Mehring in
      our arguments. With out any doubt the present state of the Polish question
      differs radically from that which obtained fifty years ago. However, the
      present situation cannot be regarded as permanent. Class antagonism has
      now undoubtedly relegated national

    

      questions far into the background, but, without the risk of lapsing into
      doctrinairism, it cannot be categorically asserted that some particular
      national question cannot appear temporarily in the foreground of the
      political drama. No doubt, the restoration of Poland prior to the fall of
      capitalism is highly improbable, but it cannot be asserted that it is
      absolutely impossible, or that circumstances may not arise under which the
      Polish bourgeoisie will take the side of independence, etc. And Russian
      Social-Democracy does not in the least intend to tie its own hands. In
      including in its programme recognition of the right of nations to self-
      determination, it takes into account all possible, and even all
      conceivable, combinations. That programme in no way precludes the
      adoption by the Polish proletariat of the slogan of a free and independent
      Polish republic, even though the probability of its becoming a reality
      before socialism is introduced is infinitesimal. The programme merely
      demands that a genuinely socialist party shall not corrupt proletarian
      class-consciousness, or slur over the class struggle, or lure working
      class with bourgeois-democratic phrases, or break the unity of the
      proletariat’s present-day political struggle. This reservation is the crux
      of the matter, for only with this reservation do we recognise
      self-determination. It is useless for the P.S.P. to pretend that it
      differs from the German or Russian Social-Democrats in their rejection of
      the right to self-determination, the right to strive for a free and
      independent republic. It is not this, but the fact that it loses. sight of
      the class point of view, obscures it by chauvinism and disrupts the unity
      of the present-day political struggle, that prevents us from regarding the
      P.S.P. as a genuine Social-Democratic workers’ party. This, for instance,
      is how the P.S.P. usually presents the question: “...We can only
      weaken tsarism by wresting Poland from it; it is the task of the Russian
      comrades to overthrow it.” Or again: “... After the over throw of
      tsarism we would simply decide our fate by seceding from Russia.” See to
      what monstrous conclusions this monstrous logic leads, even from the
      viewpoint of the programme demand for Poland’s
      restoration. Because the restoration of Poland is one of the
      possible (but, whilst the bourgeoisie rules, by no means absolutely
      certain) consequences of democratic evolution, therefore the
      Polish

    

      proletariat must not fight together with the Russian proletariat to
      overthrow tsarism, but “only” to weaken it by wresting Poland
      from it. Because Russian tsarism is concluding a closer and
      closer alliance with the bourgeoisie and the governments of Germany,
      Austria, etc., therefore the Polish proletariat must weaken its
      alliance with the proletariat of Russia, Germany, etc., together with whom
      it is now fighting against one and the same yoke. This is nothing
      more than sacrificing the most vital interests of the proletariat to the
      bourgeois-democratic conception of national independence. The
      disintegration of Russia which the P.S.P. desires, as distinct
      from our aim of overthrowing tsarism, is and will remain an empty
      phrase, as long as economic development continues to bring the different
      parts of a political whole more and more closely together, and as long as
      the bourgeoisie of all countries unite more and more closely against their
      common enemy, the proletariat, and in support of their common ally, the
      tsar. But the division of the forces of the proletariat, which is
      now suffering under the yoke of this autocracy, is the sad reality, the
      direct consequence of the error of the P.S.P., the direct outcome of its
      worship of bourgeois-democratic formulas. To turn a blind eye to this
      division of the proletariat, the P.S.P. has to stoop to chauvinism and
      present the views of the Russian Social-Democrats as follows: “We
      [the Poles] must wait for the social revolution, and until then we must
      patiently endure national oppression.”  This is an utter falsehood. The
      Russian Social-Democrats have never advised anything of the sort; on the
      contrary, they themselves fight, and call upon the whole Russian
      proletariat to fight, against all manifestations of national oppression in
      Russia; they include in their programme not only complete
      equality of status for all languages, nationalities, etc., but also
      recognition of every nation’s right to determine its own
      destiny. Recognising this right, we subordinate to the interests
      of the proletarian struggle our support of the demand for national
      independence, and only a chauvinist can interpret our position as an
      expression of a Russian s mistrust of a non-Russian, for in reality this
      position necessarily follows from the class-conscious proletarian’s
      distrust of the bourgeoisie. The P.S.P. takes the view that the national
      question is exhausted by the contrast—“we” (Poles)
      and “they”

    

      (Germans, Russians, etc.). The Social-Democrat, however, gives first place
      to the contrast— “we,” the proletarians, and “they,” the
      bourgeoisie. “We,” the proletarians, have seen dozens of times how
      the bourgeoisie betrays the interests of freedom, motherland,
      language, and nation, when it is con fronted with the revolutionary
      proletariat. We witnessed the French bourgeoisie’s surrender to the
      Prussians at the moment of the greatest humiliation and suppression of the
      French nation, the Government of National Defence becoming a Government of
      National Defection, the bourgeoisie of an oppressed nation calling to its
      aid the troops of the oppressing nation so as to crush its proletarian
      fellow countrymen, who had dared to assume power. And that is why,
      undeterred by chauvinist and opportunist heckling, we shall always say to
      the Polish workers: only the most complete and intimate alliance with the
      Russian proletariat can meet the requirements of the present political
      struggle against the autocracy; only such an alliance can guarantee
      complete political and economic emancipation.
    

      What we have said on the Polish question is wholly applicable to every
      other national question. The accursed history of autocracy has left us a
      legacy of tremendous estrangement between the working classes of
      the various nationalities oppressed by that autocracy. This estrangement
      is a very great evil, a very great obstacle in the struggle against the
      autocracy, and we must not legitimise this evil or sanctify this
      outrageous state of affairs by establishing any such
      “principles” as separate parties or a “federation”
      of parties. It is, of course, simpler and easier to follow the line of
      least resistance, and for everyone to make himself comfortable in his own
      corner following the rule, “it’s none of my business,” as the Bund
      now wants to do. The more we realise the need for unity and the more
      firmly we are convinced that a concerted offensive against the autocracy
      is impossible without complete unity, the more obvious becomes the
      necessity for a centralised organisation of the struggle in the conditions
      of our political system—the less inclined are we to be satisfied
      with a “simple,” but specious and, at bottom, profoundly false
      solution of the problem. So long as the injuriousness of estrangement is
      not realised, and so long as there is no desire to put an end radically
      and at all costs to this

    

      estrangement in the camp of the proletarian party, there is no need for
      the fig-leaf of “federation,” and no use in under taking to solve a
      problem which one of the “sides” concerned has no real desire
      to solve. That being the case, it is better to let the lessons of
      experience and of the actual movement prove that centralism is essential
      for success in the struggle waged by the proletarians of all nationalities
      oppressed by autocracy against that autocracy and against the
      international bourgeoisie, which is becoming more and more united.
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

The Polish Socialist Party (P.S.P.)—a petty-bourgeois
      nationalist party, founded in 1892.
    



[2]

Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung (New Rhenish Gazette) appeared in
      Cologne from June 1, 1848, until May 19, 1849. Marx and Engels were
      managers of this newspaper, Marx being editor-in-chief. As Lenin put it,
      the newspaper was “the best, the unsurpassed organ of the
      revolutionary proletariat” (see present edition, Vol. 21,
      “Karl Marx”). It educated the masses, roused them to fight the
      counter-revolution, and made its influence felt throughout
      Germany. Because of its resolute and irreconcilable position and its
      militant internationalism, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was from
      the first months of its existence persecuted by the feudal-monarchist and
      liberal-bourgeois press, and also by the government. Marx’s deportation by
      the Prussian Government and the repressive measures against its other
      editors led to the paper ceasing publication, About the Neue
      Rheinische Zeitung see the article by Engels, “Marx and the
      Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-49)” (Marx and Engels, Selected
      Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 328-37).
    



[3]

      Lenin is quoting from the series of articles printed under the general
      title of “Debates on the Polish Question in Frankfort” in the
      Neue Rheinische Zeitung in August-September 1848. See
      MEGA, Erste Abteilung, Band 7, S. 287-317. Engels was the author
      of these articles.
    



[4]

Dąbrowski, Jaroslaw and Wróblewski,
Walery—prominent leaders of the Polish revolutionary movement
      in 1863-64, who emigrated to France after the suppression of the
      Polish uprising. In 1871 they were generals of the Paris Commune.
    



[5]

      Lenin is quoting Franz Mehring’s introduction to the third volume of the
      Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, 1841 to
      1850, which he published in 1902. (Gesammelte Schriften von
      Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, 1841 bis 1850. Dritter Band,
      Stuttgart.  Verlag von J. H. W. Dietz, Nachf., 1902.)
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Outline of an Article Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries









Lenin: Outline of an Article Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries







V. I.  

      Lenin
Outline of an Article Against the Socialist-Revolutionaries




Written: Written in July 1903 

Published:

      First published in 1939 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia, No. 1.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 464-466.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    





α) Lack of principle

About the Socialist-Revolutionaries (a party without a
    programme).

    
Unprincipledness in matters of theory:
Narodnik prejudices + West-European opportunist bourgeois “criticism.”
Absence of a credo, blurred political consciousness. Playing at
hide-and-seek....
    



β) Petty-bourgeois ideology


Petty-bourgeois ideology: corrupts the class-consciousness of the proletariat,
makes it unfit for an independent stand towards bourgeois democracy (because the
Socialist-Revolutionaries are striving to fuse and confuse social and bourgeois
democracy, while being in essence a branch of the latter).
    



γ) Phrases and bluff


Phrase-mongering in theory and in tactics: an unserious attitude towards revolu
tionary work, exaggeration, bluff, “fiction” ...
(dishing out trivialities in “popular” literature) (war against
“polemics,” absence of principles).
    



δ) Terrorism


A tactical mistake, a very flagrant one:
terrorism, advocacy of it, weakening of contact with the mass movement.


      ΣΣ [Summa
  summarum—sum-total.—Ed.]:
      from all the bourgeois revolutions in Europe the working class
      emerged
      disap
    



ε Dissemination of illusions + reactionary spirit
  of the Narodnik part of the programme + ideological, political and
    practical harm 

 
pointed, because it entered them with
      bourgeois-democratic illusions. The Socialist-Revolutionaries are
      doing their utmost to “repeat” this history; it is our
      duty to wage a determined struggle against it, so that the Russian
      proletariat should derive from the forthcoming revolution not
      disappointment, but fresh faith in its strength, greater courage
      for the still more tremendous struggle before it, and the
      beginnings of a strong, purely proletarian organisation.

    





 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.








V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.[1]
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903




Published:

      Speeches first published in Geneva in 1904 in the Minutes of the Second Regular Congress of the R.S.D.L.P..

      Speeches are published according to the text of the Minutes and the manuscripts.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 467-509.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






1. Draft Resolution on Demonstrations
  469



2. Draft Resolution on the Place of the Bund in the Party
  470



3. Draft Resolution on the Attitude Towards the Student Youth
  471



4. Draft Resolution on Party Literature
  472



5. Drafts of Minor Resolutions
  473



6. Draft Resolution on the Publication of a Periodical for Members of Religious Sects
  475



7. Draft Rules of the R.S.D.L.P.
  476



8. Draft Resolutions Not Submitted to the Congress
  479



9. First Speech on the Agenda of the Congress
  482



10. Second Speech on the Agenda of the Congress
  483



11. Speech on the Actions of the Organising Committee
  484



12. Speech on the Attendance of the Polish Social-Democrats at the Congress
  485



13. Speech on the Place of the Bund in the R.S.D.L.P.
  486



14. Speech on the Party Programme
  489



15. Report on the Party Rules
  492



16. First Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme
  493



17. Second Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme
  496



18. Third Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme
  498



19. Fourth Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme
  499



20. First Speech in the Discussion on the Party Rules
  500



21. Second Speech in the Discussion on the Party Rules
  501



22. Speech at the Election of the Editorial Board of Iskra
  505



23. Speech on the Attitude Towards the Student Youth
  509

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. was held on July 17(30) to
      August 10(23), 1903. The first thirteen sessions of the Congress were held
      in Brussels, but owing to police persecution, the Congress sessions were
      transferred to London. In all, 37 sessions were held. There were 20 items
      on the agenda, of which the most important were: the Party programme,
      Party organisation (confirmation of the Rules of the R.S.D.L.P.),
      elections to the Central Committee and editorial hoard of the Party’s
      Central Organ. Twenty-six organisations were represented at the Congress,
      which was attended by 43 delegates possessing 51 decisive votes (eight
      delegates had two votes each), and by 14 delegates with a deliberative
      voice.
    

      The preparations for the Congress had been made by Lenin’s Iskra,
      Lenin himself carrying out tremendous work in this respect.
    

      Lenin drew up the outline of the report on the work of the Iskra
      organisation, and composed the draft of the Party Rules, the draft
      resolutions on several questions planned for discussion at the Congress,
      the agenda and the standing orders of the Congress.
    

      Lenin did much work among the delegates, ascertaining the general
      situation and state of organisation in various parts of the country, and
      discussing many of the problems confronting the Congress. At a meeting of
      the Congress delegates, Lenin made a report on the national question.
    

      The composition of the Congress was not homogeneous. Attending it were not
      only supporters of Iskra, but also its opponents, as well as
      unstable and wavering elements. Lenin’s preliminary acquaintance with the
      delegates made it possible for him to ascertain the political stand of
      each, of them prior to the opening of the Congress.
    

      Lenin was elected to the Bureau of the Congress and was a member of the
      main Congress committees: the programme, Rules and Credentials
      Committees. He delivered the report on the Party Rules and spoke on almost
      all the subjects on the agenda. The minutes of the Congress register more
      than one hundred and thirty speeches, remarks, and rejoinders made by
      Lenin.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Resolution on
Demonstrations









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 1. Draft Resolution on Demonstrations







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

 

1. Draft Resolution on Demonstrations

      The Congress considers the organisation of public demonstrations against
      the autocracy a highly important means of political education of the
      working masses. In this connection, the Congress recommends, firstly, that
      special efforts should be made to utilise for demonstrations such
      instances and circumstances when some atrocious act by the tsarist
      government has aroused particularly widespread indignation among the
      people; secondly, that efforts should be most of all directed to securing
      the participation of broad masses of the working class in the
      demonstrations and the best possible organisation of the latter,
      in regard to preparation for them, their efficient handling, and guidance
      of demonstrators’ resistance to the troops and police; thirdly, that
      preparations for armed demonstrations should be begun, strictly observing
      instructions of the Central Committee in this respect.
    

      The Congress also recommends that all committees and other organisations
      of the Party should thoroughly discuss the question of preparations for an
      armed uprising and should make every effort to convince the working masses
      of the necessity and inevitability of an uprising. The practical measures
      which can already be taken in preparing for an

       up rising 

      are entrusted by the Congress exclusively and entirely to the Central
      Committee.
    

Written in June-July 1903
Published according to the manuscript
First published in 1927 in Lenin Miscellany VI



    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  


|

2. Draft Resolution on the Place of the Bund in the Party

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Resolution on the
Place of the Bund in the Party









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 2. Draft Resolution on the Place of the Bund in the Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

2. Draft Resolution on the Place of the Bund in the Party

      Taking into consideration that the fullest and closest unity of the
      militant proletariat is absolutely essential both for the purpose of the
      earliest achievement of its ultimate aim and in the interests of an
      unswerving political and economic struggle in conditions of the existing
      society;
    

      that, in particular, complete unity between the Jewish and non-Jewish
      proletariat is moreover especially necessary for a successful struggle
      against anti-Semitism, this despicable attempt of the government and the
      exploiting classes to exacerbate racial particularism and national enmity;
    

      that the complete amalgamation of the Social-Democratic organisations of
      the Jewish and non-Jewish proletariat can in no respect or manner restrict
      the independence of our Jewish comrades in conducting propaganda and
      agitation in one language or another, in publishing literature adapted to
      the needs of a given local or national movement, or in advancing such
      slogans for agitation and the direct political struggle that would be an
      application and development of the general and fundamental principles of
      the Social-Democratic programme regarding full equality and full freedom
      of language, national culture, etc., etc.;
    

      the Congress emphatically repudiates federation as the organisational
      principle of a Russian party and endorses the organisational principle
      adopted as the basis of the Rules of 1898, i.e., autonomy for the national
      Social-Democratic organisations in matters

      concerning... [Here the manuscript breaks
off.–Ed.]

    

Written in June-July 1903
Published according to the manuscript
First published in 1927 in Lenin Miscellany VI



    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

1. Draft Resolution on Demonstrations

|

3. Draft Resolution on the Attitude Towards the Student Youth

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Resolution on the
      Attitude Towards the Student Youth









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 3. Draft Resolution on the Attitude Towards the Student Youth







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

3. Draft Resolution on the Attitude Towards the Student Youth

      The Second Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party welcomes
      the growing revolutionary initiative among the student youth and calls
      upon all organisations of the Party to give them every possible assistance
      in their efforts to organise. It recommends that all student groups and
      study circles should, firstly, make it the prime object of their
      activities to imbue their members with an integral and consistent
      socialist world outlook and give them a thorough acquaintance with
      Marxism, on the one hand, and with Russian Narodism and West-European
      opportunism, on the other, these being the principal currents among the
      conflicting advanced trends of today; secondly, that they should beware of
      those false friends of the youth who divert them from a thorough
      revolutionary training through recourse to empty revolutionary or
      idealistic phrase-mongering and philistine complaints about the harm and
      uselessness of sharp polemics between the revolutionary and the opposition
      movements, for as a matter of fact these false friends are only spreading
      an unprincipled and unserious attitude towards revolutionary work;
      thirdly, that they should endeavour, when undertaking practical
      activities, to establish prior contact with the Social-Democratic
      organisations, so as to have the benefit of their advice and, as far as
      possible, to avoid serious mistakes at the very outset of their work.
    

Written in June-July 1903
Published according to the manuscript
First published in Geneva in 1904 in the Minutes of the Second Regular Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

2. Draft Resolution on the Place of the Bund in the Party

|

4. Draft Resolution on Party Literature

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Resolution on
Party Literature









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 4. Draft Resolution on Party Literature







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

4. Draft Resolution on Party Literature

      The Congress recognises the absolute and urgent necessity for a wide
      production of popular Social-Democratic literature for all sections of the
      population, and for the working-class masses in particular.
    

      The Congress considers it necessary in the first place to compile a series
      of pamphlets (each ranging from one to five signatures in size) dealing
      with each (theoretical and practical) point of our Party programme and
      giving a detailed exposition and explanation of that point; and then a
      number of leaflets (ranging from one to eight printed pages each) on the
      same subjects to be scattered or distributed in town and country. The
      Congress instructs the editorial board of the Central Organ to immediately
      take all steps to fulfil this task.
    

      As regards publication of a special popular newspaper for the people or
      for the broad sections of the working class, the Congress, though it does
      not reject this project in principle, considers it untimely at the
      immediate moment.
    

Written in June-July 1903
Published according to the manuscript
First published in 1927 in Lenin Miscellany VI



    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

3. Draft Resolution on the Attitude Towards the Student Youth

|

5. Drafts of Minor Resolutions

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Drafts of Minor
Resolutions









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 5. Drafts of Minor Resolutions







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

5. Drafts of Minor Resolutions
The Economic Struggle

      The Congress deems it absolutely essential in all cases to support and
      develop in every way the economic struggle of the workers and their trade
      unions (principally the all-Russian unions) and from the very outset to
      ensure that the economic struggle and the trade-union movement in Russia
      have a Social-Democratic character.
    
May Day

      The Congress approves the celebration of the First of May, which has
      already become a tradition, and draws the attention of all Party
      organisations to the necessity of selecting the time and ways most
      suitable under existing conditions for celebrating this international
      holiday of the proletariat’s struggle for freedom.
    
International Congress

      The Congress appoints Comrade Plekhanov to represent the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party in the Secretariat of the Socialist
      International (in amendment of the Paris decision to appoint Plekhanov and
      Krichevsky joint representatives).
    

      The Congress instructs the editorial board of the Central Organ and the Central
      Committee to arrange, by agreement between them (or by decision of the Party
      Council), for the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party to be represented at
      the International Socialist Congress in Amsterdam in 1904.
    
    

    Terrorism

      The Congress decisively rejects terrorism, i.e., the system of individual
      political assassinations, as being a method of political struggle which is
      most inexpedient at the present time, diverting the best forces from the
      urgent and imperatively necessary work of organisation and agitation,
      destroying contact between the revolutionaries and the masses of the
      revolutionary classes of the population, and spreading both among the
      revolutionaries themselves and the population in general utterly destorted
      ideas of the aims and methods of struggle against the autocracy.
    
Propaganda

      The Congress calls the attention of all Party members to the importance of
      improving the theoretical knowledge of our propagandists and of forming
      groups of travelling lecturers so as to co-ordinate propaganda throughout
      the country.
    
Distribution of Forces

      The Congress recommends to all comrades returning to Russia from abroad or
      from exile to their place of activity, especially if they do not have
      well-established contacts with any committee, that they should endeavour
      to give timely notice to the Central Committee or its agents so, as to
      enable the Central Committee properly and promptly to distribute
      revolutionary forces throughout Russia.
    

Written in June-July 1903
Published according to the manuscript
First published in 1927 in Lenin Miscellany VI



    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

4. Draft Resolution on Party Literature

|

6. Draft Resolution on the Publication of a Periodical for Members of Religious Sects

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Resolution on the
Publication of A Periodical
      For Members of Religious Sects









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 6. Draft Resolution on the Publication of a Periodical for Members of Religious Sects







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

6. Draft Resolution on the Publication of a Periodical for Members of
  Religious Sects

      Bearing in mind that in many of its aspects the sectarian movement in
      Russia represents one of the democratic trends in Russia, the Second
      Congress calls the attention of all Party members to the necessity of
      working among members of sects so as to bring them under Social-Democratic
      influence. By way of experiment, the Congress permits Comrade
      V. Bonch-Bruyevich to publish, under the supervision of the editorial
      board of the Central Organ, a popular news paper entitled Among
      Sectarians, and instructs the Central Committee and the editorial
      board of the Central Organ to take the measures necessary to ensure
      successful publication of this newspaper and to create all the conditions
      for its proper functioning.
    

Written in August 1903
Published according to the manuscript
First published in Geneva in 1904 in the Minutes of the Second Regular Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

5. Drafts of Minor Resolutions

|

7. Draft Rules of the R.S.D.L.P.

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Rules of the
R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 7. Draft Rules of the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

7. Draft Rules of the
R.S.D.L.P.[1]

      1. A Party member is one who accepts the Party’s programme and supports
      the Party both financially and by personal participation In one of its
      organisations.
    

      2. The Party Congress is the supreme organ of the Party. Party congresses
      are summoned (if possible, not less than once in two years) by the Central
      Committee. The Central Committee is obliged to summon a congress at the
      demand of Party committees, or unions of committees, which jointly had
      one-third of the votes at the preceding congress, or at the demand of the
      Party Council. A congress is valid given representation of over one half
      of all (properly constituted) committees of the Party existing at the
      moment of the congress.
    

      3. The following are entitled to representation at a congress: a) the
      Central Committee; b) the editorial board of the Central Organ; c) all
      local committees which do not belong to special unions; d) all unions of
      committees recognised by the Party; and e) the League Abroad. Each of the
      organisations enumerated has two deciding votes at a congress. New
      committees and unions of committees are entitled to be represented at a
      congress only if they have been endorsed not less than six months before
      the congress.
    

      4. The Party Congress appoints the Central Committee, the editorial board
      of the Central Organ, and the Party Council.
    

      5. The Central Committee co-ordinates and directs all the practical
      activities of the Party and administers the

    

      Central Party Treasury, as well as all the general technical
      establishments of the Party. It examines conflicts that may arise between
      various organisations and institutions of the Party or within them.
    

      6. The editorial board of the Central Organ gives ideological guidance to
      the Party by editing the Party’s Central Organ, the scientific organ, and
      pamphlets.
    

      7. The Party Council is appointed by the congress from among members of
      the editorial board of the Central Organ and the Central Committee, and
      consists of five persons. The Council settles disputes and differences
      arising between the editorial board of the Central Organ and the Central
      Committee on questions of general organisation and tactics. The Party
      Council appoints a new Central Committee in the event of the arrest of all
      the members of the old committee.
    

      8. New committees and unions of committees are endorsed by the Central
      Committee. Each committee, union, organisation, or group recognised by the
      Party has charge of affairs relating specifically and exclusively to its
      particular locality, district or national movement, or to the special
      function assigned to it, being bound, however, to obey the decisions of
      the Central Committee and the Central Organ and to make contributions to
      the Central Party Treasury in amounts determined by the Central Committee.
    

      9. Any Party member and any person who has any contact with the Party is
      entitled to demand that any statements made by him should be transmitted
      in the original to the Central Committee, the Central Organ, or the Party
      Congress.
    

      10.  It is the duty of every Party organisation to afford both the Central
      Committee and the editorial board of the Central Organ every opportunity
      of becoming acquainted with all its activities and its entire composition.
    

      11. All Party organisations and collegiate bodies decide their affairs by
      a simple majority vote and have the right of co-optation. A two-thirds
      majority vote is required for co-optation or expulsion of members.
    

      12. It is the purpose of the League of Russian Revolutionary
      Social-Democracy Abroad to carry on propaganda and agitation abroad and
      also to assist the movement in Russia.

    

      The League enjoys all the rights of committees, with the sole exception
      that it renders assistance to the movement in Russia only through persons
      or groups specially appointed for the purpose by the Central Committee.
    

Written in June-early July 1903
Published according to the text of the Minutes
First published in Geneva in 1904 in the Minutes of the Second Regular Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.



    

    
 
Notes
 
 



[1]

Draft Rules of the R.S.D.L.P. proposed by Lenin at the Second
      Congress of the Party have not been preserved. The present volume gives
      the original draft Rules included by the Protocol Committee of the Second
      Congress in the appendices to the Full Text of the Minutes of the
      Second Regular Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
      Party, published in Geneva in 1904. The Protocol Committee of the
      Second Party Congress erroneously termed Lenin’s original draft Rules,
      which it included in appendix XI to the Full Text of the Minutes,
      the draft of the organisational rules of the R.S.D.L.P. put forward by
      Lenin at the Congress (see V. I: Lenin, One Step Forward, Two Steps
      Back, item G, The Party Rules. Comrade Martov’s Draft).
    

 
  

6. Draft Resolution on the Publication of a Periodical for Members of Religious Sects

|

8. Draft Resolutions Not Submitted to the Congress

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Draft Resolutions Not
    Submitted to the Congress









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 8. Draft Resolutions Not Submitted to the Congress







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

8. Draft Resolutions Not Submitted to the Congress
Withdrawal of the Bund

      The Congress considers the refusal of the Bund delegates to submit to the
      decision adopted by the majority of the Congress as the Bund’s withdrawal
      from the R.S.D.L.P.
    

      The Congress deeply regrets this step, which, it is convinced, is a major
      political

      mistake ...[One word here is
indecipherable.—Ed.]

      on the part of the leaders of the “Jewish Workers’ Union,” a mistake
      which must inevitably injure the interests of the Jewish proletariat and
      working-class movement. The Congress considers that the arguments cited by
      the Bund delegates in justification of their step amount in practice to
      entirely unfounded apprehensions and suspicion that the Social-Democratic
      convictions of the Russian Social-Democrats are insincere and
      inconsistent; in respect of theory they are the result of the unfortunate
      penetration of nationalism into the Social-Democratic movement of the
      Bund.
    

      The Congress voices its desire for, and firm conviction of, the need for
      complete and closest unity of the Jewish and Russian working-class
      movement in Russia, unity not only in principle but also in organisation,
      and resolves to take all measures in order to acquaint the Jewish
      proletariat in detail both with this resolution of the Congress and with
      the general attitude of the Russian Social-Democrats towards every
      national movement.
    
    

    Separate Groups

      The Congress expresses its regret at the separate existence of such groups
      of Social-Democrats as the Borba, Zhizn and Volya. Their
      separateness cannot but, on the one hand, lead to disorganisation
      impermissible in the Party, and on the other hand, to regrettable
      departures from Social-Democratic views and Social-Democratic tactics
      towards so-called socialist-revolutionism (as exemplified by the
      Volya group and partially also by the Borba in its
      agrarian programme), or towards Christian socialism and anarchism
      (Zhizn). The Congress would like to see the above-mentioned
      groups, and in general all groups which identify themselves with
      Social-Democracy, join the ranks of united and organised Russian
      Social-Democracy. The Congress instructs the Central Committee to collect
      the necessary information and to adopt a final decision on the place of
      the above-mentioned and other separate groups within the Party, or on the
      attitude of the Party towards these groups.
    
The Army

      The Congress calls the attention of all Party organisations to the
      importance of Social-Democratic propaganda and agitation in the army, and
      recommends that all efforts should be made for the speediest strengthening
      and proper channelling of all the existing contacts among the officers and
      other ranks. The Congress considers it desirable to form special groups of
      Social-Democrats serving in the army, in order that these groups should
      occupy a definite position in the local committees (as branches of the
      committees), or in the central organisation (as institutions formed
      directly by the Central Committee and subordinated directly to it).
    
The Peasantry

      The Congress calls the special attention of all Party members to the
      importance of developing and strengthening work among the peasantry. It is
      necessary to acquaint the peasantry (and, especially, the rural
      proletariat) with the Social-Democratic programme in its entirety, and to
      explain the significance of the agrarian programme as the first and

    

      immediate demands under the existing system. It is necessary to get
      class-conscious peasants and intellectuals in the countryside to form
      solidly united groups of Social-Democrats, which would maintain constant
      contact with the Party committees. It is necessary to counter the
      propaganda conducted among the peasantry by the Socialist-Revolutionaries,
      propaganda which spreads unprincipledness and reactionary Narodnik
      prejudices.
    

Written on August 5 (18)-10 (23), 1903
Published according to the manuscript
First published in 1930 in Lenin Miscellany XV



    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

7. Draft Rules of the R.S.D.L.P.

|

9. First Speech on the Agenda of the Congress

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## First Speech On the Agenda of the Congress









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 9. First Speech on the Agenda of the Congress







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

9. First Speech on the Agenda of the Congress
July 18 (31)

      I should like to make a remark. It would be wrong, it is claimed, to make
      the question of the Bund the first item on the agenda, since the reports
      should be the first item, the programme the second, and the Bund the
      third. The arguments in favour of this order will not stand
      criticism. They amount to the presumption that the Party as a whole has
      not yet reached agreement on the programme, and that it is possible that
      precisely on this question we may part company. I am surprised at that. It
      is true that we have not yet adopted a programme, but the surmise that a
      rupture may take place over the programme is conjectural in the highest
      degree. No such tendencies have been discernible in the Party, at least as
      far as its literature is concerned, which of late has given the fullest
      reflection of Party opinion. There are both formal and moral reasons for
      making the question of the Bund the first item on the agenda. Formally, we
      stand by the Manifesto of 1898, but the Bund has expressed a desire for a
      radical change in our Party’s organisation. Morally, many other
      organisations have expressed their disagreement with the Bund over this
      question; that has caused sharp differences leading even to polemics. The
      Congress therefore cannot begin harmonious work until these differences
      have been removed. As to the delegates’ reports, it is possible that they
      may not be heard in pleno at all. I therefore second the agenda
      in the order approved by the Organising Committee.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

8. Draft Resolutions Not Submitted to the Congress

|

10. Second Speech on the Agenda of the Congress

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Second Speech On the Agenda of the Congress









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 10. Second Speech on the Agenda of the Congress







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

10. Second Speech on the Agenda of the Congress
July 18 (31)

      Now that the Congress has decided what shall be the first item on
      our agenda, the third point is the only moot point with regard to
      the rest of the agenda. This item reads: “Creation of the Central
      Organ of the Party, or endorsement of such.” Some comrades consider that
      this item should be shifted farther down, because, firstly, one cannot
      speak of the Central Organ until a decision has been taken on the
      organisation of the Party in general and of its central body in
      particular, and so on; and, secondly, because many committees have already
      expressed their views on the substance of this question. I consider the
      second argument wrong, for declarations by the committees are not binding
      on the Congress and, formally speaking, have no deciding vote at the
      Congress. The other objection is wrong because, before settling details of
      organisation, the Party Rules, and the like, we must first definitely
      decide on the trend of Russian Social-Democracy. In fact, it is this
      question that has divided us so long, and the mere adoption of a programme
      cannot remove all the differences dividing us on this issue; that
      can be done only by deciding, immediately after the question of
      the programme, what kind of Central Organ of the Party we should form
      anew, or what old one we should endorse with certain modifications.
    

      That is why I second the agenda in the order endorsed by the Organising
      Committee.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

9. First Speech on the Agenda of the Congress

|

11. Speech on the Actions of the Organising Committee

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Speech On the Actions of the Organising Committee









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 11. Speech on the Actions of the Organising Committee







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

11. Speech on the Actions of the Organising Committee
July 18
(31)[1]

      I cannot agree with Comrade Yegorov. It is he who has in fringed
      the standing orders of the Congress and it is he who is against the clause
      on imperative mandates. I do not doubt the existence of the Organising
      Committee, just as I do not doubt the existence of the Iskra
      organisation, which also has its own organisation and its own Rules. But
      as soon as the standing orders of the Congress were announced, the
      Iskra organisation informed its delegates that they have full
      freedom of action at the Congress. Just imagine our position, as members
      of the Credentials Committee of the Congress, who yesterday heard two
      members of the Organising Committee, Comrades Stein and Pavlovich, and
      today are hearing an entirely new proposal. There are experienced comrades
      here who have attended many international congresses. These comrades could
      tell you what a storm of indignation has always been aroused when people
      say one thing at commit tees and another on the floor of the Congress.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      Lenin’s speech on the actions of the Organising Committee was evoked by
      the following incident. Before the Congress met, the Organising Committee
      had already rejected the demand of the Borba group for their
      representative to attend the Congress with a deliberative voice. The
      Credentials Committee endorsed the Organising Committee’s proposal. When
      Credentials. Committee’s decision had been reported to the Congress, one
      of the members of the Organising Committee demanded a recess so that this
      question might be reconsidered in the Organising Committee. During the
      recess, the Organising Committee met and by a majority of votes (against
      one) decided to invite the representative of the Borba group to
      attend the Congress with a deliberative voice.
    

      Those mentioned in the speech were: Yegorov—the Menshevik
      E. Y. Levin; Stein—the Menshevik E.M. Alexandrova; Pavlovich—
      the Bolshevik P. A. Krasikov.
    

 
  

10. Second Speech on the Agenda of the Congress

|

12. Speech on the Attendance of the Polish Social-Democrats at the Congress

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Speech On the Attendance of the Polish
      Social-Democrats at the Congress









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 12. Speech on the Attendance of the Polish Social-Democrats at the Congress







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

12. Speech on the Attendance of the Polish Social-Democrats at the Congress
July 18 (31)

      In its report, the committee holds that the Polish comrades’ presence at
      the Congress is desirable, but only in a deliberative capacity. In my
      opinion that is quite right, and it seems to me quite reasonable to begin
      the resolution of the committee with a statement to this effect. The
      presence of the Letts and the Lithuanians would also be highly desirable,
      but, unfortunately, that is not feasible. The Polish comrades could have
      announced their conditions of affiliation at any time, but they did not do
      so. The Organising Commit tee was therefore right in exercising restraint
      towards them. Nor is the question clarified by the letter from the Polish
      Social-Democrats which was read here. In view of this, I move that the
      Polish comrades be invited as guests.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

11. Speech on the Actions of the Organising Committee

|

13. Speech on the Place of the Bund in the R.S.D.L.P.

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Speech On the Place of the Bund In the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 13. Speech on the Place of the Bund in the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

13. Speech on the Place of the Bund in the R.S.D.L.P.
July 20 (August 2)

      I shall first deal with

      Hofman’s[1]
      speech and his expression “a compact majority.” Comrade Hofman uses
      these words by way of reproach. In my opinion we should be proud, not
      ashamed, of the fact that there is a compact majority at the Congress. And
      we shall be prouder still if our whole Party proves to be a compact, a
      highly compact, 90 per cent, majority. (Applause.) The majority
      were right in making the position of the Bund in the Party the first item
      on the agenda, and the Bundists at once proved this by submitting their
      so-called Rules, but in essence proposing federation. Once there
      are members in the Party who propose federation and others who reject it,
      there could be no other course open but to make the question of the Bund
      the first item on the agenda. It is no use forcing your favours on
      anybody, and the internal affairs of the Party cannot be discussed until
      we have firmly and uncompromisingly settled whether or not we want to
      march together.
    

      The crux of the issue has not always been presented quite correctly in the
      debate. The point of the matter is that, in the opinion of many Party
      members, federation is harmful and runs counter to the principles
      of Social-Democracy as applied to existing Russian conditions. Federation
      is harmful because it sanctions segregation and alienation,
      elevates them to a principle, to a law. Complete alienation does in deed
      prevail among us, and we ought not to sanction it, or cover it with a
      fig-leaf, but combat it and resolutely acknowledge and proclaim the
      necessity of firmly and unswervingly advancing towards the
      closest unity. That is why we reject

    

      federation in principle, in

limine[On the
threshold.—Ed.]

      (as the Latin phrase has it); that is why we reject all
      obligatory partitions that serve to divide us. As it is, there will always
      be different groupings in the Party, groupings of comrades who do not
      think quite alike on questions of programme, tactics or organisation; but
      let there be only one division into groups throughout the Party,
      that is, let all like-minded members join in a single group, instead of
      groups first being formed in one section of the Party, separately
      from the groups in another section of the Party, and then having a union
      not of groups holding different views or different shades of opinion, but
      of sections of the Party, each containing different groups. I repeat, we
      recognise no obligatory partitions, and that is why we reject
      federation in principle.
    

      I shall now pass to the question of autonomy. Comrade Lieber has said that
      federation means centralism, while autonomy means decentralism. Can it be
      that Comrade Lieber takes the Congress members for six-year-old children,
      who may be regaled with such sophistries? Is it not clear that centralism
      demands the absence of all partitions between the central body
      and even the most remote and out-of-the-way sections of the Party? Our
      central body will be given the absolute right to communicate directly with
      every Party member. The Bundists would only laugh if someone would propose
      to them a form of “centralism” within the Bund, under
      which its Central Committee could not communicate with all the Kovno
      groups and comrades otherwise than through the Kovno
      Committee. Incidentally, as regards the committees: Comrade Lieber has
      exclaimed with feeling, “What is the good of talking about the
      Bund’s autonomy if it is to be an organisation subordinated to one central
      body? After all, you would not grant autonomy to some Tula Committee!” You
      are mistaken, Comrade Lieber; we will certainly and most decidedly grant
      autonomy to “some” Tula Committee, too, autonomy in the sense of
      freedom from petty interference by the central body, although the duty of
      obeying that body will, of course, remain. I have taken the words
      “petty interference” from the Bund leaflet, “Autonomy or
      Federation?” The Bund has advanced this freedom from

    

      “petty interference” as a condition, as a
demand to the Party. The mere fact that it advances such ridiculous
demands shows how muddled the Bund is on the question at issue. Does the
Bund really think that the Party would tolerate the existence of a
central body that indulged in “petty” interference
in the affairs of any Party organisation or group? Is this not,
in effect, precisely that “organised distrust” which has
already been mentioned at this Congress? Such distrust runs through all
the proposals and arguments of the Bundists. Is it not, in fact, the
duty of our entire Party to fight, for example, for
full equality and even for recognition of the right of
nations to self-determination?  Consequently, if any section of our
Party failed in this duty, it would unquestionably be liable to
condemnation by virtue of our principles; it would unquestionably be
liable to correction on the part of the central institutions of
the Party. And if the neglect of that duty were conscious and
deliberate, despite full opportunity to carry out that duty, then that
would be treachery.
    

      Further. Comrade Lieber has asked us in moving tones how it can be
proved that autonomy is able to guarantee to the Jewish workers’
      movement that independence which is absolutely essential to it. A
      strange question, indeed! How can it be proved that one of the several
      paths suggested is the right one? Tie only way is to try it and see. My
      reply to Comrade Lieber’s question is:

        M a r c h

  w i t h

  u s,  

      and we undertake to prove to you in practice that all legitimate demands
      for independence are gratified in full.
    

      When I hear disputes about the place of the Bund, I always recollect the
      British miners. They are excellently organised, better than any other
      workers. And because of that they want to thwart the general
      demand for an 8-hour day put forward by all

      proletarians.[2]
      These miners have the same narrow idea of the unity of the proletariat as
      our Bundists. Let the sad example of the miners serve as a warning to our
      comrades of the Bund.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      Hofman—pseudonym of Bund member V. Kossovsky.
    



[2]

      This refers to the Northumberland and Durham miners who, in the eighties
      of the nineteenth century, secured a 7-hour working day for skilled
      underground workers—through a deal with the coal-owners—but
      later for a number of years opposed the legal enactment of an 8-hour
      working day for all workers in Britain.
    

 
  

12. Speech on the Attendance of the Polish Social-Democrats at the Congress

|

14. Speech on the Party Programme

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Speech On the Party Programme









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 14. Speech on the Party Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

14. Speech on the Party Programme
July 22 (August 4)

      First of all, I must draw attention to the highly characteristic way in
      which Comrade Lieber confuses a Marshal of the Nobility with a section of
      the toilers and the exploited. This confusion is a feature of all the
      debates. Isolated episodes of our controversy are being everywhere
      confused with the establishment of basic principles. One cannot deny, as
      Comrade Lieber does, the possibility of even a section (one or
      another) of the working and exploited population coming over to the side
      of the proletariat. You will recall that in 1852, referring to the revolt
      of the French peasants, Marx wrote (in The Eighteenth Brumaire)
      that the peasantry acts sometimes as a representative of the past and
      sometimes as a representative of the future; one can appeal not only to
      the peasant’s prejudice, but to his

      judgement[1]
      as well. You will further recall that Marx said the Communards were quite
      right in declaring the cause of the Commune that of the peasantry as

      well.[2]
      I repeat, it cannot be doubt ed that, under certain conditions, it is by
      no means impossible for one section or another of the working people to
      come over to the side of the proletariat. The important thing is to define
      these conditions correctly. And the condition we are speaking of is
      expressed quite accurately in the words “place themselves at the
      standpoint of the proletariat.” It is these words that draw a definite
      line of demarcation between us, Social-Democrats, and all pseudo-socialist
      trends in general, and the so-called Socialist-Revolutionaries in
      particular.
    
 

      I shall now go over to that disputed passage in my pamphlet, What Is
to Be Done?, which gave rise to so much discussion here. After all
this discussion, I think that the question has been so clarified that
very little remains for me to add. It is obvious that here an episode in
the struggle against “economism” has been confused with a
discussion of the principles of a major theoretical question (the
formation of an ideology). Moreover, this episode has been presented in
an absolutely false light.
    

      In support of this last statement, I might refer first of all to Comrades
      Akimov and Martynov, who spoke here. They made it quite clear that it was
      indeed an episode in the struggle against “economism” which
      was at issue here. They expressed views which have already been termed
      opportunism (and quite rightly so). They actually went so far as to
      “refute” the theory of impoverishment, to
      “dispute” the dictatorship of the proletariat, and even to
      advocate the “Erfüllungstheorie,” as Comrade Akimov
      called it. To tell the truth, I do not quite know what that means. Perhaps
      Comrade Akimov meant to say
      “Aushöhlungstheorie”— the “theory of the
      hollowing out” of capitalism, that is, one of the most popular and
      current ideas of the Bernsteinian theory. In his defence of the old
      mainstays of “economism,” Comrade Akimov even advanced such an
      incredibly eccentric argument as that the word proletariat does not figure
      in our programme even once in the nominative case. At most, Comrade Akimov
      exclaimed, they have the proletariat in the genitive case. And so it
      appears that the nominative is the most honourable case, whereas the
      genitive takes second place in the scale of honour. It only remains to
      convey this idea—through a special commission, perhaps—to
      Comrade Ryazanov, so as to enable him to supplement his first scientific
      work on the letters of the alphabet with another treatise on the cases....
    

      As to the direct references to my pamphlet, What Is to Be Done?,
      it will be quite easy for me to show that they have been wrenched from the
      context. It is claimed that Lenin says nothing about any conflicting
      trends, but categorically affirms that the working-class movement
      invariably “tends” to succumb to bourgeois
      ideology. Is that so? Have I not said that t.he working-class movement is
      drawn

    

      towards the bourgeois outlook with the benevolent assistance of
      the Schulze-Delitzsches and others like

them?[See present edition,
Vol. 5.—Ed.]

      And who is meant here by “others like them”? None other than the
      “economists,” none other than those who, for example, used to say
      then that bourgeois democracy in Russia is a phantom. Today it is easy to
      talk so cheaply about bourgeois radicalism and liberalism, when examples
      of them are to be found right before us. But was that the case previously?
    

      Lenin takes no account whatever of the fact that the workers, too, have a
      share in the formation of an ideology. Is that so? Have I not said time
      and again that the shortage of fully class-conscious workers,
      worker-leaders, and worker-revolutionaries is, in fact, the greatest
      deficiency in our movement? Have I not said there that the training of
      such worker-revolutionaries must be our immediate task? Is there no
      mention there of the importance of developing a trade-union movement and
      creating a special trade-union literature? Is not a desperate struggle
      waged there against every attempt to lower the level of the advanced
      workers to that of the masses, or of the average

      workers?[Ibid.—Ed.]
    

      To conclude. We all now know that the “economists” have gone
      to one extreme. To straighten matters out some body had to pull in the
      other direction—and that is what I have done. I am convinced that
      Russian Social-Democracy will always vigorously straighten out whatever
      has been twisted by opportunism of any kind, and that therefore our line
      of action will always be the straightest and the fittest for action.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      Lenin is referring to Karl Marx’s Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte, Chapter VII (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works,
 Vol. 1, Moscow, 1958, pp. 334-36).
    



[2]

      Lenin is referring to Karl Marx’s Civil War in France (see Marx
      and Engels. Selected Works, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 525).
    

 
  

13. Speech on the Place of the Bund in the R.S.D.L.P.

|

15. Report on the Party Rules

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Report On the Party Rules









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 15. Report on the Party Rules







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

15.  Report on the Party Rules
July 29 (August 11)

      Lenin (the reporter) gives an explanation of the draft Rules submitted by
      him. The basic idea of the Rules, he says, is that of a division of
      functions. Hence, the division into two central bodies, for
      example, is not due to their geographical division (Russia and abroad),
      but is a logical consequence of a division of functions. It is the
      function of the Central Committee to exercise practical leadership, that
      of the Central Organ to exercise ideological leadership. To co-ordinate
      the activities of these two central bodies, to preclude disunity between
      them, and, in part, to settle disputes, a Council is needed, which should
      not at all be purely an institution of arbitration. The paragraphs in the
      Rules which govern the relations between the Central Committee and the
      local committees, and define the Central Committee’s competence cannot and
      should not enumerate all the points within that competence. Such an
      enumeration is inconvenient and impossible, for it is inconceivable that
      all possible cases should be foreseen, and, more over, points unprovided
      for might appear to be outside the competence of the Central
      Committee. The Central Commit tee itself should be allowed to determine
      the sphere of its competence, since any local matter may affect the
      interests of the Party as a whole, and the Central Committee should be in
      a position to intervene in local affairs, even going against local
      interests, should such action be in the interests of the Party as a whole.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

14. Speech on the Party Programme

|

16. First Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## First Speech In the Discussion On the Agrarian
      Programme









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 16. First Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

16. First Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme

      I shall in the first place mention a detail that came up during the
      debate. Comrade Yegorov expressed regret that there was no report which
      might have considerably facilitated and directed our whole debate. Since
      it was I who was suggested as reporter, I shall, in a
      manner of speaking, have to defend myself for the absence of a report. And
      I shall say in my defence that I have a report: it is my reply to Comrade

      X,[See pp. 438-53 of this
volume.—Ed.]

      which, in fact, replies to the most widespread of the objections and
      misunderstandings aroused by our agrarian programme, and has been
      distributed to all the Congress delegates. A report is no less a report
      for having been printed and distributed to the delegates instead of being
      delivered by word of mouth.
    

      I shall now pass to the contents of the speeches by those who,
      unfortunately, have disregarded this particular re port of mine. Comrade
      Martynov, for example, failed even to take account of the earlier
      literature on our agrarian programme, when he spoke again and again about
      redressing a historical injustice, of a needless reversion to forty years
      back, of the destruction of the feudalism of the sixties, rather than that
      of today, and so on. In replying to these arguments, I shall have to
      repeat what I have said before. If we acted

        s o l e l y  

      on the principle of “redressing a historical injustice,” we would be
      guiding ourselves by nothing but democratic phraseology. But we refer to
      the survivals

    

      of serf-ownership which exist around us, to present-day
      realities, to what is today hampering and retarding the proletariat’s
      struggle for emancipation. We are accused of reverting to the hoary
      past. This accusation reveals only an ignorance of the most generally
      known facts regarding the activities of Social-Democrats in all
      countries. One of the aims they set themselves and work for everywhere is
      to complete what the bourgeoisie has left unfinished. That is
      what we are doing. And in order to do so, we have unavoidably to revert to
      the past; and that is what the Social-Democrats in every country are
      doing, always reverting to their 1789, or to their
      1848. Similarly, the Russian Social-Democrats cannot but revert
      to their 1861, and must do so all the more energetically and
      frequently since our so-called peasant “Reform” has achieved
      so little in the way of democratic changes.
    

      As to Comrade Gorin, he too is guilty of the common error of forgetting
      the serf bondage that actually exists. Comrade Gorin says that “hope
      of getting the cut-off lands perforce keeps the small peasant bound to an
      anti-proletarian ideology.” Actually, however, it is not
      “hope” that he will get the cut-off lands, but the
      present cut-off lands themselves that forcibly maintain serf
      bondage, and there is no way out of this bondage, out of these serf forms
      of land leasing, except by converting the pseudotenants into free owners.
    

      Lastly, Comrade Yegorov asked the authors of the programme what the
      programme signified. Is the programme, he asked, a conclusion drawn from
      our basic conceptions of the economic evolution of Russia, a scientific
      anticipation of the possible and inevitable result of political changes
      (in which case Comrade Yegorov might agree with us)? Or is our programme a
      practical slogan for agitation? In that case we could not beat the record
      of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and the programme must be regarded as
      incorrect. I must say that I do not understand the distinction Comrade
      Yegorov draws. If our programme did not meet the first condition, it would
      be incorrect and we could not accept it. If, however, the programme is
      correct, it cannot but furnish a slogan of practical value for purposes of
      agitation. The contradiction between Comrade Yegorov’s two alternatives is

    

      only a seeming one; it cannot exist in fact, because a correct theoretical
      decision guarantees enduring success in agitation. And it is for
      enduring success that we are working, not in the least disconcerted by
      temporary reverses.
    

      Comrade Lieber likewise repeated objections long ago refuted; he was
      astonished at the “meagreness” of our programme and demanded
      “radical reforms” in the agrarian sphere as well. Comrade
      Lieber has forgotten the difference between the democratic and the
      socialist parts of the programme: what he has taken for
      “meagreness” is the absence of anything socialistic in the
      democratic programme. He has failed to notice that the socialist part of
      our agrarian programme is to be found elsewhere, namely in the section on
      the workers, which also applies to agriculture. Only
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, with their characteristic lack of principle,
      are capable of confusing, as they constantly do, democratic and
      socialistic demands. But the party of the proletariat is in duty bound to
      separate and distinguish between them in the strictest fashion.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

15. Report on the Party Rules

|

17. Second Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Second Speech In the Discussion On the Agrarian
      Programme









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 17. Second Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

17. Second Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme
August 1 (14)

      Before passing to details, I want to object to certain general statements,
      and in the first place to those of Comrade Martynov. Comrade Martynov says
      that it is not the feudalism of the past we must combat, but the feudalism
      that exists today. That is true, but let me remind you of my reply to
      X. The latter referred to Saratov Gubernia. I have consulted the data for
      that gubernia and found that the cut-off lands there amount to 600,000
      dessiatines, i.e., two-fifths of the total land held by the peasants under
      serfdom, while the rented land amounts to 900.000
      dessiatines. Consequently, two-thirds of the rented land consists of
      cut-off lands. That means that we are out to restore two-thirds of the
      laud held in tenure. Hence it is not a ghost we are fighting, but a real
      evil. We would arrive at the state of affairs which exists in Ireland,
      where the present peasant reform was required, which is turning the tenant
      farmers into small owners. The analogy between Ireland and Russia was
      already pointed out by the Narodniks in their economic literature. Comrade
      Gorin says that the measure I propose is not the best; that it would be
      better to turn the peasants into free tenant farmers. But he is mistaken
      in thinking that it would be better to turn semi-free tenants into free
      tenants. We are not inventing a transition, but are proposing one that
      would bring the land tenure laws into conformity with the actually
      existing conditions of land tenure, thereby abolishing the bondage
      relations that exist today. Martynov says that it is not our demands

    

      that are meagre, but the principle from which they are derived. But that
      is like the arguments the. Socialist-Revolutionaries bring against us. We
      are pursuing two qualitatively different aims in the countryside: firstly,
      we want to achieve freedom for bourgeois relations; secondly, we want to
      conduct the proletarian struggle. Despite the Socialist-Revolutionaries’
      prejudices, it is our task to show the peasants where the revolutionary
      proletarian task of the peasant proletariat begins. Comrade Kostrov’s
      objections are therefore groundless. We are told that the peas ants will
      not be satisfied with our programme and will go further. But we are not
      afraid of that; we have our socialist programme for that eventuality, and
      consequently are not afraid even of a redistribution of the land, which
      terrifies Comrades Makhov and

      Kostrov[1] so much.
    

      I conclude. Comrade Yegorov has called our reliance on the peasants
      chimerical. No! We are not carried away; we are sufficiently sceptical,
      and that is why we say to the peasant proletarian: “Now you are
      fighting by the side of the peasant bourgeoisie, but you must always be
      prepared to fight against that same bourgeoisie, and you will wage that
      fight together with the urban industrial proletarians.”
    

      In 1852 Marx said that the peasants had judgement as well as
      prejudices. And now, when we point out to the poor peasants the cause of
      their poverty, we may count on success. We believe that, since the
      Social-Democrats have now taken up the struggle for the interests of the
      peasants, we shall in future be reckoning with the fact that the peasant
      masses will get used to looking upon Social-Democracy as the defender of
      their interests.
    

    

   
 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      Makhov—pseudonym of the Menshevik D. P. Kalafati;
      Kostrov— pseudonym of the Menshevik N. N. Jordania.
    

 
  

16. First Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme

|

18. Third Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Third Speech In the Discussion On the Agrarian
      Programme









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 18. Third Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

18. Third Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme
August 1 (14)

      There is nothing for Comrade Lieber to be surprised at. He demands of us a
      single general criterion, but there is no such criterion. Sometimes one
      demand has to be made, at other times another. We have no stereotyped
      standards. Lieber claims that our demand for the abolition of
      serf-ownership coincides with the liberals’ demands. But the liberals do
      not say how this demand is to be carried out. We, for our part, say that
      it must be carried out not by the bureaucracy, but by the oppressed
      classes, and that means the way of revolution. Therein lies the
      fundamental difference between us and the liberals, whose talk about
      changes and reforms “pollutes” the minds of the people. If we
      were to set forth in detail all the demands for the abo lition of
      serf-ownership, we should fill whole volumes. That is why we mention only
      the more important forms and varieties of serfdom, and leave it to our
      committees in the various localities to draw up and advance their
      particular demands in development of the general programme. Trotsky’s
      remark to the effect that we cannot concern ourselves with local demands
      is wrong, for the question of the khizani and the temporarily
      bound

      peasants[1]
      is not only a local one. Moreover, it is known in agrarian literature.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 



[1]

Khizani—the name given to the landless peasants of Georgia,
      who in the distant past had been settled on the lands of the landlords on
      specially agreed terms. The khizani were not formally considered
      serfs, enjoyed personal liberty, but remained perpetual tenants without
      any rights. The 1861 Peasant Reform did not apply to the

   

      khizani, who continued to be completely dependent on the
      landlords. These began to increase the khizani’s services and
      confiscate the land they held. The khizani system was abolished
      after the Great October Socialist Revolution.
    

Temporarily bound peasants was the name given to those former
      serf peasants who were still compelled to carry out certain duties
      (payment of quit-rent or performance of corvée service) for the use
      of their land even after the abolition of serfdom in 1861 and until they
      started paying redemption money to the landlord for their allotments. From
      the moment the redemption contract was concluded, the peasants ceased to
      be “temporarily bound” and joined the category of
      “peasant property-owners.”
    

      On Lenin’s proposal, the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. added to the
      agrarian section of the Party programme the demand for “transfer to
      the ownership of the peasants in the Caucasus of lands which they are
      using as temporarily bound peasants, khizani, and so forth.”
    

 
  

17. Second Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme

|

19. Fourth Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Fourth Speech In the Discussion On the Agrarian
      Programme









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 19. Fourth Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

19. Fourth Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme
August 1 (14)

      Comrade Lieber proposes deletion of the clause on the cut-off lands, on
      the sole grounds that he does not like the peasant committees. That is
      strange. Since we have agreed on the fundamental question—that the
      cut-off lands keep the peasants in bondage—the formation of
      committees is only a secondary matter, and to reject the whole clause on
      account of that would be illogical. It is strange, too, to hear the
      question as to how we are to influence the peasant committees. I hope that
      the Social-Democrats will then find it easier to arrange congresses, and
      will there decide how to act in each particular case.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

18. Third Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme

|

20. First Speech in the Discussion on the Party Rules

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## First Speech In the Discussion On the Party Rules









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 20. First Speech in the Discussion on the Party Rules







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

20. First Speech in the Discussion on the Party Rules
August 2 (15)

      Lenin delivers a brief speech in support of his formulation, emphasising
      in particular its stimulating effect: “Organise!” It should not be
      imagined that Party organisations must consist solely of professional
      revolutionaries. We need the most diverse organisations of all types,
      ranks and shades, beginning with extremely limited and secret and ending
      with very broad, free, lose Organisationen. Its endorsement by
      the Central Committee is an essential condition for a Party organisation.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 

 
  

19. Fourth Speech in the Discussion on the Agrarian Programme

|

21. Second Speech in the Discussion on the Party Rules

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Second Speech In the Discussion On the Party Rules









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 21. Second Speech in the Discussion on the Party Rules







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

21. Second Speech in the Discussion on the Party Rules

      I should like first of all to make two remarks on minor points. First, on
      the subject of Axelrod’s kind proposal (I am not speaking ironically) to
      “strike a bargain.” I would willingly respond to this appeal, for I
      by no means consider our difference so vital as to be a matter of life or
      death to the Party. We shall certainly not perish because of an
      unfortunate clause in the Rules! But since it has come to the point of
      choosing between two formulations, I simply cannot abandon my
      firm conviction that Martov’s formulation is worse than the
      original draft and may, in certain circumstances, cause no little
      harm to the Party. The second remark concerns Comrade

      Brucker.[1]
      It is only natural for Comrade Brucker, who wishes to apply the elective
      principle everywhere, to have accepted my formulation, the only one that
      defines at all exactly the concept of a Party member. I therefore
      fail to understand Comrade Martov’s delight at Comrade Brucker’s agreement
      with me. Is it possible that in actual fact Comrade Martov makes a point
      of guiding himself by the opposite of what Brucker says, without
      examining his motives and arguments?
    

      To come to the main subject, I must say that Comrade Trotsky has
      completely misunderstood Comrade Plekhanov’s fundamental idea, and his
      arguments have therefore evaded the gist of the matter. He has spoken of
      intellectuals and workers, of the class point of view and of the mass
      movement, but he has failed to notice a basic question: does my
      formulation narrow or expand the concept of a Party

    

      member? If he had asked himself that question, he would easily have seen
      that my formulation narrows this concept, while Martov’s expands it, for
      (to use Martov’s own correct expression) what distinguishes his concept is
      its “elasticity.” And in the period of Party life that we are now
      passing through it is just this “elasticity” that undoubtedly
      opens the door to all elements of confusion, vacillation, and
      opportunism. To refute this simple and obvious conclusion it has to be
      proved that there are no such elements; but it has not even occurred to
      Comrade Trotsky to do that. Nor can that be proved, for everyone knows
      that such elements exist in plenty, and that they are to be found in the
      working class too. The need to safeguard the firmness of the Party’s line
      and the purity of its principles has now become particularly
      ·urgent, for, with the restoration of its unity, the Party will
      recruit into its ranks a great many unstable elements, whose number will
      increase with the growth of the Party. Comrade Trotsky completely
      misinterpreted the main idea of my book, What Is to Be Done?,
      when he spoke about the Party not being a conspiratorial organisation
      (many others too raised this objection). He forgot that in my book I
      propose a number of various types of organisations, from the most secret
      and most exclusive to comparatively broad and “loose”
      (lose)

      organisations.[See present edition,
Vol. 5.—Ed.]

      He forgot that the Party must be only the vanguard, the leader of the vast
      masses of the working class, the whole (or nearly the whole) of which
      works “under the control and direction” of the Party
      organisations, but the whole of which does not and should not belong to a
      “party.” Now let us see what conclusions Comrade Trotsky arrives at
      in consequence of his fundamental mistake. He has told us here that if
      rank after rank of workers were arrested, and all the workers were to
      declare that they did not belong to the Party, our Party would be a
      strange one indeed! Is it not the other way round? Is it not Comrade
      Trotsky’s argument that is strange? He regards as something sad that which
      a revolutionary with any experience at all would only rejoice at. If
      hundreds and thousands of workers who were arrested for taking part in
      strikes and demonstrations did not prove

    

      to be members of Party organisations, it would only show that we have good
      organisations, and that we. are fulfilling our task of keeping a more or
      less limited circle of leaders secret and of drawing the broadest possible
      masses into the movement.
    

      The root of the mistake made by those who stand for Martov’s formulation
      is that they not only ignore one of the main evils of our Party life, but
      even sanctify it. The evil is that, at a time when political discontent is
      almost universal, when conditions require our work to be carried on in
      complete secrecy, and when most of our activities have to be confined to
      limited, secret circles and even to private meetings, it is extremely
      difficult, almost impossible in fact, for us to distinguish those who only
      talk from those who do the work. There is hardly another country in the
      world where the jumbling of these two categories is as common and as
      productive of such boundless confusion and harm as in Russia. We are
      suffering sorely from this evil not only among the intelligentsia, but
      also among the working class, and Comrade Martov’s formulation sanctions
      it. This formulation necessarily tends to make Party members of all
      and sundry; Comrade Martov himself was forced to admit this, although
      with a reservation: “Yes, if you like,” he said. But that
      is precisely what we do not like! And that is precisely why we are so
      adamant in our opposition to Martov’s formulation. It would be better if
      ten who do work should not call themselves Party members (real workers
      don’t hunt after titles!) than that one who only talks should have the
      right and opportunity to be a Party member. That is a principle which
      seems to me irrefutable, and which compels me to fight against Martov. The
      objection has been presented to me that we confer no rights on Party
      members, and that therefore there can be no abuses. This kind of objection
      is quite untenable: if we do not state what particular rights a Party
      member enjoys, please note that neither do we say that there is to be any
      restriction on the rights of Party members. That is point
      one. Secondly—and this is the main point—irrespective even of
      rights, we must not forget that every Party member is responsible for the
      Party, and that the Party is responsible for every one of its
      members. In view of the conditions in

    

      which we have to carry on our political activities, in view of the present
      rudimentary state of real political organisation, it would be simply
      dangerous and harmful to grant the right of membership to people who are
      not members of a Party organisation and to make the Party responsible for
      people who do not belong to an organisation (perhaps
      deliberately). Comrade Martov was horrified at the idea that one who is
      not a member of a Party organisation will have no right to declare in
      court that he is a Party member, however energetically he may have done
      his work. That does not frighten me. On the contrary, serious harm would
      be done if a person who calls himself a Party member, even though he does
      not belong to any Party organisation, were to behave unworthily in
      court. It would be impossible to deny that such a person was working under
      the control and direction of the organisation—impossible because of
      the very vagueness of the term. Actually—and there can be no doubt
      about this—the words “under the control and direction”
      will mean that there will be neither control nor direction. The
      Central Committee will never be able to exercise real control over all who
      do the work but do not belong to organisations. It is our task to place
      actual control in the hands of the Central Committee. It is our
      task to safeguard the firmness, consistency, and purity of our Party. We
      must strive to raise the title and the significance of a Party member
      higher, higher and still higher—and I therefore oppose Martov’s
      formulation.
    

    

    
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

      Brucker—pseudonym of the Menshevik Mrs. Makhnovets.
    

 
  

20. First Speech in the Discussion on the Party Rules

|

22. Speech at the Election of the Editorial Board of Iskra

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Speech at the Election of the Editorial Board of
      









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 22. Speech at the Election of the Editorial Board of Iskra







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

22. Speech at the Election of the Editorial Board of Iskra
August 7
(20)[1]

      Comrades! Martov’s speech was so strange that I find myself obliged to
      protest emphatically against his presentation of the question. In the
      first place, let me remind you that Martov’s protest against the editorial
      board election itself, his refusal, and that of his colleagues, to work on
      the editorial board which is to be elected, is in crying contradiction to
      what we all said (Martov included) when Iskra was recognised as
      the Party organ. The objection was then presented to us that such
      recognition was pointless because you cannot endorse a mere title without
      endorsing the editorial board; and Comrade Martov himself explained to the
      objectors that this was not true, that it was a definite
      political trend that was being endorsed, that the composition of the
      editorial board was not being predetermined in any way, and that
      the election of the editors would come up later under Point

      24[During the Congress it was changed to Point 18 on
the agenda.— Ed.]

      of our

      Tagesordnung[Agenda.—Ed.]

      Comrade Martov, therefore, had no right whatever now to speak
about the recognition of Iskra being limited. Comrade Martov’s
statement that his inclusion in the trio without his old colleagues of
the editorial board would cast a slur on his whole political reputation
is therefore indicative only of an astounding confusion of political
ideas. To adopt this point of view is to deny the right of the
Congress to hold new

    

      elections, make new appointments of any kind, and change the composition
      of its authorised boards. The Organising Committee provides an example of
      the confusion created by such an approach. We expressed to the Organising
      Committee the complete confidence and gratitude of the Congress but at the
      same time we ridiculed the very idea of the Congress having no right to
      examine the internal relations of the Organising Committee, and rejected
      every supposition that the old composition of the Organising Committee
      would be an embarrassment to an “uncomradely” change of this
      composition and the formation of a new Central Committee of any
      elements we pleased. I repeat: Comrade Martov’s views on the
      permissibility of electing part of the old board reflect an
      extreme confusion of political ideas.
    

      I now come to the question of the “two trios.” Comrade Martov said
      that this whole plan for “two trios” was the work of one
      person, of one member of the editorial board (that it was my plan, in
      fact), and that no one else was responsible for it. I categorically
      protest against this assertion and declare that it is simply
      untrue. Let me remind Comrade Martov that several weeks before the
      Congress I plainly told him and another member of the editorial board that
      at the Congress I would demand the tree election of the
      editorial board. I gave up this plan only because Comrade Martov
      himself suggested to me the more convenient plan of electing
      “two trios.” I thereupon formulated this plan on paper and
      sent it first 01 all to Comrade Martov himself, who returned it
      to me with some corrections—here it is, I have the very copy, with
      Martov’s corrections in red ink. Many of the comrades later saw this plan
      dozens of times, all the members of the editorial board saw it too, and
      no one at any time formally protested against it. I say
      “formally” because, if I am not mistaken, Comrade Axelrod on
      one occasion dropped some private remark to the effect that he did not
      sympathise with the plan. But it is obvious that for a protest the
      editorial board required something more than a private remark. It was not
      without reason that, even before the Congress, the editorial board adopted
      a formal decision to invite a definite seventh person, so that,
      should it be necessary to make a collective statement at the Congress, a
      firm decision could be made—which we so often

    

      failed to reach on our board of six. And all the members of the
editorial board know that the addition of a seventh permanent
member to the board of six was a matter of constant concern to us for a
very long time. And so, I repeat, the election of “two
trios” was a perfectly natural solution, and one which I
incorporated in my plan with the knowledge and consent of
Comrade Martov. And on many subsequent occasions, Comrade Martov,
together with Comrade Trotsky and others, at a number of private
meetings of Iskra supporters, advocated this system of electing
“two trios.”
    

      However, in correcting Martov’s statement about the private character of
      the plan for “two trios,” I have no

      in tention 

      of denying Martov’s assertion of the “political significance”
      of the step we took in not endorsing the old editorial board. On the
      contrary, I fully and unreservedly agree with Comrade Martov that this
      step is of great political significance—only not the significance
      which Martov ascribes to it. He said that it was an act in a struggle for
      influence on the Central Committee in Russia. I go farther than
      Martov. The whole activity of Iskra as a separate group has
      hitherto been a struggle for influence; but now it is a matter of
      something more, namely, the organisational consolidation of this
      influence, and not only a struggle for it. How profoundly Comrade Martov
      and I differ politically on this point is shown by the fact that
      he blames me for this wish to influence the Central Committee,
      whereas I count it to my credit that I strove and still strive to
      consolidate this influence by organisational means. It appears that we are
      even talking in different languages! What would be the point of all our
      work, of all our efforts, if they ended in the same old struggle for
      influence, and not in its complete acquisition and consolidation? Yes,
      Comrade Martov is absolutely right: the step we have taken is undoubtedly
      a major political step showing that one of the trends now to be
      observed has been chosen for the future work of our Party. And I am not at
      all frightened by the dreadful words a “state of siege in the
      Party,” “emergency laws against particular individuals and groups,”
      etc. We not only can but we must create a “state of siege” in
      relation to unstable and vacillating elements, and all our Party

    

      Rules, the whole system of centralism now endorsed by the Congress are
      nothing but a “state of siege” in respect to the numerous
      sources of political vagueness. It is special laws, even if they
      are emergency laws, that are needed as measures against vagueness, and the
      step taken by the Congress has correctly indicated the political direction
      to be followed, by having created a firm basis for such Laws and
      such measures.
    

    

    
 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      At the thirty-first session of the Second Congress Lenin delivered a
      speech on the subject of the election of the Iskra editorial
      board. When the minutes of this session were ratified at the thirty-fifth
      session of the Congress, a change was made, with Lenin’s consent, in the
      text of his speech. The beginning of the speech—from the words:
      “Comrades I Martov’s speech was so strange that I find myself
      obliged to protest emphatically against his presentation of the
      question...” and ending with the words "...is therefore indicative
      only of an astounding confusion of political ideas”—was
      deleted and replaced by the following:
    

      “I ask the Congress to allow me to reply to Martov.
    

      “Comrade Martov said that the vote in question cast a slur on his
      political reputation. The election has nothing to do with an insult to a
      political reputation. (Shouts: ’Wrong! Not true!’ Plekhanov and Lenin
      protest against recesses. Lenin asks the secretaries to enter in the
      minutes that Zasulich, Martov, and Trotsky have interrupted him, and he
      asks that the number of times they have interrupted him should be
      recorded.)”
    

      In the present volume Lenin’s speech is printed in the form in which he
      wrote it and delivered it at the Congress.
    

 
  

21. Second Speech in the Discussion on the Party Rules

|

23. Speech on the Attitude Towards the Student Youth

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Speech On the Attitude
      Towards the Student Youth









Lenin: 1903/2ndcong: 23. Speech on the Attitude Towards the Student Youth







V. I.  

      Lenin
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.
July 17 (30)-August 10 (23), 1903



    

23. Speech on the Attitude Towards the Student Youth
August 10 (23)

      It is not only by reactionaries that the expression “false
      friends” is used; we know from the example of the liberals and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries that such “false friends” do
      exist. It is these false friends that are trying to persuade the youth
      that they have no need to distinguish between different trends. We, on the
      contrary, consider it the main task to develop an integral revolutionary
      world outlook, and the practical task for the future is to get the youth,
      when they are organising themselves, to apply to our committees.
    

 
Notes
 
 

 
  

22. Speech at the Election of the Editorial Board of Iskra

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## An Era of Reforms









Lenin: An Era of Reforms







V. I.  

      Lenin
An Era of Reforms




Published:

      First published Iskra, No. 46, August 15, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 510-517.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      Yes, we are undoubtedly passing through an era of reforms, strange as
      these words may sound when applied to present-day Russia. There is
      stagnation in all spheres of home policy, except where these are linked up
      with the fight against the internal enemy, and despite this—or, to
      be more exact, precisely because of this—constant and unceasing
      efforts are being made to institute reforms, attempts at reforms in the
      sphere of the most critical and most salient social and political
      relations. The proletariat, which is awakening to class-conscious life,
      came forward fairly long ago as the real, the main, as the only
      irreconcilable foe of our autocratic police regime. However, an enemy such
      as the foremost social class cannot be fought with force alone, even with
      the most ruthless, best organised, and most thorough-going force. Such an
      enemy makes itself reckoned with and compels concessions, which, though
      they are always insincere, always half-hearted, often spurious and
      illusory, and usually hedged round with more or less subtly hidden traps,
      are nevertheless concessions, reforms that mark a whole era. Of course,
      these are not the reforms that denote a down-grade in political
      development, when a crisis has passed, the storm has abated, and those who
      have been left masters of the situation proceed to give effect to their
      own programme, or (as also happens) the programme taken over from their
      opponents. No, these are the reforms of an up-grade, when ever greater
      masses are being drawn into struggle, when the crisis is still in the
      offing, when every clash, in which hundreds of victims are carried off the
      field of battle, produces thousands of new fighters who are even grimmer,
      bolder, and better trained.
    
 

      Such reforms are always foretokens and precursors of revolution. The
      recent measures partly effected and partly only projected by the tsarist
      government are indubitably of this nature, viz., the Bill on workers’
      mutual aid societies (this Bill has not been made public by the government
      and is known only from reports in the liberal bourgeois
      Osvobozhdeniye), the laws on compensation for injured workers and
      on factory stewards. It is on this latter law that we now propose to dwell
      in greater detail.
    

      The gist of the new law is that, under certain circumstances, the workers
      may have the right to representation in their relations with the
      employers, the right to certain rudiments of organisation. These rights
      are circumscribed by an incredible number of police regulations,
      restrictions, and qualifications. And indeed, it is first of all necessary
      to take into consideration that, according to the new law, the right of
      the workers to representation depends on the consent and initiative of the
      factory management and on the permission of the Boards for Factory and
      Mining Affairs. The right to representation may be accorded the
      workers by the factory owners, but they are in no way bound to do so under
      this law, besides which the Factory Board may refuse to permit
      representation, even if requested by the employer, on any grounds or even
      on no grounds whatever. Hence, from the very outset, the right of the
      workers to representation has been completely, unconditionally,
      and conclusively left to the discretion of the employers and the
      police. If it appears advantageous and desirable to the employers and
      the police, they may set up workers’ representative bodies (on a very
      restricted basis)—that is the substance of the reform. I would add
      parenthetically that the law makes no mention whatever of workers’
      representation at government factories: at privately owned factories the
      workers’ representatives may turn out to be new agents, new
      factory watchmen controlled by the police; at government factories there
      is always a sufficient number of agents and watchmen! The police do not
      ask for a reform in this field—hence, reform is not necessary here.
    

      Further, workers’ representation itself has been given an ugly twist. The
      workers are to be disunited, divided into categories; the regulations
      governing the division into

    

      categories are subject to approval by the governor, as are
all regulations in general that have any bearing on the
organisation of representative bodies under the new law. The
manufacturers and the police can and of course will arrange the
categories in such a way as to hinder workers solidarity and unity in
every way possible, rouse and in flame discord not only among the
various crafts and shops but also among workers of different
nationalities, sex, age groups, degrees of skill, wage levels, etc.,
etc. Workers’ representation can be and is useful to the workers
exclusively in their uniting in a single body, for their unity,
organisation and solidarity are the only source of strength to the
downtrodden, oppressed wage-slaves of our civilisation, ground down as
they are by toil. The tsarist autocracy wants to give the workers
representation of such a kind and on such terms as to
disunite them in every way possible and thus make them
powerless.
    

      The police-established categories will have to elect candidates
      for the post of steward on the basis of detailed police rules, the number
      of candidates to be designated by the police. The factory management will
      endorse one of the candidates at its own discretion, while the governor
      always has the right to remove any steward who “does not meet the
      requirements of his office,” as the law puts it.
    

      This whole police scheme is not so very subtle! The “office”
      of a steward obviously consists in being useful to the police, in being
      acceptable to them. The law says nothing about this, for such conditions
      are not spoken of; they are engineered. And it is more than
      simple to engineer this, once the governor, who is the head of the local
      police, is given the unrestricted right to remove an undesirable
      steward. Once again: would it not be more correct to call such a factory
      steward a factory watchman? The police can decide on the election of a
      very large number of candidates, of whom only one will be endorsed; for
      example, each category of say 50 to 100 people will be told to vote for 5
      or 10 candidates. Will it not be possible in some cases to turn the list
      of elected candidates into a list of people to be kept under special
      surveillance or even subject to arrest? Formerly such lists were drawn up
      only by spies; but now will they not perhaps sometimes be drawn
      up by the workers

    

      themselves? To the police there is nothing dangerous or even inconvenient
      in a list of candidates, since it is always the worst of them that will be
      endorsed, or no one at all, and new elections will be ordered.
    

      In its effort to have the factory stewards meet the requirements of their
      police “office,” the new law (like the majority of the Russian laws)
      has even overdone things. Candidates must not he under 25 years of
      age. The original Bill proposed a minimum age of 21; higher government
      circles deemed it more cautious and statesmanlike to raise it by four
      years so as to eliminate in advance “the most unruly elements of the
      industrial population,” which, “according to information in
      possession of the Department of Police, are within the 17-20 age
      group” (from the explanatory motives of the Ministry of Finance,
      published in abridged form in Vestnik Finonsov, and in full in
      Osvohozhdeniye). But that is not all. The factory management and
      the police may, in each particular instance, i.e., for each separate
      establishment, demand, firstly, a higher minimum age and, secondly, a
      certain length of service of the particular worker in the factory. It is,
      for example, possible that they may demand a minimum age of 40 and a
      service record of not less than 15 years as a condition for the right to
      be elected as candidate for the post of steward! There is one thing,
      however, to which the authors of this law, who so zealously safeguarded
      the interests of the police, did not apparently give sufficient thought:
      under such conditions will workers be at all eager to accept this
      “post” of steward? After all, the steward will be placed
      almost as much at the arbitrary disposal of the police as a mere village
      constable. The steward may be turned into an ordinary messenger boy,
      conveying the orders and explanations of the factory management to the
      workers. The steward will undoubtedly be required to render sheer spying
      services and to give accounts of the meetings of the workers’ categories
      which are called by him and for the orderly conduct of which he is
      responsible. And yet, while providing for rules about stewards being
      released from work to perform their duties, the law maintains a modest
      silence as to whether the stewards ·are to receive remuneration,
      and if so from whom. Do the authors of this law really

    

      think that stewards who have been released from work will not demand pay
      from the factory for this “free” time? Would they really serve
      as stewards, at the will of the manufacturers and governors, out of sheer
      love for these true friends of the working people?
    

      The desire to turn stewards into factory watchmen is particularly evident
      also in Clause 3 of the new law: stewards are recognised as being
      representatives empowered to speak for the workers’ categories only on
      matters concerning fulfilment of the terms of hire. When it comes
      to changing the terms of hire the stewards have no right even
      to hint at this! Fine workers’ “representatives”
      indeed. And how absurd this ruling is, even from the standpoint of the
      authors of the law, who wanted to make it easier “to ascertain the
      true desires and needs of the workers” “particularly at a time
      when discontent and unrest have already arisen.” In nine cases out of ten,
      unrest is the result of this very demand to change the terms of
      hire, and to bar the stewards from taking a hand in this matter is
      tantamount to reducing their role to practically nil. The authors of the
      law have become entangled in one of the countless contradictions of the
      autocracy, for to accord the workers’ representatives (their genuine
      representatives, and not representatives by permission of the police) the
      right to demand changes in the terms of hire would mean granting them
      freedom of speech and inviolability of the person.
    

      In general there can be no question of regarding the factory stewards as
      genuine representatives of the workers. Representatives must be elected
      only by the workers, with out any endorsement by the police. A
      representative must be removed as soon as the workers who elected him pass
      a vote of non-confidence in him. A representative must render an account
      to a meeting of the workers whenever they demand this of him. According to
      our law, however, the steward alone is authorised to convene the
      workers of the category which has elected him, and, besides, this must be
      done when and where the factory management wants it. In other words, the
      steward is not obliged to call the workers together, and the management
      does not have to provide the time and the place. It would perhaps be more
      expedient not to talk about workers’ representation at all than to

    

      annoy the workers with this mere pretence of representation.
    

      Workers’ meetings inspire the autocracy with such fear (and a justified
      fear) that it categorically bans joint meetings of the various
      categories. “For the discussion of matters concerning several
      categories,” the new law decrees, “the stewards of these categories
      alone shall meet.” For the capitalists, and for the police government
      which protects them, it would indeed be extremely advantageous to set up
      numerically small categories of foremen, office employees, and highly paid
      workers, to set up numerically large categories of unskilled workers and
      ordinary workers—and then to permit meetings only of the stewards of
      different categories. But this means reckoning without the real
      master:

      the class-conscious proletariat is the master of its own fate and it will
      spurn these miserable police partitions in which they would segregate
      it. The workers will meet together to discuss their own affairs and will
      organise secret meetings of their own, genuine, Social-Democratic
      stewards, despite all bans.
    

      But if this miserable reform to such a degree infects the embryo of
      workers’ representation with a spirit of police espionage, would it not be
      better for the class-conscious workers to have nothing whatever to do with
      the election of factory stewards or the meetings of the
      “categories”? We believe that it would not. Refusal to take an
      active part in present-day political life, however disgusting it may be,
      is the tactic of anarchists, not of Social-Democrats. We shall and must be
      able to promote a widespread struggle of the workers against every
      loathsome trap in the new law, against every spying manoeuvre made with
      the help of the new law—and this fight will rouse the most

      back ward 

      workers, and will develop the political consciousness of all who take part
      in the Russian workers-police-gendarme spy “representation.” The
      Zubatov meetings corrupted workers’ minds far more and much more directly
      than their minds will be corrupted by stewards who kowtow to the
      authorities, and yet we sent to those meetings class-conscious workers who
      themselves learned and taught others, and yet this entire Zubatov epic
      ended in a miserable fiasco, after working to the advantage of
      Social-Democracy far more

    

      than to that of the autocracy: the Odessa

      events[2]
      have left no shadow of doubt on that score.
    

      The autocracy is beginning to talk about workers’ meetings. Let us take
      advantage of this for the widest propaganda and agitation in support of
      the Social-Democratic demands for the full freedom of meetings and
      assembly. The autocracy is beginning to talk of elections; let us take
      advantage of this to acquaint the working masses with the meaning of
      elections, with all systems of elections, with all the tricks of the
      police during elections. And let the workers know this not only from books
      and talks, but from practice. from the example of the Russian,
      police-controlled elections, and by participating in these

      elections,[1]

      the class-conscious workers will teach ever greater masses to carry on
      election agitation. conduct meetings, defend their demands both at
      meetings and before the stewards, and organise a constant watch over the
      activities of the stewards. The autocracy is talking about workers’
      representation. Let us take advantage of this to spread correct ideas
      about genuine representation. Only a free workers’ union, with
      members in many factories and many cities, can represent the
      workers. Factory representation, bodies representing the workers at each
      factory separately,

      can not 

      satisfy the workers even in the West, even in the free states. The leaders
      of the Social-Democratic Labour Party, in Germany for example, have
      frequently protested against factory representation. And this can be
      readily understood, for the yoke of capital is too heavy, and the right to
      dismiss workers—the sacred right of capitalist free
      contract—will always render the representative body of the
      workers in each individual factory powerless. Only a workers’ union which
      organises the workers of many factories and many localities will do away
      with dependence of the workers’ representatives on the individual factory
      owner. Only a workers’ union will provide all the means of struggle that
      can at all possibly exist under capitalism. But free-workers’ unions are
      out of the question unless we have political liberty,
      inviolability of the person, freedom of assembly

    

      and meetings, and the right freely to elect deputies to a national
      assembly.
    

      Without political liberty all forms of workers’ representation will remain
      a miserable fraud, and the proletariat will remain in prison as hitherto,
      without light, with out air, and without the elbow-room it needs for the
      struggle to attain its complete emancipation. In this prison the
      government is now cutting a tiny aperture instead of a window, and in such
      a manner that this aperture is of more use to the gendarmes and spies who
      guard the prisoners than it is to the prisoners themselves. And this is
      the reform that the butchers of the Russian people want to pass off as a
      benefaction of the tsarist government! But the Russian working class will
      use this aperture to build up fresh energy for battle; it will raze to the
      ground the walls of the accursed all-Russian prison and win for itself
      free class representation in a bourgeois-democratic state.
    

 
Notes
 

[1]

      Naturally, organised workers should in no case be elected to the post of
      steward; suitable people from among the unorganised masses should be put
      forward as candidates.
    —Lenin
 



[2]

      Lenin is referring to the strike of Odessa workers in July 1902. Despite
      the efforts of the local Zubatov organisation to deflect the workers from
      the revolutionary struggle, the strike assumed a markedly political
      character. Mass political strikes in 1903 embraced almost the whole of
      South Russia (Kiev, Ekaterinoslav, Nikolayev, Elizavetgrad, and other
      towns).
    

      Lenin’s Iskra gave detailed accounts of the Odessa events in
      No. 45, August 1. 1903.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Latest Word in Bundist Nationalism









Lenin: The Latest Word in Bundist Nationalism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Latest Word in Bundist Nationalism




Published:
Iskra, No. 46, August 15, 1903.

      Published according to the Iskra text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      pages 518-521.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      The Foreign Committee of the Bund has just issued a bulletin containing a
      report on the Fifth Congress of the Bund, which took place in June (Old
      Style). Preponderant among its resolutions are the “draft
      Rules” on the position of the Bund in the Party. This draft is
      highly instructive, and from the angle of definiteness and
      “resoluteness” of content, nothing better could be
      desired. Strictly speaking, the first paragraph of the draft is so
      striking as to reduce all the others to mere explanation or even to
      entirely useless ballast. “The Bund,” declares § 1,
      “is a federative [italics ours] section of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party.” Federation presupposes an
      agreement between separate, entirely independent units, which
      define their mutual relations only by voluntary consent of the sides
      concerned. It is not surprising, therefore, that the “draft
      Rules” speak repeatedly of the “contracting
      parties” (§§ 3, 8, 12). It is not surprising that, on
      the basis of this draft, the Party Congress is not given the
      right to alter, supplement or delete Rules relating to a
      section of the Party. Neither is it surprising that the Bund
      reserves to itself “representation” in the Central Committee
      of the Party and permits this Central Committee of the Party to address
      itself to the Jewish proletariat and to communicate with individual
      sections of the Bund “only with the consent of the Central
      Committee of the Band.” All this logically stems from the concept of
      “federation,” from the concept of “contracting parties,” and
      had the Fifth Congress of the Bund simply resolved that the Bund is to be
      constituted as an in dependent Social-Democratic national (or, perhaps,
      nationalist Social-Democratic?) party, it would have saved itself

    

      (and others) much time, much labour, and much paper.  On, the one hand, it
      would have been clear at once without any circumlocution that an
      independent, separate party could determine its relations with other
      parties only as a “contracting party” and only on the basis of
      “mutual consent.” There would have been no need to enumerate every
      individual case when such consent will be required (and it is impossible
      in fact to enumerate all such cases, while to give an incomplete
      list, as the Bund does, is to open the door to a host of
      misunderstandings). There would have been no need to do violence to logic
      and conscience by calling an agreement between two independent units Rules
      on the position of one section of the party. This apparently seemly and
      suitable name (“Rules on the Position of the Bund in the Party”) is
      all the more false in essence since the entire Party has in fact not yet
      restored its full organisational unity, while the Bund comes out as an
      already unified section, which wishes to take advantage of the
      shortcomings in the general organisation in order to get still farther
      away from the whole, in order to try and split up this whole into
      small parts for all time.
    

      On the other hand, a straightforward treatment of the matter would have
      relieved the authors of the notorious draft Rules of the necessity to
      introduce clauses providing for rights already possessed by every
      organised section of the Party, every district organisation, every
      committee and every group, e.g., the right to solve, in accordance with
      the Party programme, general problems on which Party congresses have not
      adopted decisions. To write Rules including clauses such as these is
      simply ridiculous.
    

      Let us now appraise in essence the stand taken by the Bund. Once it has
      stepped on to the inclined plane of nationalism, the Bund (if it did not
      wish to renounce its basic mistake) was naturally and inevitably bound to
      arrive at the formation of a particular Jewish party. And this is
      precisely the direct object of §2 of the Rules, which grants the Bund
      the monopoly of representing the Jewish proletariat. According to
      this paragraph, the Bund is in the Party as its (the Jewish proletariat’s)
      sole (italics ours) representative. The activities of the Bund
      and the organisation of the Bund are not to be restricted by any
      territorial

    

      limits. Consequently, complete separation and demarcation of the Jewish
      and non-Jewish proletariat of Russia is not only here effected to the
      end with absolute consistency, but is endorsed by what may be called
      a notarial agreement, by “Rules,” by a “basic” law (see
      § 12 of the draft). Such “outrageous” facts as the
      audacious appeal of the Ekaterinoslav Committee of the Paty to the Jewish
      workers directly, not through the medium of the Bund (which had no special
      organisation in Ekaterinoslav at the time!), should henceforth become
      impossible, according to the idea of the new draft. However few the number
      of Jewish workers may be in a given locality, however far away this
      locality may be from the centres of the Bundist organisation, no section
      of the Party, not even the Central Committee of the Party, dare address
      itself to the Jewish proletariat without the consent of the Central
      Committee of the Bund! It is hard to believe that such a proposal could
      have been made, so monstrous is this demand for monopoly, especially in
      our Russian conditions, but §§ 2 and 8 (footnote) of the draft
      Rules leave no doubts whatever on this score. The desire of the Bund to
      shift still farther away from the Russian comrades is apparent not only in
      each clause of the draft, but is also expressed in other resolutions of
      the congress. For example, the Fifth Congress has resolved to publish once
      a month Posledniye Izvestia, issued by the Foreign Committee of
      the Bund, “in the form of a newspaper which would explain the pro
      grammatic and tactical position of the Bund.” We shall be looking forward
      with impatience and interest to an explanation of this position. The
      congress has annulled the resolution of the Fourth Congress on
      work in the south. It is known that the Fourth Congress of the Bund
      decided that “separate committees of the Bund shall not be set
      up” (italicised by the Bund) in the towns and cities in the
      south, where the Jewish organisations are included in the Party
      committees. The reversal of this decision is a big step towards further
      isolation, a direct challenge to the comrades from the south, who have
      been working and wanted to work among the Jewish proletariat, while
      remaining inseparably connected with the local proletariat as a
      whole. “He who says A must say B”; one who has adopted
      the standpoint of nationalism naturally arrives at the desire to erect a
      Chinese Wall

    

      around his nationality, his national working—class movement; he is
      unembarrassed even by the fact that it would mean building separate walls
      in each city, in each little town and village, unembarrassed even by the
      fact that by his tactics of division and dismemberment he is reducing
      to nil the great call for the rallying and unity of the proletarians
      of all nations, all races and all languages. And what bitter mockery
      sounds in the resolution of the same Fifth Congress of the Fund on
      pogroms, which expresses the “confidence that only the joint
      struggle of the proletarians of all nationalities will abolish the
      conditions giving rise to events similar to those at

      Kishinev”[1]
      (italics ours). How false these words about joint struggle sound when we
      are treated at the very same time to “Rules” which not only
      keep the joint fighters far apart, but strengthen this separation
      and alienation through organisational means! I should like very much to
      give the Bund nationalists a piece of advice: learn from those Odessa
      workers who went on a joint strike and attended joint meetings and joint
      demonstrations, without first asking (ah, the audacity!) for the
      “consent” of the Central Committee of the Bund for an appeal
      to the Jewish nation, and who reassured the shopkeepers with the words
      (see Iskra, No. 45): “Have no fear, have no fear, this is
      not Kishinev for you, what we want is something else, we have neither Jews
      nor Russians in our midst, we are all workers, life is equally
      hard for us all.” Let the comrades of the Bund ponder over these words, if
      it is not too late; let them think-well about whither they are going!
    

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

      The reference is to the Jewish pogrom organised in Kishinev by the tsarist
      government and the Black Hundreds in April 1903.
    









Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Martov's Contradictions and Zigzags









Lenin: Martov's Contradictions and Zigzags







V. I.  

      Lenin
Martov’s Contradictions and Zigzags




Written: Written at the end of August 1903 

Published:

      First published in 1927 in Lenin Miscellany VI.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1964,

      Moscow,

      Volume 6,

      page 522.

      Translated: ??? ???

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2003).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

      1. He lashed the Organising Committee for its vacillations and abrupt
      changes of front, for its quasi-Iskra-ism, but then brought
      the vacillators and quasi-Iskra-ists into the Central Committee.
    

      2. He always defended Iskra’s ideas of organisation (What Is
        to Be Done?), but secured the incorporation of a Jaurèsist
        first clause in the Rules.
    

      3. He agreed to the editorial board being reorganised into a trio, but
      then fought at the Congress for a board of six quand

même.[All the same.–Ed.]
    

      4. He fought against so-called “democratism,” but insisted on
      “freedom” of co-optation to the central bodies.
    

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 6

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 





