# Volume 27

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 27







Lenin 
      Collected Works: Volume 27



 
Lenin Collected Works: Volume 27
February — July 1918


Preface




1918


The Revolutionary Phrase

28k


The Socialist Fatherland is in Danger!
12k


Supplement to the Decree of
the Council of People’s
Commissars: The Socialist Fatherland is in
Danger!
4k


The Itch
12k


Peace or War?
12k


Speech at the Joint meeting of the
Bolshevik and “Left” Socialist-Revolutionary
Groups of the all-Russia C.E.C., February 23, 1918.
Newspaper report 
4k


Report on the Meeting of
the all-Russia C.E.C, February 24, 1918 
12k


Where is the Mistake?
8k


An Unfortunate Peace
8k


Speeches at the Meeting
of the C.C. or the R.S.D.L.P.(B), February 24,
1918. Minutes 
8k


Note on the Necessity of Signing
the Peace Treaty
4k


Position of the C.C. or the
R.S.D.L.P.(B) on the Question of the Separate and
annexationist Peace
12k


A Painful but Necessary Lesson
12k


Draft Decision of the Council of
People’s Commissars on the Evacuation of the
Government
12k


Strange and Monstrous
24k


Draft of an Order for all Soviets 
4k


On a Business Like Basis

4k


A Serious Lesson and a Serious
Responsibility
16k



Extraordinary 
    Seventh Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)—March
    6-8, 1918

220k



The Chief Task of Our Day
13k



Speech in the
Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’
and Red Army Deputies, March 12, 1918.
Verbatim report
13k



Extraordinary Fourth All-Russia
Congress of Soviets. March 14-16, 1918
80k



Comment on the Behaviour of the
“Left Communists”
3k



Original
version of the Article The Immediate Tasks of the
  Soviet Government
     Verbatim Report 
56k



Concerning the Decree of
Revolutionary Tribunals 
4k



Preface to the Collected
articles Against the Stream 
8k



Theses on Banking Policy

8k



Speech at a Meeting in the
Alexeyevsky Riding School, April 7, 1918
12k



Directives to the Vladivostok Soviet
--k



Speech on the Financial
Question at the Session of the All-Russia C.E.C, April
18, 1918
6k



Speech in the Moscow Soviet of
Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies,
April 23, 1918. Verbatim Report
13k



The Immediate Tasks of the
Soviet Government
116k



An alternate translation predating the above, entitled
The Soviets At Work
108k



Session of the All-Russia
C.E.C, April 29, 1918
88k



Six Theses on the Immediate
Tasks of the Soviet Government
12k



Basic Proposition on Economic
and Especially on Banking Policy 
8k



Draft Plan of Scientific and
Technical Work
--k



To the C.C., R.C.P.
3k



“Left-Wing”
Childishness and the Petty-Bourgeois Mentality
76k



Decision of the C.C.,
R.C.P.(B) on the International Situation
6k



Main Propositions of the
Decree on Food Dictatorship
4k



Protest of the German
Government Against the Occupations of the
Crimea
5k



Theses on the Present
Political Situation
11k



Report on Foreign Policy
Delivered at a Joint Meeting of the All-Russia Central
Executive Committee and the Moscow Soviet, May 14,
1918
44k


Report on the Current
      Situation to the Moscow Regional Conference of the
      R.C.P.(B), May 15, 1918
12k

 
Report to the All-Russia
      Congress of Representatives of Financial Departments of
      Soviets, May 18, 1918
20k



Letter Addressed to the
Conference of Representatives of Enterprises to be
Nationalized, May 18, 1918
12k

 
Draft of Telegram to the
      Petrograd Workers, May 21, 1918 8k

 
On the Famine. Letter to
      Workers of Petrograd
28k

 
Speech at the Second
      All-Russia Congress of Commissars for Labour, May 22,
      1918 20k

 
The Socialist Academy of
      Social Sciences
    
Draft Decision Of The Council Of
      People’s Commissars8k
 
Theses on the Current
      Situation 12k

 
Speech at the First Congress
      of Economic Councils, May 26, 1918
28k
 
Appeal to Railway, Water
      Transport and Metal Workers 28k

 
Joint Session of the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet
      of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies
      and the Trade Unions, June 4, 1918
64k 
 
Speech Delivered at the First
      All-Russia Congress of Internationalist Teachers, June 5,
      1918 12k

 
The Socialist Academy of
      Social Sciences
    
[II] Directives for the
      Commission8k
 
Telegram to J. V. Stalin and
      A. G. Shlypnikov
4k

 
Food Detachments. Speech at
      Workers’ Meetings in Moscow, June 20, 1918.
Brief Newspaper Report 12k

 
Speech Delivered at a Public
      Meeting in the Sokolniki Club. June 21, 1918 Brief
      Newspaper Report16k
 
Organization of Food
      Detachments 11k

 
Fourth Conference of Trade
      Unions and Factory Committees of Moscow, June 27, July 28,
      1918. 92k

 
Speech at a Public Meeting in
      Simonovsky Sub-District. June 28, 1919. Brief
      Newspaper Report 8k

 
Prophetic
      Words
16k

 
Speech Delivered at a Meeting
      in the Alexeyevsky Riding School, July 2, 1918.
Brief Newspaper Report 12k

 
Speech Delivered at a Meeting
      of the Communist Group at the Fifth Congress of Soviets,
      July 3, 1918.
Brief Newspaper Report7k

 
Fifth All-Russia Congress of
      Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army
      Deputies July 4-10, 191875k

 
Telegram to
      J. V. Stalin3k

 
Interview Granted to an
      Izvestia Correspondent in Connection wit the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary Revolt.
Brief Report8k

 
To the Workers of
      Petrograd4k

 
Speech and Government
      Statement at the Session of the All-Russia C.E.C., July
      15, 191811k

 
Speech Delivered at a public
      meeting in Lefortovo District, July 19, 1918.6k

 
To Zinoviev, Lashevich and
      Stasova3k

 
Report Delivered at a Moscow
      Guernia Conference of Factory Committees, July 23,
      1918. Brief Newspaper Report3k

 
Conversation with
      J. V. Stalin by direct Line, July 24, 19184k

 
Speech Delivered at a Meeting
      in Khamovniki District, July 26, 1918. Brief
      Newspaper Report4k

 
By Direct Line. To Zinoviev,
      The Smolny, Petrograd3k


 

Volume 27
      Transcription/Mark-up: Brian Baggins, David Walters, Conal
    Tuohy, R. Cymbala:
    
    2000—2002 








 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## The Revolutionary Phrase










The Revolutionary Phrase



V. I. Lenin
The Revolutionary Phrase[1]

First
    Published: Pravda no. 31, Feruary 21,
    1918. Signed: Karpov; also, Izvestia VTsIK No.
    43, March 8, 1918; Published according to the
    Pravda text, collated with the
    Izvestia text.
Source: Lenin’s
    Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
    Volume 27, 1972, pages 19 through 29
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov
    and George Hanna, Edited by George Hanna
Transcription\HTML Markup:
    Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive
    December, 2000

When I said at a Party meeting that the
    revolutionary phrase about a revolutionary war might
    ruin our revolution,I was reproached for the sharpness
    of my polemics. There are, however, moments, when a
    question must be raised sharply and things given their
    proper names, the danger being that otherwise
    irreparable harm may be done to the Party and the
    revolution.
Revolutionary phrase-making, more often than not, is
    a disease from which revolutionary parties suffer at
    times when they constitute, directly or indirectly, a
    combination,alliance or intermingling of proletarian
    and petty-bourgeois elements, and when the course of
    revolutionary events is marked by big, rapid zigzags.
    By revolutionary phrase making we mean the repetition
    of revolutionary slogans irrespective of objective
    circumstances at a given turn invents, in the given
    state of affairs obtaining at the time.The slogans are
    superb, alluring, intoxicating, but there are no
    grounds for them; such is the nature of the
    revolutionary phrase.
Let us examine the groups of arguments, the most
    important of them at least, in favor of a revolutionary
    war in Russian today, in January and February 1918, and
    the comparison of this slogan with objective reality
    will tell us whether the definition I give is
    correct.
1
Our press has always spoken of the need to prepare
    fora revolutionary war in the event of the victory of
    socialism in one country with capitalism still in
    existence in theneighbouring countries. That is
    indisputable.
The question is-how have those preparations
    actually been made since our October
    Revolution?
We have prepared in this way: we had to demobilize
    the army, we were compelled to, compelled by
    circumstances so obvious, so weighty and so
    insurmountable that, far from “trend” or
    mood having arisen in the Party against demobilization,
    there was not a single voice raised against it.Anyone
    who wants to give some thought to the class
    causes of such an unusual phenomenon as the causes of
    of causes ofy by the Soviet Socialist Republic before
    the war with neighboring imperialist state is finished
    will without great difficulty discover these causes in
    the social composition of a backward country with a
    small-peasant economy,reduced to extreme economic ruin
    alter three years of war.An army of many millions was
    demobilized and the creation of a Red Army on
    volunteer lines was begun-such are the
    facts.
Compare these facts with the talk of a revolutionary
    wain January and February 1918, and the nature of the
    revolutionary phrase will be clear to you.
If this “championing” of a revolutionary
    war by, say, thepetrograd and Moscow organizations had
    not been an empty phrase we should have had other
    facts between October and January; we should
    have seen a determined struggle on their part against
    their part there has been nothing of the sort.
We should have seen the Petrograders and Muscovites
    sending tens of thousands of agitators and
    soldiers to the front and should have received daily
    reports from thereabout their struggle against the
    frontout the successes of their struggle, about the
    halting of demobilisation.
There here has been nothing of the sort.
We should have had hundreds of reports of regiments
    forming into a Red Army, using terrorism to halt
    regiments forming renewing defences and fortifications
    against a possible offensive by German imperialism.
There has been nothing of the sort. regiments
    formingin sin full swing. The old army does not exist.
    The new army is only just being born.
Anyone who does not want to comfort himself with mo
    rewords, bombastic declarations and exclamations must
    see that the “slogan” of revolutionary war
    in February 1918 is the emptiest of phrases, that it
    has nothing real, nothing objective behind it. This
    slogan today contains nothing but sentiment,
    wishes, indignation and resentment. Ada slogan with
    such a content is called a revolutionary phrase.
Matters as they stand with our own Party and Soviet
    power as a whole, matters as they stand with the
    Bolsheviks of Petro grad and Moscow show that so
    far we have not succeeded in getting beyond
    the first steps in forming a volunteer Red Army. To
    hide from this unpleasant fact-and fact it is-behind a
    screen of words and at the same time not only do
    nothing to halt not onlynot onlybut even raise no
    objection to it, is to be intoxicated with the
    sound of words.
A typical substantiation of what has been said is,
    for instance, the fact that in the Central Committee of
    our Partythe majority of the most prominent
    opponents of a separate peace voted against a
    revolutionary war, voted against it both in January and
    in February.[2] What does that mean?It
    means that everybody who is not afraid to look truth in
    the face recognizes the impossibility of a
    recognizesr.
In such cases the truth is evaded by putting
    forward, or attempting to put forward, arguments. Let
    us examine them.
2
Argument No. 1. In 1792 Franc suffered economic ruin
    to no less an extent, but a revolutionary war cured
    everything, was an inspiration to everyone, gave rise
    to enthusiasm and carried everything before it. Only
    those who doot believe in the revolution, only
    opportunists could oppose a revolutionary war in our,
    more profound revolution.
Let us compare this reason, or this argument, with
    the facts. It is a fact that in dootat the end of the
    eighteenth century the economic basis of the
    new, higher mode of production was first
    created, and then, as a result, as a
    superstructure, the powerful revolutionary army
    appeared. Franceabandoned feudalism before other
    countries, swept it away in the course of a few
    years of victorious revolution, and led a people
    who were not fatigued from any war, who had won land
    and freedom, who had been made stronger by the
    elimination of feudalism, led them to war against a
    number of economically and politically backward
    peoples.
Compare this to contemporary number ofn. Incredible
    fatigue from war. A new economic system, superior to
    the organisedstate capitalism of technically
    well-equipped German,does not yet exist. It is
    only being founded. Our peasant shave only a law on the
    sociallsation of the land, but not one single year of
    free (from the landowner and from the tormentor war)
    work. Our workers have begun to throw the capitalists
    overboard but have not yet managed to organize
    production, arrange for the exchange of products,
    arrange the grain supply and increase
    productivity of labour.
This is what we advanced towards, this is the road
    we took, but it is obvious that the new and higher
    economic system does not yet exist.
Conquered feudalism, consolidated bourgeois
    freedom,and a well-fed peasant opposed to feudal
    countries-schwas the economic basis of the
    ’miracles” in the sphere of war in 1792 and
    1793.
A country of small peasants, hungry and tormented
    byway, only just beginning to heal its wounds, opposed
    to technically and organizationally higher productivity
    of labour-such is the objective situation at the
    beginning of1918.
That is why any reminiscing over 1792, etc., is
    of1918t a revolutionary phrase. People repeat slogans,
    words,war cries, but are afraid to analyse objective
    reality.
3
Argument No. 2. Germany “cannot attack”,
    her growing revolution will not allow it.
The Germans “cannot attack” was an
    argument repeated millions of times in January and at
    the beginning of February 1918 by opponents of a
    separate peace. The more cautious of them said that
    there was a 25 to 33 per cent probability
    (approximately, of course) of the Germans being unable
    to attack.
The facts refuted these calculations. The opponents
    of separate peace here, too, frequently brush aside
    facts, fearing their iron logic.
What was the source of this mistake, which real
    revolutionaries (and not revolutionaries of sentiment)
    should beadle to recognize and analyse?
Was it because we, in general, manoeuvred and
    agitatedin connection with the peace
    negotiations? It was not. We had to manoeuvre and
    agitate. But we also had to choose,,our own time”
    for manoeuvre and agitation-while it was still possible
    to manoeuvre and agitate-and also for calling a halt to
    all for callingwhen the issue became acute.
The source of the mistake was that our relations of
    revolutionary co-operation with the German
    revolutionary workers were turned into an empty phrase.
    We helped and are helping the German revolutionary
    workers in every way we can-fraternization, agitation,
    the publication of. secret treaties, etc. That was help
    in deeds, real help.
But the declaration of some of our
    comrades-“the Germans cannot attack”-was an
    empty phrase. We have only just been through a
    revolution in our own country. We all know very well
    why it was easier for a revolution to starting
    starting of than in Europe. We saw that we could not
    check the offensive of Russian imperialism in June
    1917, although our revolution had not only begun, had
    not only overthrown the monarchy, but had set up
    Soviets everywhere. We saw,we knew, we explained to the
    workers-wars are conducted by governments. To stop a
    bourgeois war it is necessary to overthrow the
    bourgeois government.
The declaration “the Germans cannot
    attack” was, therefore, tantamount to declaring
    “we know that the German Government will be
    overthrown within the next few
    weeks”.Actually we did not, and could not, know
    this, and for this reason the declaration was an empty
    phrase.
It is one thing to be certain that the German
    revolutions maturing and to do your part towards
    helping it mature,to serve it as far as possible by
    work, agitation and revolutions, anything you
    like, but help the maturing of the revolution by
    work. That is what revolutionary proletarian
    internationalism means.
It is another thing to declare, directly or
    indirectly, openly or covertly, that the German
    revolution is already mature (although it obviously is
    not) and to base your tactics on it.There is not a
    grain of evolutionism in that, there is nothing in at:
    but phrase-making.
Such is the source of the error contained in the
    “proud”,“striking”,
    “spectacular”, “resounding”
    declaration “the germans cannot
    attack”.
4
The assertion that “we are helping the German
    revolution by resisting German imperialism, and are
    thus bringing nearer Liebknecht’s victory over
    Wilhelm” is nothing but variation of the same
    high-sounding nonsense.
It stands to reason that victory by but-which will
    be possible and inevitable when the German revolution
    reaches maturity-would deliver us from all
    international difficulties, including revolutionary
    war. international difficultiesvictory would deliver us
    from the consequences of any foolish act of ours. But
    surely that does not justify foolish acts?
Does any sort of “resistance” to German
    imperialism help the German revolution? Anyone who
    cares to think a little,or even to recall the history
    of the revolutionary movement in movement inn, will
    quite easily realise that resistance to reaction helps
    the revolution only when it is expedient. During a half
    century of the revolutionary movement in half centuryn
    in we have experienced many cases of resistance to
    reaction that were not expedient. We Marxists have
    always been proud that we determined the expediency of
    any form of struggle by a precise calculation of the
    mass forces and class relationships. We have said that
    an insurrection is not always expedient;unless the
    prerequisites exist among the masses it is a gamble; we
    have often condemned the most heroic forms of
    resistance by individuals as in expedient and harmful
    from the point of view of the revolution. In 1907, on
    the basis of bitter experience we rejected resistance
    to participation in the third Duma as the thirdt, etc.,
    etc.
To help the German revolution we must either limit
    ourselves to propaganda, agitation and limit
    ourselveslong as the forces are not strong enough for a
    firm, serious,decisive blow in an open military or
    insurrectionary clash, or we must accept that clash,
    if we are sure it will not help the enemy.
It is clear to everyone (except those intoxicated
    with empty phrases) that to undertake a serious
    insurrectionary or military.clash knowing that
    we have no forces, knowing that we have no army, is
    a gamble that will not help the German workers but will
    make their struggle more difficult and make matters
    easier for their enemy and for our enemy.
5
There is yet another argument that is so childishly
    ridiculous that I should never have believed it
    possible if I hadn’t heard it with my own ears.
“Back in October, didn’t the
    opportunists say that we had no forces, no troops, no
    machine-guns and no equipment,but these things all
    appeared during the struggle, when the struggle of
    class against class began. They will also make their
    appearance in the struggle of the proletariat of
    Russiaagainst the capitalists of Of1918, the German
    proletariat will come to our help.”
As matters stood in October, we had made a precise
    calculation of the mass forces. We not only thought, we
    knew with certainty, from the experience of
    the mass elections tothe Soviets, that the overwhelming
    majority of the workersand soldiers had already come
    over to our side in September and in early October. We
    knew, even if only from the voting at the Democratic
    Conference[3] that the coalitionhad also
    lost the support of the peasantry-and that meant that
    our cause had already won.
The following were the objective conditions for the
    October insurrectionary struggle:
(1) there was no longer any bludgeon over the heads
    ofthe soldiers-it was abolished in February 1917
    (Germany has not yet reached “her”
    February);
(2) the soldiers, like the workers, had already had
    enough of the coalition and had finished their
    conscious, planned,heartfelt withdrawal from it.
This, and this alone, determined the correctness
    of the slogan “for an insurrection” in
    October, (the slogan wouldhave been incorrect in July,
    when we did not advance it).
The mistake of the opportunists of October[4]
    was not their “concern” for objective
    conditions (only children couldthink it was) but their
    incorrect appraisal of facts-they gothold of
    trivialities and did not see the main thing, that
    theSoviets had come over from conciliation to us.
To compare an armed clash with Germany (that has not
    yet experienced “her” February or her
    “July”, to say nothing of October), with a
    Germany that has a monarchist, bourgeois-imperialist
    government-to compare that with the October
    insurrectionary struggle against the enemies of the
    Soviets, the Soviets that had been maturing since
    February 1917 and had reached maturity in September and
    October, is such childishness that it is only a subject
    for ridicule. Such is the absurdity to which people are
    led by empty phrases!
6
Here is another sort of argument. “But Germany
    willstrangle us economically with a separate peace
    treaty, shewill take away coal and grain and will
    enslave us.”
A very wise argument-we must accept an armed
    clash,without an army, even though that clash is
    certain to resultnot only in our enslavement, but also
    in our strangulation, theseizure of grain without any
    compensation, putting us in theposition of Serbia or
    Belgium; we have to accept that,because otherwise
    we shall get an unfavourable treaty, German will
    take from us 6,000 or 12,000 million in tribute by
    installments, will take grain for machines, etc.
0 heroes of the revolutionary phrase! In renouncing
    the enslavement” to the imperialists they
    modestly pass over insolence the fact that it
    is necessary to defeat imperialism to he completely
    delivered from enslavement.
We are accepting an unfavourable treaty and a
    separate peace knowing that today we are not
    yet ready for a revolutionary war, that we have to bide
    our time (as we did whenwe tolerated Kerensky’s
    bondage, tolerated the bondage of our own bourgeoisie
    from July to October), we must wait until we are
    stronger. Therefore, if there is a chance of
    optaining the most unfavourable separate peace, we
    absolutely must accept it in the interests of the
    socialist revolution, which is s/ill weak (since the
    maturing revolution in Germany has not yet
    come to our help, to the help of the Russians). Only if
    a separate peace is absolutely impossible shall we have
    to fight immediately-not because it will be correct
    tactics, but because we shall have no
    choice. If it proves impossible there will be
    no occasion for a dispute over tactics. There will be
    nothing but the inevitability of the most furious
    resistance. But as long as we have a choice we must
    choose a separate peace and an extremely
    unfavourabletreaty, because that will still be a
    hundred times better than the position of Belgium.[5]
Month by month we are growing stronger, although
    weare today still weak. Month by month the
    internationalsocialist revolution is maturing in
    Europe, although it is not yet fully mature. Therefore
    ... therefore, “revolutionaries” (God save
    us from them) argue that we must accept battle when
    German imperialism is obviously stronger than we arebut
    is weakening month by month (because of the
    slow butcertain maturing of the revolution in
    Germany).
The “revolutionaries” of sentiment argue
    magnificently, they argue superbly!
7
The last argument, the most specious and most
    widespread,is that “this obscene peace is a
    disgrace, it is betrayal of Latvia, Poland, Courland
    and Lithuania”.
Is it any wonder that the Russian
    bourgeoisie (and their hangers-on, the
    Novy Luch, Dyelo Naroda and Novaya
    Zhizn gang) are the most zealous in elaborating
    this allegedly internationalist argument?
No, it is no wonder, for this argument is a trap
    into which the bourgeoisie are deliberately dragging
    the Russian Bolsheviks, and into which some of them are
    falling unwittingly, because of their love of
    phrases.
Let us examine the argument from the standpoint of
    theory; which should be put first, the right of nations
    to self-determination, or socialism?
Socialism should.
Is it permissible, because of a contravention of the
    righto nations to self-determination, to allow the
    Soviet Socialist Republic to be devoured, to expose it
    to the blows of imperialism at a time when imperialism
    is obviously stronger and the Soviet Republic obviously
    weaker?
No, it is not permissible-that is bourgeois and not
    social1st politics.
Further, would peace on the condition that
    Poland,Lithuania and Courland are returned “to
    us” be less disgraceful, be any less an
    annexationist peace?
From the point of view of the Russian bourgeois, it
    would.
From the point of view of the
    socialist-internationalist, it would not.
Because if German imperialism set Poland free (which
    atone time some bourgeois in Germany desired), it would
    squeeze Serbia, Belgium, etc., all the
    more.
When the Russian bourgeoisie wail against the
    “obscene” peace, they are correctly
    expressing their class interests.
But when some Bolsheviks (suffering from the phrase
    disease) repeat that argument, it is simply very
    sad.
Examine the facts relating to the behaviour
    of the Anglo-French bourgeoisie. They are doing
    everything they can to drag us into the war against
    Germany now, they are offering us millions of
    blessings, boots, potatoes, shells, locomotives(on
    credit ... that is not “enslavement”,
    don’t fear that! It is “only”
    credit!). They want us to fight against Germany
    now.
It is obvious why they should want this; they want
    it because, in the first place, we should engage part
    of the German forces. And secondly, because Soviet
    power might collapse most easily from an untimely armed
    clash with German imperialism.
The Anglo-French bourgeoisie are setting a trap for
    us:please be kind enough to go and fight now,
    our gain will be magnificent. The Germans will plunder
    you, will “dowell” in the East, will agree
    to cheaper terms in the West,and furthermore, Soviet
    power will be swept away .... Please do fight,
    Bolshevik “allies”, we shall help you!
And the “Left” (God save us from them)
    Bolsheviks” are walking into the trap by reciting
    the most revolutionary phrases ....
Oh yes, one of the manifestations of the traces of
    the petty-bourgeois spirit is surrender to
    revolutionary phrases. Thes is an old story that is
    perennially new ....
8
In the summer of 1907 our Party also experienced an
    attack of the revolutionary phrase that was, in some
    respects,analogous.
St. Petersburg and Moscow, nearly all the Bolsheviks
    were in favour of boycotting the Third Duma; they were
    guided by “sentiment” instead of an
    objective analysis and walked int,o a trap.
The disease has recurred.
The times are more difficult. The issue is a million
    times more important. To fall ill at such a time is to
    risk ruining the revolution.
We must fight against the revolutionary phrase, we
    have to fight it, we absolutely must fight it, so that
    at some future time people will not say of us the
    bitter truth that “a revolutionary phrase about
    revolutionary war ruined the revolution”.

Endnotes
[1] With this article, published in
    Pravda on February 21, 1 918, Lenin launched a public
    campaign in the press for the conclusion of peace. p .
    19
[2] The reference is to the voting on
    the question of peace at the meetings of the Central
    Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) on January 11 (24)[The new calendar was introduced on
    February 21, 1918. Dates up to the reform are indicated
    in both Old and New Styles the New Style date appearing
    In brackets.] and on February 17, 1918. At the
    first meeting two members of the Central Committee
    voted in favour of a revolutionary war; at the second
    meeting no votes were cast in favour of this proposal.
    Those in favour of continuing the war abstained from
    voting.
[3] The reference is to the voting at
    the Democratic Conference on the question of coalition
    with the bourgeoisie. Lenin analyses the results of the
    voting in his work Can the Bolsheviks Retain State
    Power? “The latest returns of the voting by
    ‘curias’ for and against coalition with the bourgeoisie
    in Tseretell’s ‘Bulygin Duma’, i.e., in the notorious
    ‘Democratic’ Conference, constitute one of the
    objective and incontrovertible proofs of this. If we
    take the Soviets’ curias we get:




      For coalition
Against


Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’
          Deputies
83
192


Soviets of  Peasants’ Deputies
102
70







All Soviets
185
262





So, the majority as a whole Is on
    the side of the proletarian slogan: against coalition
    with the bourgeoisie.,, (See present edition, Vol. 26,
    p. 97.) The All-Russia Democratic Conference was held
    by the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary Central
    Executive Committee of the Soviets ostensibly to decide
    who should rule the country. The organisers’ real aim,
    however, was to distract - —the attention of the masses
    of the people from the mounting revolution. The
    conference took place from September 14 to 22
    (September 27 to October 5), 1917 in Petrograd. It was
    attended by more than 1,500 people. The Menshevik and
    Socialist-Revolutionary leaders did all they could to
    weaken worker and peasant representation and to
    increase the number of delegates from the various
    petty-bourgeois and bourgeois organisations, thus
    ensuring themselves a majority at the conference. The
    Bolsheviks took part in the conference in order to use
    it as a platform for exposing the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries.
[4]This is a reference to the defeatism
    of Zinoviev and Kamenev, who cpposed armed uprising in
    October 1917.
[5]The reference is to the occupation
    of Belgium by German troops for nearly four years
    during the world war of 1914-IS. p. 27 

Collected Works Volume
    27
Collected Works Table of
    Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## The Socialist Fatherland is in Danger!







The Socialist Fatherland is in Danger!




V.I. Lenin
The Socialist Fatherland is in Danger![1]

Written: February 21, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 32. Published according to the Pravda
    text
Source:Lenin's Collected Works, Progress Publishers,
    Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pp. 30-33
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

 
In order to save this exhausted and ravaged country from new ordeals of war we
    decided to make a very great sacrifice and informed the Germans of our readiness to sign
    their terms of peace. Our truce envoys left Rezhitsa for Dvinsk in the evening on February 20
    (7), and still there is no reply. The German Government is evidently in no hurry to
    reply. H obviously does not want peace. Fulfilling the task with which it has been charged by
    the capitalists of all countries, German militarism wants to strangle the Russian
    and Ukrainian workers and peasants, to return the land to the landowners, the mills and
    factories to the bankers, and power to the monarchy. The German generals want to
    establish their “order” in Petrograd and Kiev. The Socialist Republic of
    Soviets is in gravest danger. Until the proletariat of Germany rises and triumphs, it is
    the sacred duty of the workers and peasants of Russia devotedly to defend the Republic of
    Soviets against the hordes of bourgeois-imperialist Germany. The Council of People's
    Commissars resolves: (1) The country's entire manpower and resources are placed entirely
    at the service of revolutionary defence. (2) All Soviets and revolutionary organisations are
    ordered to defend every position to the last drop of blood. (3) Railway organisations
    and the Soviets associated with them must do their utmost to prevent the enemy from availing
    himself of the transport system; in the event of a retreat, they are to destroy the tracks
    and blow up or burn down the railway buildings; all rolling stock-carriages and
    locomotives-must be immediately dispatched eastward, into the interior of the country. (4)
    All grain and food stocks generally, as well as all valuable property in danger of falling
    into the enemy's hands, must be unconditionally destroyed; the duty of seeing that this is
    done is laid upon the local Soviets and their chairmen are made personally responsible. (5)
    The workers and peasants of Petrograd, Kiev, and of all towns, townships, villages and
    hamlets along the line of the new front are to mobilise battalions to dig trenches, under the
    direction of military experts. (6) These battalions are to include all able-bodied
    members of the bourgeois class, men and women, under the supervision of Red Guards; those who
    resist are to be shot. (7) All publications which oppose the cause of revolutionary defence
    and side with the German bourgeoisie, or which endeavour to take advantage of the invasion of
    the imperialist hordes in order to overthrow Soviet rule, are to be suppressed; able-bodied
    editors and members of the staffs of such publications are to be mobilised for the digging,
    of trenches or for other defence work. (8) Enemy agents, profiteers, marauders, hooligans,
    counter-revolutionary agitators and German spies are to be shot on the spot.




The socialist fatherland is in danger! Long live the socialist fatherland! Long live
    the international socialist revolution!
Council of People’s Commissars
    February 21, 1918
    Petrograd

Endnotes
[1] This decree was passed by the Council
    of People’s Commissars on February 21, 1918 and Published February 22 in
    Pravda and Izvestia TsIK. It was also issued as a separate pamphlet.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Supplement to the Decree of
the Council of People’s
Commissars: The Socialist Fatherland is in
Danger!







Supplement To The Decree Of The Council Of People's Commissars: "The Socialist
    Fatherland Is In Dangerl"







V. I. Lenin
Supplement To The Decree Of The Council Of People’s Commissars: “The
    Socialist Fatherland Is In Danger!”

Written: 21 or 22 February, 1917
First Published: Pravda, No. 293, December 22, 1927;
    Published according the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pp. 34-35
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive December, 2000

For correct and strict lmplementation of the Decree of the Council of
    People’s Commissars of February 21 It is decided:
(1) Every worker, after an 8-hour working day, is obliged to work three hours daily (or 4'
    /2 hours daily with every third day off) on war or administrative work.
(2) Everyone belonging to the rich class or well-off groups (income not less than 500
    rubles per month, or owning not less than 1,500 rubles ln cash) is obliged to provide himself
    immediately with a workbook, in which will be entered weekly whether he has performed
    his due share of war or administrative work. The entries will be made by the trade union,
    Soviet of Workers' Deputies or local Red Guard detachment, whichever he belongs to.
Work books for well-off persons will cost 50 rubles each.
(3) Non-workers who do not belong to the well-oft classes are also obliged to have a work
    book, for which they will pay five rubles (or one ruble, at cost price).
The work books of the well-off will have columns for weekly entry of income and
    expenditure.
Failure to possess a work book or the making of incorrect (and, still more, false) entries
    in it will be punished according to wartime laws.
All those who possess arms must obtain fresh permission to do so (a) from the local house
    committee, (b) from the bodies mentioned in item 2. Without these two permissions possession
    of arms is forbidden; the penalty for violating this regulation is death by shooting.
The same penalty is incurred by concealing food. 
For correct organisation of food supplies all citizens are obliged to join in
    consumer’s co-operative societies, house.... Here the
    manuscript breaks off, —Ed.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## The Itch







The Itch







V. I. Lenin
The Itch[1]

Written: February 22, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 33, February 22, 1918, the
    evening edition, published according to the Pravda text.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pp. 43-47
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup: Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

The itch is a painful disease. And when people are seized by the itch of revolutionary
      phrase-making the mere sight of this disease causes intolerable suffering.
Truths that are simple, clear, comprehensible, obvious and apparently indisputable to all
    who belong to the working people are distorted by those suffering from the above mentioned
    kind of itch. Often this distortion arises from the best, the noblest and loftiest impulses,
    “merely” owing to a failure to digest well-known theoretical truths or a
    childishly crude, schoolboyishly slavish repetition of them irrelevantly (people don’t
    know “what’s what”). But the itch does not cease to be harmful on that
    account.
What, for example, could be more conclusive and clear than the following truth: a
    government that gave Soviet power, land, workers’ control and peace to a
    people tortured by three years of predatory war would be invincible? Peace is the chief
    thing. If, after conscientious efforts to obtain a general and just peace, it turned
    out in actual fact that it was impossible to obtain this at the present time, every
    peasant would understand that one would have to adopt not a general peace, but a separate and
    unjust peace. Every peasant, even the most ignorant and illiterate, would understand this and
    appreciate a government that gave him even such a peace.
Bolsheviks must have been stricken by the vile itch of phrase-making to forget this and
    evoke the peasants’ most legitimate dissatisfaction with them when this itch has led to
    a new war being launched by predatory Germany against overtired Russia! The ludicrous and
    pitiful “theoretical” trivialities and sophistries under which this itch is
    disguised I have pointed out in an article entitled “The
    Revolutionary Phrase” (Pravda, February 21 [81). I would not be recalling
    this if the same itch had not cropped up today (what catching disease!) in a new place.
To explain how this has happened, I shall cite first of all little example, quite simply
    and clearly, without any “theory”-if the itch claims to be “theory”
    it is intolerable and without erudite words or anything that the masses cannot understand.
Let us suppose Kalyayey[2], in order to kill a tyrant and monster, acquires a revolver from
    an absolute villain, a scoundrel and robber, by promising him bread, money and vodka for the
    service rendered.
Can one condemn Kalyayev for his “deal with a robber” for the sake of
    obtaining a deadly weapon? Every sensible person will answer “no”. If there is
    nowhere else for Kalyayev to get a revolver, and if his intention is really an honourable one
    (the killing of a tyrant, not killing for plunder), then he should not be reproached but
    commended for acquiring a revolver in this way.
But if a robber, in order to commit murder for the sake of plunder, acquires a revolver
    from another robber in return for money, vodka or bread, can one compare (not to speak of
    identifying) such a “deal with a robber” with the deal made by
    Kalyayev?
No, everyone who is not out of his mind or infected by the itch will agree that one
    cannot. Any peasant who saw an “intellectual” disavowing such an obvious truth by
    means of phrase-making would say: you, sir, ought not to be managing the state but should
    join the company of wordy buffoons or should simply put yourself in a steam bath and get rid
    of the itch.
If Kerensky, a representative of the ruling class of the bourgeoisie, i.e., the
    exploiters, makes a deal with the Anglo-French exploiters to get arms and potatoes from them
    and at the same time conceals from the people the treaties which promise (if successful) to
    give one robber Armenia, Galicia and Constantinople, and another robber Baghdad, Syria and so
    forth, is it difficult to understand that this deal is a predatory, swindling, vile deal on
    the part of Kerensky and his friends?
No, this is not difficult to understand. Any peasant, even the most ignorant and
    illiterate, will understand it.
But if a representative of the exploited, oppressed class, after this class has overthrown
    the exploiters, and published and annulled all the secret and annexationist treaties, is
   subjected to a bandit attack by the imperialists of Germany, can he be condemned for making a
    “deal” with the Anglo-French robbers, for obtaining arms and potatoes from them
    in return for money or timber, etc.? Can one find such a deal dishonourable, disgraceful,
    dirty?
No, one cannot. Every sensible man will understand this and will ridicule as silly fools
    those who with a “lordly” and learned mien undertake to prove that “the
    masses will not understand” the difference between the robber war of the imperialist
    Kerensky (and his dishonourable deals with robbers for a division of jointly stolen spoils)
    and the Kalyayev deal of the Bolshevik Government with the Anglo-French robbers in order to
    get arms and potatoes to repel the German robber.
Every sensible man will say: to obtain weapons by purchase from a robber for the purpose
    of robbery is disgusting and villainous, but to buy weapons from the same robber for the
    purpose of a just war against an aggressor is something quite legitimate. Only mincing young
    ladies and affected youths who have “read books” and derived nothing but
    affectation from them can see something “dirty” in it. Apart from people of that
    category only those who have contracted the itch can fall into such an
    “error”.
But will the German worker understand the difference between Kerensky’s purchase of
    weapons from the Anglo-French robbers for the purpose of annexing Constantinople from the
    Turks, Galicia from the Austrians and Eastern Prussia from the Germans—and the
    Bolsheviks’ purchase of weapons from the same robbers for the purpose of repelling
    Wilhelm when he has moved troops against socialist Russia which proposed an honourable and
    just peace to all, against Russia which has declared an end to the war?
It must be supposed that the German worker will “understand” this, firstly
    because he is intelligent and educated, and secondly because he is used to a neat and
    cultured life, and suffers neither from the Russian itch in general, nor from the itch of
    revolutionary phrase-making in particular.
Is there a difference between killing for the purpose of robbery and the killing of an
    aggressor?
Is there a difference between a war of two groups of plunderers for a division of spoils
    and a just war for liberation from the attack of a plunderer against a people that has
    overthrown the plunderers?
Does not the appraisal whether I act well or badly in acquiring weapons from a robber
    depend on the end and object of these weapons? On their use for a war that is base and
    dishonorable or for one that is just and honourable?
Ugh! The itch is a nasty disease. And hard is the occupation of a man who has to give a
    steam bath to those infected with it ....
P.S. The North Americans in their war of liberation against England at the end of the
    eighteenth century got help from Spain and France, who were her competitors and just as much
    colonial robbers as England. It is said that there were “Left Bolsheviks” to be
    found who contemplated writing a “learned work” on the “dirty deal”
    of these Americans ....

Endnotes
[1] This article was written by Lenin
    in connection with the opposition, expressed by the “Left Communists” at a
    meeting of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) on February 22, 1918, to acquiring
    arms and food supplies from Britain and France for purposes of defence against the German
    imperialists. When the Council of People's Commissars discussed the question on February 21,
    the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries opposed the use of aid from the Allies and the following
    resolution was passed: “In view of the disagreement concerning the negotiations with
    the Allied Powers for supplying the country with food and military equipment the meetings
    hall be adjourned for the groups to consult among themselves.”
Lenin was not present at the discussion of this question in the Central
    Committee on February 22, but he sent the following statement: “To the Central
    Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. Please include my vote in favour of accepting potatoes and arms
    from the bandits of Anglo-French imperialism.” By 6 votes to 5 the Central Committee
    passed a resolution in which it acknowledged that It was permissible for the purpose of
    arming and providing the revolutionary army with the necessary supplies to acquire such
    supplies from the governments of capitalist countries, while maintaining complete
    independence in foreign policy.
After the vote Bukharin tendered his resignation from the Central Committee
    and the editorship of Pravda. In addition, eleven “Left Communists”—Lomov
    (Oppokov), Uritsky, Bukharin, Bubnov, Pyatakov and others-submitted a statement to the
    Central Committee charging the Central Committee with capitulating to the international
    bourgeoisie, and stating that they would conduct extensive agitation against the policy of
    the Central Committee.
The same day the question of obtaining arms and food supplies from the Allied
    Powers was again discussed, this time by the Council of People’s Commissars, which
    decided in favour of obtaining them.
[2] Kalyayev. I. P, (1877-1905)—a
    member of the combat group of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, took part in a number of
    terroristic acts, On February 4 (17). In 1905 he assassinated the Governor-General of Moscow,
    the Grand Duke S. A. Romanov, uncle of Nicholas ll. He was executed at Schüsselburg on
    May 10 (23). 


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Peace or War?







Peace or War?







V. I. Lenin
Peace or War?

Written: Morning of February 23, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 34, the evening edition,
 published according to the Pravda text.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
 Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pp. 36-39
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
 Archive March, 2002


The Germans’ reply, as the reader sees, sets us peace terms still more onerous than
 those of Brest-Litovsk. Nevertheless, I am absolutely convinced that only complete
 intoxication by revolutionary phrase-making can impel some people to refuse to sign these
 terms. It was precisely on that account that, by articles in Pravda (signed Karpov)
 on “The Revolutionary Phrase” and on “The Itch”, 
 I began a relentless struggle against revolutionary phrase-making, which I saw and see now as 
 the greatest menace to our Party (and, consequently, to the revolution as well). On many
 occasions in history revolutionary parties which were strictly carrying out revolutionary
 slogans became infected with revolutionary phrase-making and perished as a result.

      Hitherto I have been trying to persuade the Party to fight
      against revolutionary phrase-making. Now I must do this
      publicly.

      For&#8212;alasl&#8212;my 

      very worst suppositions have proved justified.
    
On January 8, 1918, at a meeting of about 60 of the chief Party workers of Petrograd I
 read out my “Theses on the Question of the Immediate Conclusion of a Separate and
 Annexationist Peace” (17 theses, which will be published tomorrow). In these theses
 (paragraph 13) 1 declared war against revolutionary phrase-making, doing so in the mildest
 and most comradely fashion (I now profoundly condemn this mildness of mine). I said that the
 policy of refusing the proposed peace “would, perhaps, answer the needs of someone who
 is striving for an eloquent, spectacular and brilliant effect, but would completely fail to
 reckon with the objective relationship of class forces and material factors at the present
 period of the socialist revolution that has begun”.
In the the thesis I wrote that if we refuse to sign the proposed peace, “very heavy
 defeats will compel Russia to conclude a still more unfavourable separate peace”.
Things have turned out still worse, for our army, which is retreating and demobilising, is
 refusing to fight at all.
Under such conditions, only unrestrained phrase-making is capable of pushing Russia into
 war at the present time and I personally, of course, would not remain for a second either in
 the government or in the Central Committee of our Party if the policy of phrase-making were
 to gain the upper hand.
The bitter truth has now revealed itself with such terrible clarity that it is impossible
 not to see it. The entire bourgeoisie in Russia is rejoicing and gloating over the arrival of
 the Germans. Only those who are blind or intoxicated by phrases can close their eyes to the
 fact that the policy of a revolutionary war (without an army ... ) brings grist to
 the mill of our bourgeoisie. In Dvinsk, Russian officers are already going about wearing
 their shoulder-straps.
In Rezhitsa, the bourgeoisie exultantly welcomed the Germans. In Petrograd, on Nevsky
 Prospekt, and in bourgeois newspapers (Rech, Dyelo Naroda, Novy Luch, etc.), they
 are licking their lips with delight at the impending overthrow of Soviet power by the
 Germans.
Let everyone know: he who is against an immediate, even though extremely onerous peace, is
 endangering Soviet power.
We are compelled to endure an onerous peace. It will not halt the revolution in Germany
 and in Europe. We shall set about preparing a revolutionary army, not by phrases and
 exclamations (after the manner of those who since January 7 have done nothing even to halt
 our fleeing troops), b~t by organisational work, by deeds, by the creation of a
 proper, powerful army of the whole people.
Lenin


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech at the Joint meeting of the
Bolshevik and “Left” Socialist-Revolutionary
Groups of the all-Russia C.E.C., February 23, 1918.







Speech At The Joint Meeting Of The Bolshevik And “Left”
    Socialist-Revolutionary Groups Of The All-Russia C.E.C.







V. I. Lenin
Speech At the Joint Meeting of the
     Bolshevik and “Left” Socialist-Revolutionary Groups of the All-Russia C.E.C.
    [1]
February 23, 1918 Newspaper Report

Delivered: February 23, 1918
First Published: February 24, 1918, in Izvestia of the Soveits
    of Workers’, soldiers’ andpeasant̻ Deputires of the City of Moscow and
    Moscow Region No. 32. Published according to the newsaper text
Source: Lenin's Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, page 42
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

Lenin spoke in defence of signing the German proposals. He began by saying that Soviet
    power must face up to the truth, that it must acknowledge the total impossibility of
    resistance to the Germans. He referred to the previous speakers who rejected signature to the
    treaty, but the view that we could organise an army in the near future was wholly without
    grounds; the army did not want to fight and no one could compel it to do so; if, however, we
    were to start A joint meeting of the Bolshevik and Left Socialist-Revolutionary groups in the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee was held in the evening of February 23, 1918 to
    discuss the question of accepting the new German peace terms. The atmosphere at the meeting
    was extremely tense. After a report on the situation at the front by the Supreme Commander N.
    V. Krylenko, who announced that the army was demobilising spontaneously, K. B. Radek, D. B.
    Ryazanov and the Left Socialist-Revolutionary I. Z. Steinberg spoke against concluding peace.
    Lenin spoke in favour of concluding peace. No decisions were taken at the meeting. The joint
    meeting of the two groups was followed by a meeting of the Bolshevik group of the All-Russia
    C.E.C. The “Left Communists” demanded freedom to vote as they pleased at the
    forthcoming meeting of the All-Russia C.E.C., but this demand was rejected by the group and a
    majority decision was taken to vote at the All-Russia C.E.C. meeting in favour of concluding
    peace. p. 42 organising an army, if we were to collect a small handful of valiant fighters
    whom we would throw into the jaws of imperialism, we would thereby lose energetic and
    ideologically equipped fighters who had won us victory.
Further, Lenin said that our Russian proletariat was not at all to blame if the German
    revolution was delayed. It would come but it was not there yet, and for us the best way out
    was to gain time; if we were to sign a peace treaty at the present moment, we could
    subsequently, by energetic, organised work, by railway construction and by putting food
    matters in order, create a strong and stable army for the defence of our revolution, and
    before that time the socialist revolution in Germany would certainly arrive.

Endnotes
1. A joint meeting of the Bolshevik and
    Left Socialist-Revolutionary groups in the All-Russia Central Executive Committee was held in
    the evening of February 23, 1918 to discuss the question of accepting the new German peace
    terms. The atmosphere at the meeting was extremely tense. After a report on the situation at
    the front by the Supreme Commander N. V. Krylenko, who announced that the army was
    demobilising spontaneously, K. B. Radek, D. B. Ryazanov and the Left Socialist-Revolutionary
    I. Z. Steinberg spoke against concluding peace. Lenin spoke in favour of concluding
    peace.
No decisions were taken at the meeting.
The joint meeting of the two groups was followed by a meeting of the Bolshevik
    group of the All-Russia C.E.C. The “Left Communists” demanded freedom to vote as
    they pleased at the forthcoming meeting of the All-Russia C.E.C., but this demand was
    rejected by the group and a majority decision was taken to vote at the All-Russia C.E.C.
    meeting in favour of concluding peace.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Report on the Meeting of
the all-Russia C.E.C, February 24, 1918







Report at the Meeting Of The All-Russia C.E.C. February 24, 1918







V. I. Lenin
Report at the Meeting Of The All-Russia C.E.C. February 24, 1918[1]

Delivered: February 24, 1918
First Published: A brief report of this speech was published on the 26 February 1918 issue of Pravda No. 35. Firt published in full in 1926 in N. Lenin V. Ulyanov), Collected Works Volume XX, Part II. Published according the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
 Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pages 42-47
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
 Archive March, 2002



 Comrades, the terms put to us by the representatives of German imperialism are unprecedentedly severe, immeasurably oppressive, predatory terms. The German imperialists, taking advantage of the' weakness of Russia, have their knee on our chest. Not to conceal from you the bitter truth of which I am deeply convinced, the situation being what it is, I must tell you that we have no other way out than to subscribe to these terms. And that any other proposal means to incur, either voluntarily or involuntarily, still worse evils and further (if one can speak here of degrees) complete subjection of the Soviet Republic, its enslavement to German imperialism, or it is a pitiful attempt at using words to evade a terrible, immeasurably cruel, but undeniable reality. Comrades, you all know very well, and many of you know it from personal experience, that the burden Russia had to bear in the imperialist war was for indisputable reasons that everyone can understand more terrible and severe than that endured by other countries. You know, therefore, that our army was martyrised and tortured by the war as was no other, that all the slanders cast at us by the bourgeois press and the parties which supported it, or which were hostile to the Soviet government, alleging that the Bolsheviks were demoralising the troops, are nonsense. I shall remind you once again of the proclamation which Krylenko, while still an ensign under Kerensky, distributed to the troops when he left for Petrograd, and which was reprinted in Pravda, and in which he said: we do not urge upon you any kind of mutiny, we urge upon you organised political actions; strive to be as organised as possible.[2] Such was the propaganda of one of the most ardent representatives of the Bolsheviks, one who was most closely connected with the army. Everything that could be done to bold together this unprecedentedly, immeasurably fatigued army, and to make it stronger, was done. And if we see now, though I have entirely refrained, during the last month, for example, from setting out my view, which could seem pessimistic, if we have seen that, as regards the army during the past month, we have said all that could be said, and done all that could be done, to ease the situation, reality has shown us that after three years of war our army is altogether unable and unwilling to fight. That is the basic cause, simple, obvious, and in the highest degree bitter and painful, but absolutely clear, why, living side by side with an imperialist plunderer, we are compelled to sign peace terms when he puts his knee on our chest. That is why I say, fully conscious of the responsibility I bear, and repeat that no single member of the Soviet government ha.5 the right to evade this responsibility, of course, it is pleasant and easy to tell the workers, peasants and soldiers, as it has been pleasant and easy to observe, how the revolution has gone forward after the October uprising, but when we have to acknowledge the bitter, painful, undeniable truth—the impossibility of a revolutionary war-it is impermissible now to evade this responsibility and we must shoulder it frankly. I consider myself obliged, I consider it essential to fulfil my duty and state plainly how things are, and therefore I am convinced that the class of toilers of Russia, who know what war is, what it has cost the working people and the degree of exhaustion to which it has led them, that-I do not doubt it for a moment-they along with us recognise the unprecedented severity, grossness and vileness of these peace terms and nevertheless approve our conduct. They will say: you undertook to propose the terms of an immediate aDd just peace, you should have utilised every possibility of delaying peace in order to see whether other countries would join in, whether the European proletariat, without whose help we cannot achieve a lasting socialist victory, would come to our aid. We did everything possible to protract the negotiations, we did even more than was possible; what we did was that after the Brest negotiations we declared the state of war at an end, confident as many of us were that the situation in Germany would not allow her to make a brutal and savage attack on Russia. 



 This time we have had to endure a heavy defeat, and we have to be able to look the defeat straight in the face. Yes, hitherto the revolution has proceeded along an ascending line from victory to victory; now it has suffered a heavy defeat. The German working-class movement, which began so rapidly, has been interrupted for a time. We know that its main causes have not been abolished, and that they will grow and will inevitably extend because the excruciating war is being drawn out, because the bestiality of imperialism is being exposed ever more fully and obviously, and is opening the eyes of masses of people who might seem to be most remote from politics or incapable of understanding socialist policy. That is why this desperate, tragic situation has arisen, which compels us to accept peace now and will compel the masses of the working people to say: yes, they acted correctly, they did all they could to propose a just peace, they had to submit to a most oppressive and unfortunate peace because the country had no other way out. Their situation is such that they are forced to wage a life and-death struggle against the Soviet Republic; if they are unable now to continue their intention of advancing against Petrograd and Moscow it is only because they are tied up in a bloody and predatory war with Britain, and because there is an internal crisis as well. When it is pointed out to me that the German imperialists may present us with still worse conditions tomorrow or the day after, I say that we must be prepared for that; naturally, living side by side with bestial plunderers, the Soviet Republic must expect to be attacked. If at present we cannot reply by war it is because the forces are lacking, because war can be waged only together with the people. If the successes of the revolution cause many comrades to say the opposite, that is not a mass phenomenon, it does not express the will and opinion of the real masses. If you go to the class of real toilers, to the workers and peasants, you will hear only one answer, that we are quite unable towage war, we lack the physical strength, we are choked in blood, as one of the soldiers put it. These masses will understand us and approve of our.concluding this forced and unprecedentedly onerous peace. It may be that the respite needed for an upswing of the masses will take no little time, but those who had to live through the long years of revolutionary battles in the period of the upswing of the revolution and the period when the revolution fell into decline, when revolutionary calls to the masses obtained no response from them, know that all the same the revolution always arose afresh. Therefore we say: yes, at present the masses are not in a state to wage war, at present every representative of the Soviet government is obliged to tell the people to its face the whole bitter truth. The time of unheard-of hardship and of three years of war and of the desperate disruption left by tsarism will pass away, and the people will recover its strength and find itself capable of resistance. At present the oppressor confronts us; it is best, of course, to answer oppression by a revolutionary war, by an uprising, but, unfortunately, history has shown that it is not always possible to answer oppression by an uprising. But to refrain from an uprising does not mean refraining from the revolution. Do not succumb to the provocation coming from the bourgeois newspapers, the enemies of Soviet power. Indeed, they have nothing except talk about “an obscene peace” and cries of “shame!” about this peace, but in fact this bourgeoisie greets the German conquerors with delight. They say: “Now, at last, the Germans will come and restore order”, that is what they want and so they bait us with cries of “an obscene peace, a shameful peace”. They want the Soviet government to give battle, an unheard-of battle, knowing that we lack strength, and they are dragging us into complete enslavement to the German imperialists in order to do a deal with the German gendarmes, but they express only their own class interests, because they know that the Soviet government is growing stronger. These voices, these cries against peace, are in my view the best proof of the fact that those who reject this peace have not only been consoling themselves with unjustified illusions but have succumbed to provocation. No, we must look the disasterous truth squarely in the face: before us is the oppressor with his knee on our chest, and we shall fight with all the means of revolutionary struggle. At present, however, we are in a desperately difficult situation, our ally cannot hasten to our aid, the international proletariat cannot come just now, but it will come. This revolutionary movement, which at present has no possibility of offering armed resistance to the enemy, is rising and it will offer resistance later, but offer it it will. (Applause.) 



Footnotes
[1] 

The meeting of the All-Russia C.E.C. to discuss the question of making peace with Germany opened on February 24, 1918 at 3 a. m. under the chairmanship of Y. M. Sverdlov. During the debate on Lenin’s report the conclusion of peace was opposed by representatives of the Mensheviks, the Right and Left Socialist- Revolutionaries and the anarchists. By 116 votes to 85, with 26 abstentions, the meeting passed the Bolshevik resolution on accepting the German peace terms. The majority of the “Left Communists” did not participate in the voting and left the hall
while it was being taken. 

[2]
   The reference is to N. V. Krylenko’s appeal to the troops quoted in Lenin’s article “Bolshevism and ‘Demoralisation’ of the Army”. Lenin's article was published in Pravda No. 72, June 3 (16), 1917.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 


 



==========

## Where is the Mistake?







Where is the Mistake?







V. I. Lenin
Where is the Mistake?[1]


Written: February 23 or 24, 1918
First Published: 1929 in Lenin Miscellany XI Published according to the manuscript  
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pp. 48-50
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


The outstanding and most responsible opponents of the conclusion of
a separate peace on the Brest terms have set out the essence of their
arguments in the following form: 




  Here are advanced the most concentrated, the most important
arguments, set out almost in the form of a resolution. For convenience
in analysing the arguments, we have numbered each proposition
separately. 

 
  When one examines these arguments, the authors’ main error
  immediately strikes the eye. They do not say a word about the
  conerete conditions of a revolutionary war at the present
  moment. The chief and fundamental consideration for the supporters
  of peace, namely, that it is impossible for us to fight  at the
  present time, is  altogether evaded. In reply&#8212;in
  reply, say, to my theses,* well-known to the authors since January
  8&#8212;they put forward exclusively  general
  considerations, abstractions, which inevitably turn into empty
  phrases. For every general historical statement applied to a
  particular case without a special anal,ysis of the conditions of
  that particular case becomes an empty phrase.    * See present
  edition, Vol.   26, pp. 442-50.-Ed.  

 
  Take the first proposition. Its whole “point” is a
  reproach, an exclamation, a declamation, an effort to
  “shame” the opponent, an appeal to sentiment. See what
  bad people youi are, they say: the imperialists are attacking you,
  “proclaiming” as their aim the suppression of the
  proletarian revolution, and you reply by agreeing to conclude peacel
  But our argumeiit, as the authors are aware, is that by rejecting an
  onerous peace we actually make it easier for the enemy to
  suppress the prcletarian revolution. And this conclusion of ours is
  reinforced (for example, in my theses) by a number of very concrete
  indications about the state of the army, its class composition,
  etc. The authors have avoided everything concrete and the result
  they arrive at is an empty phrase. Forif the enemy are
  “proclaiming” that their aimis to suppress the
  revolution, then he is a bad revolutionary who by choosing an
  admittedly impossible form of resistance helps to achieve a
  transition from the “proclamation” to the
  realisation of the enemy’s aims. 


 
 Second argument: “reproaches” are being intensified. You,
 they sayu agree to peace at the first onslaught of the enemy .... Do
 the authors seriously suppose that this can be convincing for those
 who ever since January, long before the “onslaught ”,
 analysed the relationship of forces and the concrete conditions of
 the war at that time? Is it not phr~semaking if
 “reproach” is regarded as argument against analysis? ? 

 
 Agreeing to peace under the present conditions, we are told,
 “is a sihrrender of the foremost contingent of the
 international proletariat to the international bourgeoisie ”. 

 
 Again an empty phrase. General truths are inflated in such a way that
 they become untrue and are turned into declamation. The German
 bourgeoisie is not “international ”, for the Anglo-French
 eapitalists welcome our refusal to conclude
 peace. “Surrender ”, generally speaking, is a bad thing,
 but this praiseworthy truth does not decide every individual
 proposition, for refusal to fhght under obviously unfavourable
 conditions can also be called surrender, but such surrender is
 obligatory for a serious revolutionary. Agreeing to enter the Third
 Duma, the concluding of peace Witlh Stolypin, as the
 “Left” declamationists called it at that time, was also,
 generally speaking, a surrender. 
 We are the foremost contingent in tlhe seilse of the
 revolutionary beginning, that is indisputable, but in order to be the
 foremost contingent in the senso of a military clash with the forces
 of foremost imperialism, that .... [Here the
 maniuseript breaks off.—Ed.] 


Endnotes
[1]
    This article examines the statement submitted to the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) on February 22 by the “Left Communists” and signed by a group of members of the Central Committee and People’s Commissars-A. Lomov (G. I. Oppokov), M. S. Uritsky, N. I. Bukharin, A. S. Bubnov, V. M. Smirnov, I. N. Stukov, M. G. Bronsky, V. N. Yakovleva, A. P. Spunde, M. N. Pokrovsky and G. L. Pyatakov.

The copy of the statement on which Lenin made notes in preparation for quoting it in his article has not survived.
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## An Unfortunate Peace











An Unfortunate Peace



V. I. Lenin
An Unfortunate Peace

Written: February 24, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 34, February 24, 1918; published according to the Pravda text.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pp. 51-52
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

Trotsky was right when he said: the peace may be a triply unfortunate peace, but 
the peace ending this hundredfold obscene war cannot be an obscene, disgraceful, dirty 
peace.
It is incredibly, unprecedentedly hard to sign an unfortunate, immeasurably severe,
    infinitely humiliating peace when the strong has the weak by the throat. But it is
    impermissible to give way to despair, impermissible to forget that history has examples of
    still greater humiliations, still more unfortunate, onerous peace terms. Yet even so, the
    peoples crushed by bestially cruel conquerors were able to recover and rise again.

    Napoleon I crushed and humiliated Prussia immeasiarably more heavily than Wilhelm is now
    crushing and humiliating Russia,[1] For a number of years Napoleon I was completely victorious
    on the continent; his victory over Prussia was much more decisive than Wilhelm’s victory 
over Russia, Yet after a few years Prussia recovered and in a war of liberation, not without 
the aid of robber states that waged against Napoleon by no means a war of liberation but an
    imperialist war, threw off the Napoleonic yoke.
Napoleon’s imperialist wars continued for many years, took up a whole epoch and
    exhibited an extremely complex complex of imperialist[2] relationships interwoven 
with national liberation movements, Arid as a result,
    through all this epoch, unusually rich in wars and tragedies (tragedies of whole peoples),
    history went forward from feudalism to "free" capitalism. 
History is now advancing still more swiftly, the tragedies of whole nations that are being
    crushed or have been crushed by imperialist war are immeasurably more terrible. The
    interweaving of imperialist and national liberation trends, movements and aspirations is also
    in evidence, with the immense difference that the national liberation movements are
    immeasurably weaker and the imperialist ones immeasurably stronger. But history goes steadily
    forward, and in the depths of all the advanced countries there is maturing— despite
    everything—the socialist revolution, a revolution infinitely deeper, closer to the
    people and more powerful than the previous bourgeois revolution.
Hence, again and yet again: of all things the most impermissible is despair. The peace
    terms are intolerably severe. Nevertheless history will come into its own; to our aid will
    come—even if not so quickly as we should like—the steadily maturing
    socialist revolution in other countries.
The plunderer has besieged us, oppressed and humiliated us—we are capable of
    enduring all these burdens. We are not alone in the world. We have friends, supporters, very
    loyal helpers. They are late—owing to a number of conditions independent of their
    will-but they will come.
Let us work to organise, organise and yet again organise! The future, in spite of all
    trials, is ours.

Endnotes
[1]
    The reference is to the Peace of Tilsit signed in July 180 between France and Prussia, which imposed onerous and humiliating obligations on Prussia. Prussia lost a large part of her territory an was compelled to pay an indemnity of 100 million francs; she undertook to reduce her army to 40,000 men, to provide auxiliaries for Napoleon on demand, and to cease trading with England.
 
      
[2]
 I call here imperialism the plunder of foreign countries in general and an imperialist war the war of plunderers for the division of such booty.—Lenin


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speeches at the Meeting
of the C.C. or the R.S.D.L.P.(B), February 24,
1918



 
     
Speeches at the Meeting Of The C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) February 24, 1918


 V. I. Lenin
Speeches at the Meeting Of The C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) February 24, 1918
Minutes

Written: February 24, 1918 First Published: 1928 in he magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia No. 2 (73);
Published according to the text of thebook Minutes of he C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P., August
1917-February 1918, 1929 Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pp. 53-56 Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive
March, 2002
 
I
  The question of sending a delegation to Brest to sign the peace treaty was discussed.


 Lenin considered that it was necessary to preserve continuity with the preceding
delegation and since it would not be enough for Comrade Karakhan to go alone, it was very
desirable that Comrades Joffe and Zinoviev should go.


 2 
 A. A. Jofre categorieally refused to go. declaring that
“concluding peace is the death of the whole Brest policy”.
 Lenin said that he did not insist on Joffe going as a plenipotentiary for signing the
treaty, but he considered Comrade Joffe should go as a consultant. Undoubtedly, the Germans had
sent their answer in the form of an ultimatum, fearing opposition on our part, but if they saw
our willingness to sign the peace treaty they might agree also to negotiations. In view of this a
consultant who knew the whole matter was essential. If it turned out that it was only necessary
to sign, then, of course, there would be nothing to talk about, and the consultant would not even
appear at the meeting.


3

Lenin said that Radek, though opposed to concluding peace, had nevertheless agreed to go, but the
Poles had forbidden him to do so.

4
  In further discussion L. D. Trotsky declared that in Brest it would only be necessary to
sign the peace treaty and A. A. Joffe would not be necessary there, since in the Germans’
reply there was already a formulation on the chief questions. 
 
Lenin considered that he was wrong, since experts were undoubtedly required at the signing of,the
treaty and we had none, even for a trade treaty. Krasin could have gone, but he had gone to
Stockholm for a time. We were going to sign the treaty with clenched teeth, about which the
delegation had made its declaration, but we did not know the situation, we did not know what
might happen by the time the delegation arrived in Brest, and therefore Joffe as a consultant was
essential. In general it must be borne in mind that we empowered the delegation to enter into
negotiations if there was any possibility of doing so.

5
  In further discussion the candidatures of G. Y. Zinoyloy and G. Y. Sokolnikov were
put forward. 
  Lenin considered that both should be sent, and that if it was only a
question of signing the peace treaty, they could both lieave at once, having reached agreement
with Chicherin about further developments.


 6 
 G. Y. Sokolnikov declared that he would not go to Brest and if the Central Committee
insistedhe would resign frem the Central Committee. 
  Lenin asked the comrades not to get excited and pointed out that Comrade Petrovsky could
go in the delegation as People’s Commissar.


7
 mL.. D. Trotsky’s statement about his resigning the post of Peoplo’s Co
missar for Foreign Affairs was d12cussed.

  Lenin pointed out that tlhis was unacceptable, that a change of poliey was a crisis. T
hat a questionnaire on policy had been distributed in tlhe provinces,” and tlhat to polemise a
little was not at all harmful.

  He made a practical proposal: the Central Committee would ask Comrade Trotsky to
postpone his statemeiht until the next meeting of the C.C., until Tuesday. (Amendment—
until the return of the delegation from Brest.)

 8
 Lenin proposed that the following declaration should be put to the vote: the C.C.,
considering it impossible to accept the resignation of Comrade Trotsky at the present time,
requests him to postpone his decision until the return of the delegation from Brest or until a
chaiige in the actual state of affairs.

  Adopted with three abstaining.

 9
 L. D. Trotsky declared that since his statement had not been accepted he would be, compelled
to give up appearing in official institutions.

  Lenin moved that it should be voted: the Central Committee, having heard Comrade
Trotsky’s statement, while fully agreeing to Comrade Trotsky’s absence during
decisions on foreign affairs in the Council of People’s Commissars, requests Comrade
Trotsky not to keep aloof from other decisions.

  Adopted.

10
 The C.C. discussed the statement of A. Lomov, M. S. Uritsky, V. M. Smirnov, G. L, Pyatakov,
D. P. Bogolopov and A. P. Spunde about their resignation from posts in the Council of
People’s Commissars, M. S. Uritsky expressed the hope that their statement concerning their
resignation from responsible Party and Soviet posts would be published.

  Lenin moved that it be adopted: the C.C. requests the comrades who submitted the
statement to postpone their decision until the return of the delegation from Brest and to discuss
this decision of the C.C. in the group.


11
Lenin moved two proposals:
  1) While recognising the legitimate demand of the four, the C.C. requests them to
discuss tho proposal of the C.C. and to postpone their statement both in view of the nearness of
the Congress and in view of the complexity of the political situation.

  2) While guaranteeing the comrades the publication of their statement in Pravda, the
C.C. requests them to revise their decision and to discuss whether they do not find it possible
to remain both in responsible posts and in the C.C.”

  Lenin’s proposals were adopted.



Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Note on the Necessity of Signing
the Peace Treaty



 
     
Note on The Necessity of Signing the Peace Treaty



V. I. Lenin

 Note on The Necessity of Signing the Peace Treaty


Written: February 24, 1918
First Published: 1929 in Lenin Miscellany XI; published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, page 57
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive
March, 2002


   Not to conclude peace at the present moment means  declaring an armed uprising or a revolutionary war against  German imperialism. This is either phrase-making or a  provocation by the Russian bourgeoisie, which is thirsting  for the arrival of the Germans. In reality we cannot fight  at the present time, for the army is agaiihst the war and  is unable to fight. The week of war against the Germans,  infaceof whom our troops simply ran away, from February 18  to 24, 1918, has fully proved this. We are prisoners of German imperialism. Not empty phrases about an immediate  armed uprising against the Germans, but the systematie,  serious, steady work of preparing a revolutionary war, the  creation of diseipline and an army, the putting into order  of the railways and food affairs. That is the point of view  of the majority of the C.E.C., including Lenin (and the  majority of the C.C., Bolsheviks), and of Spiridonova and  Malkin (the minority of the C.C., Left Socialist-Revolutionaries). 


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Position of the C.C. or the
R.S.D.L.P.(B) on the Question of the Separate and
annexationist Peace











Position of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks) on the Question of the Separate And Annexationist Peace



V. I. Lenin
Position of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks) on the Question of the Separate And
    Annexationist Peace[1]

Written: February 24, 1918
First Published: Pravda, February 26,
    1918, No. 35; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pages 58-61
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

Dear Comrades,
The Organising Bureau of the Central Committee considers it essential to submit to you an
    explanation of the motives that led the Central Committee to agree to the peace terms
    proposed by the German Government. The Organising Bureau is addressing this explanation to
    you, comrades, in order that all Party members should be thoroughly informed of the point of
    view of the Central Committee, which, in the period between Congresses, represents the entire
    Party. The Organising Bureau considers it essential to state that the Central Committee was
    not unanimous en the question of signing the peace terms, since the decision has been made,
    however, it must be supported by the whole Party. A Party Congress is due in a few days, and
    only then will it be possible to decide the question of the extent to which the Central
    Committee rightly expressed the actual position of the whole Party. Until the Congress, all
    Party members, in pursuance of their duty to the Party and for the sake of the maintenance of
    unity in our Party ranks, will carry out the decisions of their central leading body, the
    Central Committee of the Party.
The absolute necessity of signing, at the given moment (February 24, 1918), an
    annexationist and unbelievably harsh peace treaty with Germany is due primarily to the fact
    that we have no army and cannot defend ourselves.
Everybody knows why since October 25, 1917, since the victory of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat and the poor peasantry, we have all become defencists, we are all for the defence
    of the fatherland.
From the point of view of defending the fatherland, it is impermissible for us to allow
    ourselves to he drawn into an armed conflict when we have no army and the enemy is armed to
    the teeth and excellently prepared.
The Soviet Socialist Republic cannot wage a war when the obviously overwhelming majority
    of the masses of workers, peasants and soldiers who elect deputies to the Soviets are against
    the war, It would be a rash gamble. It will be a different thing if an end is put to this
    war, excessively harsh though the terms of peace may be, and German imperialism again decides
    to start an aggressive war against Russia. Then the majority of the Soviets will most
    certainly he in favour of war.
To wage war today would amount objectively to falling for the provocation of the Russian
    bourgeoisie. They know full well that at the moment Russia is defenceless and would be
    crushed by even insignificant German forces, which would have only to cut the main railway
    lines to starve Petrograd and Moscow into surrendering. The bourgeoisie want war, because
    they want the overthrow of Soviet power and an agreement with the German bourgeoisie, the
    jubilation of the bourgeoisie when the German troops arrived in Dvinsk and Bezhitsa, Venden
    and Gapsal, Minsk and Drissa confirms this as clearly as can be.
Defence of revolutionary war at the present moment is nothing but an empty revolutionary
    phrase, it is impossible for a ruined peasant country to wage a modern war against advanced
    imperialism without an army and without the most serious economic preparation. It is beyond
    all doubt that German imperialism must be resisted, for it will crush us and hold us
    prisoner. It would, however, be empty talk to demand resistance specifically by means of
    armed uprising, especially now, when such resistance is obviously hopeless for us, and
    obviously to the advantage of the German and Russian bourgeoisie.
It is equally empty talk to argue in favour of revolutionary war at this moment on the
    grounds of support for the international socialist movement. If we make it easier for German
    imperialism to crush the Soviet Republic by our untimely acceptance of battle, we shall harm
    and not help the German and international working-class movement and the cause of socialism.
    We must help only the revolutionary internationalists in all countries by all-round,
    persistent and systematic work; but to undertake the gamble of launching an armed uprising,
    when it would obviously be a gamble, is unworthy of a Marxist.
If Liebknecht is victorious in two or three weeks (which is possible) he will, of course,
    get us out of all difficulties. It would, however, be simply foolish and would be turning the
    great slogan of the solidarity of the working people of all countries into sheer mockery if
    we were to assure the people that Liebknecht will certainly and unavoidably score victory
    within the next few weeks. Indeed, by arguing in this way we should he turning the great
    slogan "We bank on the world revolution" into an empty phrase.
Objectively the situation is similar to that of the summer of 1907. Then, it was the
    Russian monarchist Stolypin who crushed us and held us prisoner; today it is the German
    imperialist. Then, the slogan of an immediate insurrection, which, unfortunately, was
    supported by the entire Socialist-Revolutionary Party, proved to be an empty phrase. Today,
    at this very moment, the slogan of revolutionary war is obviously an empty phrase that
    attracts the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, who repeat the arguments of the Right
    Socialist-Revolutionaries. We are the prisoners of German imperialism and we have ahead of us
    a long and difficult struggle to overthrow that ringleader of world imperialism; this
    struggle is undoubtedly the last decisive struggle for socialism, but to begin that struggle
    at the present moment with an armed uprising against the leader of imperialism would be a
    gamble that no Marxist would ever undertake.
The systematic, unrelenting, all-round building up of the country's defence potential,
    self-discipline everywhere, the use of grievous defeat to improve discipline in all spheres
    of life for the purpose of the country's economic progress and the consolidation of Soviet
    power-that is the task of the day, that is the way to prepare a revolutionary war in deed and
    not merely in word.
In conclusion, the Organising Bureau considers it essential to state that, since the
    offensive of German imperialism has not yet been halted, all members of the Party must
    organise a concerted opposition to it. If it is impossible to sign a peace treaty, even the
    harshest, and gain time to prepare for new battles, our Party must emphasise the need to
    exert every effort for all-out resistance.
If we can gain time, gain even a brief respite for organisational work, we must do our
    best to get it. If we are granted no deferment our Party must call on the masses to fight, to
    engage in the most energetic self-defence., We are confident that all Party members will do
    their duty by the Party, by the working class of their country, by the people and the
    proletariat. By preserving Soviet power we are rendering the best, the most powerful support
    to the proletariat of all countries in their incredibly hard struggle against their own
    bourgeoisie. Today the cause of socialism could suffer no heavier blow than the collapse of
    Soviet power in Russia.
With comradely greetings, 

Organising Bureau of the Central Committee of the
    R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks) 


Endnotes
[1] In the document "Position of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks) on the Question of the Separate and Annexationist Peace" the first and the two concluding aragraphs were written by Y. M. Sverdlov.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## A Painful but Necessary Lesson











A Painful But Necessary Lesson



V. I. Lenin
A Painful But Necessary Lesson

Written: February 25, 1918
First Published: Pravda (evening edition), February 25,
    1918, No. 35
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pages 62-66
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

 
    The week from February 18 to 24, 1918, has been one that will be remembered as a great
    turning-point in the history of the Russian—and the international-revolution.
On February 27, 1917, the Russian proletariat, jointly with part of the peasantry who had
    been aroused by the course the war was taking, and also with the bourgeoisie, overthrew the
    monarchy. On April 21, 1917, the proletariat overthrew the absolute rule of the imperialist
    bourgeoisie and shifted power into the hands of the petty-bourgeoisie advocates of compromise
    with the bourgeoisie, On July 3, the urban proletariat gave the compromisers’
    government a severe shock by its spontaneous demonstration. On October 25, it overthrew that
    government and established the dictatorship of the proletariat and the poor peasantry.
This victory had to be defended in civil war. It took about three months, beginning with
    the victory over Kerensky near Gatchina, continued in the victories over the bourgeoisie, the
    officer cadets and part of the counter-revolutionary Cossacks in Moscow, lrkutsk, Orenburg
    and Kiev, and ending with the victory over Kaledin, Kornilov and Alexeyev at
    Restov-on-Don.
The fire of proletarian insurrection flared up in Finland, and the conflagration spread to
    Rumania.
Victories on the home front were achieved with relative ease since the enemy did not
    possess any material or organisational advantage, and, furthermore, did not have any sound
    economic basis or any support among the masses, the case with which these victories were
    gained was bound to turn the heads of many leaders, Their attitude has been:
    “We’ll have a walk-over.”
They have disregarded the widespread disintegration of the army, which is rapidly
    demobilising itself and abandoning the front. They have become intoxicated with revolutionary
    phrases. They have applied them to the struggle against world imperialism. They have mistaken
    Russia’s temporary “freedom” from imperialist pressure for something
    normal, although actually that “freedom” was due only to an interruption in the
    war between the German and Anglo-French plunderers, they have mistaken the mass strikes that
    are beginning in Austria and Germany for a revolution that is supposed to have delivered us
    from any serious danger from German imperialism. Instead of serious, effective, sustained
    work to aid the German revolution, which is coming to birth in a particularly difficult and
    painful manner, we have had people waving their arms—“what can those German
    imperialists do—with Liebknecht en our side we’ll kick them out in no
    time!”
The week from February 18 to February 24, 1918, from the capture of Dvinsk to the capture
    of Pskov (later recaptured), the week of imperialist Germany’s military offensive
    against the Soviet Socialist Republic, has been a bitter, distressing, and painful lessen,
    but it has been a necessary, useful and beneficial one. How highly instructive it has been to
    compare the two groups of telegraphic and telephonic communications that have reached the
    central government in the past week! On the one hand there has been the unrestrained flood of
    “resolution-type” revolutionary phrases—one might call them Steinberg
    phrases, if one recalls a chefd’oeuvre in that style, the speech of the
    “Left” (hm ... hm) Socialist-Revolutionary Steinberg at the Saturday meeting of
    the Central Executive Committee. On the other hand there have been the painful and
    humiliating reports of regiments refusing to retain their positions, of refusal to defend
    even the Narva Line, and of disobedience to the order to destroy everything in the event of a
    retreat, not to mention the running away, the chaos, ineptitude, helplessness and
    slovenliness.
A bitter, distressing, painful but necessary, useful and beneficial lesson!
The thoughtful, class-conscious worker will draw three conclusions from this historic
    lessen—on our attitude to the defence of the fatherland, its defence potential and to
    socialist revolutionary war; on the conditions under which we may come into collision with
    world imperialism; on the correct presentation of the question of our attitude to the world
    socialist movement.
We are and have been defencists since October 25, 1917, we champion the defence of the
    fatherland ever since that day. That is because we have shown by deeds that we have
    broken away from imperialism. We have denounced and published the filthy, bloodstained
    treaties of the imperialist plotters. We have overthrown our own bourgeoisie. We have given
    freedom to the peoples we formerly oppressed. We have given land to the people and
    introduced workers’ control. We are in favour of defending the Russian Soviet Socialist
    Republic.
And because we are in favour of defending the fatherland we demand a serious
    attitude towards the country’s defence potential and preparedness for war. We declare a
    ruthless war against revolutionary phrases about revolutionary war. There must be a lengthy,
    serious preparation for it, beginning with economic progress, the restoration of the railways
    (for without them modern warfare is an empty phrase) and with the establishment of the
    strictest revolutionary discipline and self-discipline everywhere.
From the point of view of the defence of the fatherland it would be a crime to enter into
    an armed conflict with an infinitely superior and well-prepared enemy when we obviously have
    no army. From the point of view of the defence of the fatherland we have to conclude the most
    harsh, oppressive, brutal, disgraceful peace—not in order to “capitulate”
    to imperialism but in order to learn and prepare to fight against imperialism in a serious
    and effective manner.
The past week has raised the Russian revolution to an immeasurably higher level of
    historical development. In the course of it history bas progressed, has ascended several
    steps at once.
Until now we have been faced with miserable, despicable (from the standpoint of world
    imperialism) enemies, an idiot called Romanov, Kerensky the boaster, gangs of officer cadets
    and bourgeois. Now there bas arisen against us the giant of world imperialism, a splendidly
    organised and technically well-equipped, civilised giant, that giant must be fought. And end
    must know how to fight him. A peasant country that has been subjected to
    unparalleled devastation by three years of war and that has begun the socialist revolution,
    must avoid armed conflicts-must avoid them while it is still possible, even at the cost of
    huge sacrifices-in order to be able to do something worthwhile before the “last,
    decisive battle” begins.
That battle will begin only when the socialist revolution breaks out in the leading
    imperialist countries. That revolution is undoubtedly maturating and growing stronger month
    by month, week by week. That growing strength must be helped. And we have to know how to help
    it. It would harm and not help that growing strength if we were to give up the neighbouring
    Soviet Socialist Republic to destruction at a moment when it obviously has no army.
We must not turn into an empty phrase the great slogan “We bank on the victory of
    socialism in Europe”. It is a true slogan if we have in mind the long and difficult
    path to the full victory of socialism. It is an indisputable philosophic-historical truth in
    respect of the entire “era of the socialist revolution”. But any abstract truth
    becomes an empty phrase if it is applied to any concrete situation. It is indisputable that
    “every strike conceals the hydra of the social revolution”. But it is nonsense to
    think that we can stride directly from a strike to the revolution. If we “bank en the
    victory of socialism in Europe” in the sense that we guarantee to the people that the
    European revolution will break out and is certain to be victorious within the next few weeks,
    certainly before the Germans have time to reach Petrograd, Moscow or Kiev, before they have
    time to “finish off” our railway transport, we shall be acting not as serious
    internationalist revolutionaries, but as adventurers.
If Liebknecht is victorious over the bourgeoisie in two or three weeks (it is not
    impossible), he will get us out of all difficulties. That is beyond doubt. If, however, we
    determine our tactics for today in the struggle against the imperialism of today in the hope
    that Liebknecht will probably be victorious within the next few weeks, we shall deserve
    nothing but ridicule. We shall be turning the greatest revolutionary slogans of the present
    day into an empty revolutionary phrase.
Worker comrades, learn from the painful but useful lessons of the revolution! Prepare
    seriously, vigorously and unwaveringly to defend the fatherland, to defend the Soviet
    Socialist Republic!


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Draft Decision of the Council of
People’s Commissars on the Evacuation of the
Government











Draft Decision of the Council of People's Commissars on the Evacuation of the Government



V. I. Lenin
Draft Decision of the Council of People’s Commissars on the Evacuation of the
    Government

Written: February 26, 1918
First Published: 1927 in Lenin Miscellany XI Published
    according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, page 67
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

1. Choose Moscow as the seat of government.
2. From each department evacuate the minimum number of leaders of the central
    administrative body, not more than two or three dozeri people (plus families).
3. Whatever happens, immediately remeve the State Bank, the gold and the
    Stationery Office.
4. Begin evacuating Moscow valuables. 


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Strange and Monstrous







Strange and Monstrous







V. I. Lenin
Strange and Monstrous


Written: February 28, 1918
First Published: Pravda Nos. 37 and 38, February 28 and March 
      1, 1918; Izvestia VTsIK No. 43, March 8, 1918 published according to the 
      Pravda text.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
      Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pp. 68-75 Translated:
      Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive March, 2002

The Moscow Regional Bureau of our Party, in a
      resolution adopted on February 24, 1918, has expressed lack of
      confidence in the Central Committee, refused to obey those of
      its decisions "that will be connected with the implementation of
      the terms of the peace treaty with Austria and Germany”,
      and, in an "explanatory note" to the resolution, declared that
      it “considers a split in the Party in the very near future
      hardly avoidable”.[1]
There is nothing monstrous, nor even strange in all this. It is
      quite natural that comrades who sharply disagree with the
      Central Committee over the question of a separate peace should
      sharply condemn the Central Committee and express their
      conviction that a split is inevitable.  All that is the most
      legitimate right of Party members, which is quite
      understandable.
But here is what is strange and monstrous. An
      “explanatory note” is appended to the
      resolution. Here it is in full:
“The Moscow Regional Bureau considers a split in the Party in the very near future hardly avoidable, and it sets itself the aim of helping to unite all consistent revolutionary communists who equally oppose both the advocates of the conclusion of a separate peace and all moderate opportunists in the Party. In the interests of the world revolution, we consider it expedient to accept the possibility of losing Soviet power which is now becoming purely formal. We maintain as before that our primary task is to spread the ideas of the socialist revolution to all other countries and resolutely to promote the workers’ dictatorship, ruthlessly to suppress bourgeois counter-revolution in Russia.” 
    
It is the words we have stressed in this passage which are—strange and monstrous.
It is in these words that the crux of the matter lies.
These words reduce to an absurdity the whole line put forward by the authors of the
resolution. These words expose the root of their error with exceptional clarity.
“In the interests of the world revolution it is expedient to accept the possibility of losing Soviet power. . . .”  That is strange, for there is not even any connection between the premises and the conclusion. “In the interests of the world revolution it is expedient to accept the military defeat of Soviet power” —such a proposition might be right or wrong, but it could not be called strange. That is the first thing.
Second thing: Soviet power “is now becoming purely formal”. Now this is not only strange but  downright monstrous. Obviously, the authors have got themselves thoroughly entangled. We shall have to disentangle them.
As regards the first question, the authors’ idea evidently is that it would be expedient in
the interests of tho world revolution to accept the possibility of defeat in war, which would
lead to the loss of Soviet power, in other words, to the triumph of the bourgeoisie in Russia. By
voicing this idea the authors indirectly admit the truth of what I said in the theses (on January
8, 1918, published in Pravda on February 24, 1918),[2] namely, that refusal to accept the peace terms presented by Germany would lead to Russia’s defeat and the overthrow of Soviet power.
And so, la raison finit toujours par avoir raison— the truth always triumphs! My
“extremist" opponents, the Muscovites who threaten a split, have been obliged—just because they have got to the point of talking openly of a split—to be equally explicit about their real reasons, the reasons which people who confine themselves to general phrase-making about revolutionary war prefer to pass over in silence. The very essence of my theses and arguments (as anyone who cares to read attentively my theses of January 7, 1918, may see) is that we must accept this extremely harsh peace now, at once, while at the same time seriously preparing for a revolutionary war (and accept it, moreover, precisely in the interest of such serious preparations). Those who confined themselves to general phrase-making about a revolutionary war ignored or failed to notice, or did not want to notice, the very essence of my arguments. And now it is my “extremist” opponents, the Muscovites, whom I have to thank from the bottom of my heart for having broken the “conspiracy of silence” over the essence of my arguments. The Muscovites have been the first to reply to them.

And what is their reply?
Their reply is an admission of the correctness of my concrete argument. Yes, the
Muscovites have admitted, we shall certainly be defeated if we fight the Germans now.[3] Yes, this defeat would certainly lead to the fall of Soviet power.
Again and again I thank my “extremist” opponents, the Muscovites, from the bottom of my heart for having broken the “conspiracy of silence” against the essence of my arguments, i.e., against my concrete statement as to what the conditions of war would be, if we were to accept it at once, and for having fearlessly admitted the correctness of my concrete statement.
Further, on what grounds are my arguments, the substantial correctness of which the Muscovites
have been compelled to admit, rejected?
On the grounds that in the interests of the world revolution we must accept the loss
of Soviet power.
Why should the interests of the world revolution demand it? This is the crux of the matter;
this is the very essence of the reasoning of those who would like to defeat my arguments. And it
is on this, the most important, fundamental and vital point, that not a word is said, either in
the resolution or in the explanatory note. The authors of the resolution found time and space to
speak of what is universally known and indisputable—of “ruthlessly suppressing bourgeois
counter-revolution in Russia” (using the methods and means of a policy which would lead to the
loss of Soviet power?), and of opposing all moderate opportunists in the Party—but of that
which is really disputable and which concerns the very essence of the position of the opponents
of peace—not a word!
Strange. Extremely strange. Did the authors of the resolution keep silent about this because
they felt that on this point they were particularly weak? To have plainly stated why
(this is demanded by the interests of the world revolution) would most likely have meant exposing
themselves. . . .
However that may be, we have to seek out the arguments which may have guided
the authors of the resolution.
Perhaps the authors believe that the interests of the world revolution forbid making any peace
at all with imperialists? This opinion was expressed by some of the opponents of peace at one of
the Petrograd meetings, but only an insignificant minority of those who objected to a separate
peace supported it.[4] It is
clear that this opinion would lead to a denial of the expediency of the Brest negotiations and to
a rejection of peace, “even" if accompanied by the return of Poland, Latvia and Courland. The
incorrectness of this view (which was rejected, for example, by a majority of the Petrograd
opponents of peace) is as clear as day. A socialist republic surrounded by imperialist powers
could not, from this point of view, conclude any economic treaties, and could not exist at all,
without flying to the moon.
Perhaps the authors believe that the interests of the world revolution require that it should
be given a push, and that such a push can be given only by war, never by peace, which
might give the people the impression that imperialism was being “legitimised"? Such a “theory"
would be completely at variance with Marxism, for Marxism has always been opposed to “pushing"
revolutions, which develop with the growing acuteness of the class antagonisms that engender
revolutions. Such a theory would be tantamount to the view that armed uprising is a form of
struggle which is obligatory always and under all conditions. Actually, however, the interests of
the world revolution demand that Soviet power, having overthrown the bourgeoisie in our country,
should help that revolution, but that it should choose a form of help which is
commensurate with its own strength. To help the socialist revolution on an international scale by
accepting the possibility of defeat of that revolution in one’s own country is a view
that does not follow even from the “pushing” theory.
Perhaps the authors of the resolution believe that revolution has already begun in Germany and
has already reached the stage of an open, nation-wide civil war, that we must therefore devote
our strength to helping the German workers, and must perish ourselves ("losing Soviet power") to
save a German revolution which has already started its decisive fight and is being hard
pressed? According to this theory, we, while perishing ourselves, would be diverting part of the
forces of German counter-revolution, thereby saving the German revolution.
It is quite conceivable that, given these premises, it would not only be “expedient” (as the
authors of the resolution put it) but a downright duty to accept the possibility of
defeat and the possibility of the loss of Soviet power. But obviously these premises do not
exist. The German revolution is ripening, but it has obviously not reached the stage of an
explosion in Germany, of civil war in Germany. By “accepting the possibility of losing Soviet
power", we certainly would not be helping the German revolution to reach maturity, but would
be hindering it. We would be helping German reaction, playing into its hands, hampering the
socialist movement in Germany and frightening away from socialism large masses of German
proletarians and semi-proletarians who have not yet come over to socialism and would be scared by
the defeat of Soviet Russia, just as the British workers were scared by the defeat of the Paris
Commune in 1871.
Twist and turn them how you will, but you can find no logic in the authors’ contentions. There
are no sensible arguments to support the view that “in the interests of the world revolution it
is expedient to accept the possibility of losing Soviet power”.
"Soviet power is now becoming purely formal"—this, as we see, is the monstrous view the
authors of the Moscow resolution have come to proclaim.
Since the German imperialists are going to make us pay indemnities and forbid us to carry on
propaganda and agitation against Germany, Soviet power loses all significance and “becomes purely
formal"—this is probably the line of “reasoning” of the authors of the resolution. We say
"probably", for the authors offer nothing clear and specific in support of their thesis.
Profound and hopeless pessimism and complete despair—such is the sum and substance of the
"theory” that the significance of Soviet power is purely formal, and that tactics which will risk
the possible loss of Soviet power are permissible. Since there is no salvation anyway, then let
even Soviet power perish—such is the sentiment that dictated this monstrous resolution. The
allegedly “economic” arguments in which such ideas are sometimes clothed reveal the same hopeless
pessimism: what sort of Soviet republic is it—the implication is—when not just
tribute, but tribute on such a scale can be exacted from it?
Nothing but despair: we shall perish anyhow!
It is a quite understandable mood in the extremely desperate situation in which Russia finds
herself. But it is not “understandable” among conscious revolutionaries. The typical thing about
it is that here we have the views of the Muscovites reduced to absurdity. The Frenchmen of 1793
would never have said that their gains —the republic and democracy—were becoming
purely formal and that they would have to accept the possibility of losing the republic. They
were not filled with despair, but with faith in victory. To call for a revolutionary war, and at
the same time to talk in an official resolution of “accepting the possibility of losing Soviet
power", is to expose oneself completely.
Early in the nineteenth century, at the time of the Napoleonic wars, Prussia and a number of
other countries suffered incomparably and immeasurably greater hardships and burdens of defeat,
conquest, humiliation and oppression on the part of the conqueror than Russia is suffering in
1918. Yet the best men of Prussia, when Napoleon’s military jack boots trampled upon them a
hundred times more heavily than we can be trampled upon now, did not despair, and did not say
that their national political institutions were “purely formal”. They did not give up, did not
succumb to the feeling: “We shall perish anyhow.” They signed peace treaties infinitely more
drastic, brutal, humiliating and oppressive than the Brest Treaty, and then knew how to bide
their time; they staunchly bore the conqueror’s yoke, fought again, fell under the conqueror’s
yoke again, again signed the vilest of vile peace treaties, and again rose, and in the end
liberated themselves (not without exploiting the dissensions among the stronger competing
conquerors).
Why shouldn’t this be repeated in our history?
Why should we give way to despair and write resolutions—which, by heavens, are more
disgraceful than the most disgraceful peace—saying that “Soviet power is becoming purely
formal"?
Why shouldn’t the most crushing military defeats in the struggle against the giants of modern
imperialism steel the national character in Russia, too, strengthen self-discipline, put an end
to the bragging and phrase-making, teach fortitude and bring the people round to the correct
tactics of the Prussians when they were crushed by Napoleon—the tactics of signing the most
humiliating of peace treaties when you haven’t an army, then mustering your forces and rising
again and again?
Why should we give way to despair at the first peace treaty, incredibly harsh though it be,
when other nations were able staunchly to bear even bitterer misfortunes?
Is it the staunchness of the proletarian who knows that one must submit when strength is
lacking, and is then nevertheless is able to rise again and again at any price and to build up
strength under all circumstances, that corresponds to these tactics of despair, or,
rather, the spinelessness of the petty bourgeois, who in our country, in the shape of the Left
Socialist-Revolutionary Party, has beaten the record for phrase-making about a revolutionary
war?
No, dear Moscow “extremist” comrades, every day of trial will drive away from you those very
workers who are the most class-conscious and the staunchest. Soviet power, they will say, is not
becoming, and will not become, purely formal; and not only now, when the
conqueror is in Pskov and is making us pay a ten-thousand-million-ruble tribute in grain, ore and
money, but even if he gets as far as Nizhni-Novgorod and Rostov-on-Don and makes us pay a tribute
of twenty thousand million rubles.
Never will any foreign conquest render a popular political institution “purely formal” (and
Soviet power is not only a political institution far and away superior to any thing
known to history). On the contrary, alien conquest will only strengthen popular sympathy for
Soviet power, provided—provided it does not indulge in reckless follies.
And to refuse to conclude even the vilest peace when you have no army would be a reckless
gamble, for which the people would be justified in condemning the government that refused to do
so.
Immensely more harsh and humiliating peace treaties than the Brest Treaty have been signed
before in history (we gave some instances above) without discrediting the regime or turning it
into a formality; they ruined neither the regime nor the people, but rather steeled the people,
taught them the stern and difficult science of building up an effective army even in the
most desperate conditions and under the heel of the conqueror.
Russia is making for a new and genuine patriotic war, a war for the preservation and
consolidation of Soviet power. It is possible that another epoch will—like the epoch of the
Napoleonic wars—be an epoch of liberation wars (not one war, but wars) imposed by
aggressors upon Soviet Russia. That is possible.
And, therefore, more humiliating than any harsh or even extremely harsh peace, rendered
imperative owing to the lack of an army—more humiliating than any humiliating peace is
humiliating despair. We shall not perish even from a dozen obnoxious peace treaties if we take
revolt and war seriously. No conquerors can destroy us if we do not destroy ourselves by
despair and phrase-making.

Endnotes
[1] Here is the full text of the resolution: “Having discussed the activities of the Central Committee, the Moscow Regional Bureau of the R.S.D.L.P. expresses lack of confidence in the Central Committee in view of its political line and composition, and will at the first opportunity insist that a new Central Committee be elected. Further more, the Moscow Regional Bureau does not consider itself bound to obey unreservedly those decisions of the Central Committee that will be connected with the implementation of the terms of the peace treaty with Austria and Germany.” The resolution was adopted unanimously.
    
[2] See On the History of
the Question of the Unfortunate Peace 
[3]  As to the
counter-argument, that to avoid fighting was anyway impossible, the reply has been given by the
facts: On January 8 my theses were read; by January 15 we might have had peace. A
respite would have been certainly assured (and for us even the briefest respite would have been
of gigantic significance, both materially and morally, for the Germans would have had to
declare a new war), if . . . if it had not been for revolutionary phrase-making.
[4] This refers to the voting on the
question of peace with Germany at a meeting of the Party Central Committee representing various
trends in the Party on January 21 (February 3), 1918. Two “Left Communists", Osinsky (Obolensky) and Stukov, voted against any possibility of peace between socialist and imperialist countries. The majority of the “Left Communists", however, took an ambivalent stand. While admitting the possibility of peace being concluded between socialist and imperialist states, they voted against the immediate conclusion of peace with Germany (see Minutes of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), August 1917 to February 1918, 1958, pp. 190-91).


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Draft of an Order for all Soviets







Draft of an Order for All Soviets







V. I. Lenin
Draft of an Order for all Soviets

Written: March 2, 1918
First Published: 1929 in Lenin Miscellany XI Published 
according to the manuscrit
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, page 78
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


We assume that the peace treaty will be signed tomorrow, March 3, but the reports of our agents, taken in connection with all the circumstances, lead us to expect that among the Germans the party of war against Russia will gain the upper hand in the very near future. Hence the categorical order: delay the demobilisation of Red Army men; intensify preparations for blowing up railways, bridges and roads; mobilise and arm detachments; continue accelerated evacuation; withdraw armaments into the interior of the country.
 

Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars
  
V. Uiyanov (Lenin)


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## On a Business Like Basis







On A Businesslike Basis







V. I. Lenin
On A Business Like Basis

Written: March 1, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 38, March 1, 1918; Published
    according to the Pravda text.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pages 76-77
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

We are witnessing an upsurge of revolutionary enthusiasm called forth by the
    treacherous assault of the German whiteguards on the Russian revolution. Telegrams are
    pouring in from everywhere expressing readiness to rise in defence of Soviet power and to
    fight to the last man. No other attitude on the part of the workers and peasants towards
    their own workers’ and peasants’ power could have been expected.
But enthusiasm alone is not enough for the conduct of war against such an adversary as
    German imperialism. A frivolous attitude towards this real, stubborn and bloody
    war would be the sheerest simple-mindedness, even a crime.
War must be waged in earnest, or not waged at all. There can be no ’middle course.
    Since the German imperialists are forcing war upon us, it is our sacred duty soberly to weigh
    our situation, calculate our forces and check up the economic machinery. All this must be
    done at wartime speed, for any procrastination in our present situation would be truly
    “similar to death". Hannibal is at the gates-that we must not forget for a single
    minute.
To wage the war in earnest we need a strong and organised rear. Even the best of
    armies, even people most sincerely devoted to the revolutionary cause will be immediately
    exterminated by the enemy, if they are not adequately armed, supplied with food and trained.
    That is so obvious as to need no explanation.
What is the state of the rear of our revolutionary army? Most deplorable, to say the
    least. The preceding war has utterly disorganised our transport services; exchange between
    town and countryside has been disrupted, and the direct and immediate result of this is
    famine in the large cities.
Our army is radically reshaping itself under the blows of the enemy. The old army, which
    was familiar with conditions of modern warfare, no longer exists. Utterly worn out by the
    preceding war, and tired to death by three and a half years in the trenches, it is a
    nonentity as far as its fighting capacity is concerned. The Red Army is undoubtedly splendid
    fighting material, but raw and unfinished material. In order that it may not become cannon
    fodder for the German guns, it must be trained and disciplined.
We are facing colossal difficulties. All local Soviets must immediately, following upon
    their telegrams announcing readiness to fight the external enemy, report how many truckloads
    of grain they have dispatched to Petrograd, what number of troops they are in a position to
    send to the front immediately, and how many Red Army men are undergoing training. Stock must
    be taken of all arms and shells, and the production of new arms and shells must be resumed
    immediately. The railways must be cleared of bag-traders and hooligans. The strictest
    revolutionary discipline must be restored everywhere. Only if all these conditions
    are observed can we talk of war seriously. Otherwise, all the talk about the
    “most revolutionary of wars” will be phrase-making. And
    phrase-mongering, which is always harmful, may at this critical juncture play a fatal
    role.
I am profoundly convinced that our revolution will cope with the colossal difficulties of
    the moment. It has already performed an immense work, but if our cause is to be successfully
    accomplished we must multiply our efforts a hundredfold.
Only then shall we win.

Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## A Serious Lesson and a Serious
Responsibility







A Serious Lesson And A Serious Responsibility







V. I. Lenin
 
A Serious Lesson And A Serious Responsibility

Written: Mach 5, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 42, March 6, 1918; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
    Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pages 79-84
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup:Robert Cymbala and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


      Our pseudo-Lefts, who yesterday brought out their own paper, the
      Kommunist
      (Communist of the pre-Marxian era, one should add), are trying
      to dodge the lesson and lessons of history, are trying to dodge
      responsibility.

    
      But they are dodging in vain. They will not succeed in dodging it.  

    
      The dodgers are trying their hardest, are filling countless
      newspaper columns, are sweating and straining, are not sparing
      even”, as they put it, printer’s ink to represent
      the “breathing-space” “theory” as an
      unfounded and unsound “theory”.  

    
      Alas, their efforts are powerless to refute the facts. Facts are
      stubborn things, as the English proverb rightly says. It is a
      fact that from March 3, when at 1 p.m. the Germans ceased
      hostilities, to March 5, at 7 p.m., when I am writing these
      lines, we have had a breathing-space, and we have
      already made use of these two days for the business
      like (as expressed in deeds, not phrase-making) defence of
      the socialist fatherland. This is a fact which will become more
      evident to the masses every day. It is a fact that at a moment
      when the army at the front, being in no condition to fight, is
      fleeing in panic, abandoning its guns and not even stopping to
      blow up bridges, the defence of the fatherland and the
      raising of its defensive capacity lie not in babbling
      about a revolutionary war (to babble in the face of this
      panic-stricken flight of the army—not one
      detachment of which was stopped by the advocates of
      revolutionary war—is downright shameful), but in
      retreating in good order, so as to save the remnants of the
      army, taking advantage of every day’s respite for this
      purpose.  

    
      Facts are stubborn things.  

    
      Our pseudo-Lefts, in their efforts to dodge the facts, the
      lessons to be derived from them and the question of
      responsibility, are endeavouring to conceal from their
      readers the recent, quite fresh and historically important past,
      and to gloss it over by references to the distant and
      unimportant past. For example, K. Radek in his article recalls
      that he wrote about the necessity of helping the army to hold
      out in December (December, mind you!), in a “memorandum to
      the Council of People’s Commissars”. I have not had
      the opportunity to read this memorandum and I ask myself: why
      does not Karl Radek print it in full? Why does he not
      explain clearly and frankly what exactly he meant then by a
      “compromise peace”? Why does he not recall the more
      recent past, when he wrote in Pravda about his illusion
      (the worst of all illusions) that peace could be concluded with
      the German imperialists on condition of the restoration of
      Poland.?  

    
      Why?  

    
      Because the pseudo-Lefts are compelled to gloss over facts which
      reveal their, the “Lefts”, responsibility
      for sowing illusions which actually helped the German
      imperialists and hindered the growth and development of
      the revolution in Germany.  

    
      N. Bukharin is now even attempting to deny the fact that he and
      his friends asserted that it was impossible for the Germans to
      attack. But very, very many people know that it is a fact, that
      Bukharin and his friends did assert this, and that by sowing
      such an illusion they helped German imperialism and
      hindered the growth of the German revolution, which has
      now been weakened by the fact that the Great Russian Soviet
      Republic, during the panic-stricken flight of the peasant army,
      has been deprived of thousands upon thousands of guns and of
      wealth to the value of hundreds upon hundreds of millions. I had
      predicted this definitely and clearly in my theses of January
      7.* If N. Bukharin is now compelled to eat his words, so much
      the worse for him. All who remember that Bukharin and his
      friends said that it was impossible for the Germans to attack
      will only shrug * See present edition, Vol. 26,
      pp. 442-50.-Ed. their shoulders now that N. Bukharin is
      compelled to eat his own words.  

    
      And for the benefit of those who do not remember them, of those
      who did not hear them, let us refer to a document, which is a
      little more valuable, interesting and instructive now that what
      K. Radek wrote in December. This document, which unfortunately
      is being concealed by the “Lefts” from their
      readers, is the record (1) of the vote on January 21, 1918, at
      the meeting of the Central Committee of our Party with the
      present “Left” opposition, and (2) of the vote in
      the Central Committee on February 17, 1918.  

    
      On January 21, 1918, on the question of whether to break off
      negotiations with the Germans immediately, Stukov alone (of the
      contributors to the pseudo-Left Kommunist) voted in
      favour. All the rest voted against.  



 On the question of whether it was permissible to sign an annexationist treaty if the Germans should break off negotiations or present an ultimatum, only Obolensky (When will “his” theses be published? Why is the Kommunist silent about them?) and Stukov voted against. All the rest voted in favour.  



 On the question of whether in this event the proposed peace should be concluded, only Oboleusky and Stukov voted against. The rest of the “Lefts” abstained!! That is a fact.  



 On February 17, 1918, when the question was put: who is in favour of a revolutionary war?-Bukharin and Lomov “refused to vote on the question as put”. None voted in favour. That is a fact!  



 On the question of whether to “refrain from resuming peace negotiations until the German attack becomes sufficiently (sic!) evident and its influence upon the German working-class movement becomes clear”, Bukharin, Lomov and Uritsky, of the present contributors to the. “Left” paper, voted in favour.


 On the question, “Should we conclude peace if a German offensive becomes a fact and a revolutionary upsurge fails to eventuate in Germany and Austria?”- Lomov, Bukharin and Uritsky abstained.


 Facts are stubborn things. And the facts show that Bukharin denied the possibility of a German offensive and sowed illusions by which he actually, against his own wishes, helped the German imperialists arid hindered the growth of the German revolution. That indeed is the essence of revolutionary phrase-making. You strive for one thing and achieve the opposite.  



 N. Bukharin rebukes me for not giving a concrete analysis of the terms of the present peace. But it should not be difficult to understand that from the point of view of my argument and of the essence of the matter there was not, nor is there now, any necessity for that. It was enough to show that we are facing only one real-not imagined-dilemma: either to accept such terms as would afford us a breathing space for a few days at least, or the position of Belgium and Serbia. And this Bukharin did not refute, even in the eyes of Petrograd. That his colleague, M. N. Pokrovsky, admitted.  



 And if the new terms are worse, more onerous and humiliating than the bad, onerous and humiliating Brest terms, it is our pseudo-Lefts, Bukharin, Lomov, Uritsky and Co., who are to blame for this happening to the Great-Russian Soviet Republic. This is a historical fact, as is proved by the voting referred to above. It is a fact you cannot escape, wriggle, as you will. You were offered the Brest terms, and you replied by blustering and swaggering, which led to worse terms. That is a fact. And you cannot absolve yourselves of the responsibility for it.  



 In my theses of January 7, 1918, it was predicted with the utmost clarity that in view of the state of our army (which could not be changed by phrase-making “against”  the tired peasant masses), Russia would have to conclude a worse separate peace if she did not accept the Brest peace.  



 The “Lefts” fell into a trap set by the Russian bourgeoisie, who had to embroil us in the worst kind of war we could possibly become embroiled in.  



 That these Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, in declaring for war now, have obviously parted company with the peasantry, is a fact. And this fact attests to the frivolity of the policy of Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, just as the seemingly “revolutionary” policy of all the Socialist-Revolutionaries in the summer of 1907 was frivolous.  



 That the more class-conscious and advanced workers are quickly shaking off the fumes of revolutionary phrase-making  is shown by the example of Petrograd and Moscow. In Petrograd the best of the workers’ districts-Vyborg and Vasilyevsky Island-have already sobered up. The Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ Deputies is not in favour of war now; they have realised that it is necessary to prepare for it, and are preparing for it.[1] In Moscow, at the Bolshevik city conference on March 3 and 4, 1918, the opponents of revolutionary phrase-making won the day.[2]


 To what monstrous lengths of self-deception our “Lefts” have gone is evident from one sentence in Pokrovsky’s article, which says: “If we are to fight, we must fight now” (Pokrovsky’s italics), “while” (listen to this!) “the Russian army, including the newly-formed units, has still not been demobilised.”


 But everybody who does not shut his eyes to the facts knows that the greatest hindrance to resisting the Germans in February 1918, whether in Great Russia, the Ukraine, or Finland, was our undemobilised army. That is a fact. For it could not help fleeing in panic, carrying the Red Army detachments along with it.  



 Anyone who wants to benefit by the lessons of history, and not to hide from the responsibility they impose, or shut his eyes to them, let him recall at least the wars of Napoleon I against Germany.  



 Many a time did Prussia and Germany conclude with the conqueror peace treaties ten times more onerous and humiliating (than ours), even to the extent of accepting a foreign police, even to the extent of undertaking to furnish troops to help Napoleon I in his campaigns of conquest. Napoleon I in his treaties with Prussia harassed and dismembered Germany ten times worse than Hindenburg and Wilhelm have pinned us down iiow. Yet there were people in Prussia who did not bluster, but signed tiltra-“disgraceful” peace treaties signed them because they had no army, signed terms ten times more oppressive and humiliating, and then in spite of everything rose up in revolt and to wage war. That happened not once, but many times. History knows of several such peace treaties and wars. Of several cases of respite. Of several new declarations of war by the conqueror. Of several cases of an alliance between an oppres.sed nation and an oppressing nation, which was a rival of the conqueror and no less a conqueror itself (be it noted by the advocates of a “revolutionary war” without accepting aid from imperialists!).  



 Such was the course of history.  



 So it was. So it will be. We have entered an epoch of  a succession of wars. We are moving towards a new, patriotic war. We will arrive at that war in the midst of a ripening  
socialist revolution. And while on that difficult road the Russian proletariat and the Russian revolution will be able to cure themselves of blustering and revolutionary phrasemaking, will know how to accept even the most onerous peace treaties, and then rise again.  



 We have signed a Tilsit Peace. We shall attain our victory and our liberation, just as the Germans after the Peace of Tilsit of 1807 attained their liberation from Napoleon in 1813 and 1814. The interval between our Tilsit Peace and our liberation will probably be shorter, for history is moving faster.  

    
 Down with blustering! On with the improvement of discipline and organisation in all earnest! 
    

Endnotes
[1]
On February 24, 1918 the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies passed a resolution approving the decision of the All-Russia C.E.C., which stated that the conclusion of peace was essential as “the only way out of the present grave situation”. At the same time the Petrograd Soviet decided “to take all necessary measures to organise troop trains to be sent to the front”.


[2] 
      At a meeting of the Moscow Soviet of Workers’,
      Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies in Moscow on March
      3, 1918, in which factory committees, trade unions, district
      Soviets, responsible officials and others took part, the
      majority of those present spoke in favour of peace. On March 4
      the question of peace was discussed at a meeting of the Moscow
      Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.); by 10 votes to 7 a resolution
      in favour of making peace was passed. On the night of March 4, a
      Moscow city conference of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) was held at which a
      large number of workers were also present, besides the
      delegates. The majority at the conference voted for a resolution
      approving the position of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) on the
      question of peace.
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Extraordinary 
    Seventh Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)—March
    6-8, 1918







Extraordinary Seventh Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)







V. I. Lenin
Extraordinary Seventh Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)[1]
 March 6-8, 1918 

Delivered: March 6, 1918
First Published: First published in
      full in 1923 in the book Seventh Congress of the Russian
Communist Party. Verbatim Report. March 6-8, 1918;
      Published in 1928 according to the book: Minutes of the
Congresses and Conferences of the All-Union Communist Party
(Bolsheviks).—Seventh Congress. March 1918, collated with
the verbatim report and the 1923 edition of the above book 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress
      Publishers, Moscow, Volume 27, 1972, pages 85-158
Translated: Clemans Dutt, Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup: Robert Cymbala and David Walters
online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive March, 2002
    

Table of Contents
1. Political Report of the Central
Committee, March 7
2. Reply to the Debate on the
Political Report of the Central Committee, March 8
3. Resolution on War and Peace
4. Speeches Against
Trotsky’s Amendments to the Resolution on War and Peace,
March 8 (Morning)
5. Speech Against the Statement of
the “Left Communist” Group In Support of
Trotsky’s Amendment, March 8
6. Addendum to the Resolution on
War and Peace, March 8
7. Speech Against Zinoviev’s
Amendment to the Addendum to the Resolution on War and Peace,
March 8
8. Proposal Concerning the
Resolution on War and Peace, March 8
9. Report on the Review of the
Programme and on Changing the Name of the Party, March 8
10. Resolution on Changing the
Name of the Party and the Party Programme
11. Proposal Concerning the
Revision of the Party Programme, March 8 (Evening)
12. Speech on Mgeladze’s
Proposal for Drawing the Chief Party Organisations Into the Work
of Drafting the Party Programme, March 8 (Evening)
13. Speech Against Larin’s
Amendment to the Name of the Party, March 8 (Evening)
14. Speech Against Pelshe’s
Amendment to the Resolution on the Party Programme, March 8
(Evening)
15. Speech Against
Bukharin’s Amendment to the Resolution on the Party
Programme, March 8 (Evening)
16. Speech on the Question of
Elections to the Central Committee, March 8 (Evening)
17. Resolution on the Refusal of
the “Left Communists” to Be Members of the Central
Committee
18. Rough Outline of the Draft
Programme

Endnotes
[1] See
      entry in the Marxists Enclycopedia for the
      Extraordinary
Seventh Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)



Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## The Chief Task of Our Day







The Chief Task of Our Day



V. I. Lenin

      The Chief Task of Our Day[1]


Written:March 11, 1918
First Published: Izvestia VTsIK No. 46, March 12, 1918
Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
      1972 Volume 27, pages 159-63. Published  according to the text
      of the pamphlet: N. Lenin, The Chief Task
of Our Day, Moscow, 1918
Translated: Clemens Dutt Edited by Robert Daglish 
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive March, 2002
  


      Thou art wretched, thou art abundant,
      Thou art mighty, thou art impotent
      — Mother Russia![2]

Human history these days is making a momentous and
    most difficult turn, a turn, one might say without the least
    exaggeration, of immense significance for the emancipation of the
    world. A turn from war to peace; a turn from a war between
    plunderers who are sending to the shambles millions of the working
    and exploited people for the sake of establishing a new system of
    dividing the spoils looted by the strongest of them, to a war of
    the oppressed against the oppressors for liberation from the yoke
    of capital; a turn from an abyss of suffering, anguish, starvation
    and degradation to the bright future of communist society,
    universal prosperity and enduring peace. No wonder that at the
    sharpest points of this sharp turn, when all around the old order
    is breaking down and collapsing with a terrible grinding crash,
    and the new order is being born amid indescribable suffering,
    there are some whose heads grow dizzy, some who are seized by
    despair, some who seek salvation from the at times too bitter
    reality in fine-sounding and alluring phrases. 

    
      It has been Russia’s lot to see most clearly, and
      experience most keenly and painfully the sharpest of sharp
      turning-points in history as it swings round from imperialism
      towards the communist revolution. In the space of a few days we
      destroyed one of the oldest, most powerful, barbarous and brutal
      of monarchies. In the space of a few months we passed through a
      number of stages of collaboration with the bourgeoisie and of
      shaking off petty-bourgeois illusions, for which other countries
      have required decades. In the course of a few weeks, having
      overthrown the bourgeoisie, we crushed its open resistance in
      civil war. We passed in a victorious triumphal march of
      Bolshevism from one end of a vast country to the other. We
      raised the lowest strata of the working people oppressed by
      tsarism and the bourgeoisie to liberty and independent life. We
      established and consolidated a Soviet Republic, a new type of
      state, which is infinitely superior to, and more democratic
      than, the best of the bourgeois-parliamentary republics. We
      established the dictatorship of the proletariat supported by the
      poor peasantry, and began a broadly conceived system of
      socialist reforms. We awakened the faith of the millions upon
      millions of workers of all countries in their own strength and
      kindled the fires of enthusiasm in them. Everywhere we issued
      the call for a world workers’ revolution. We flung a
      challenge to the imperialist plunderers of all countries. 

    
      Then in a few days we were thrown to the ground by an
      imperialist plunderer, who fell upon the unarmed. He compelled
      us to sign an incredibly burdensome and humiliating
      peace—as tribute for having dared to tear ourselves, even
      for the shortest space of time, from the iron clutches of an
      imperialist war. The more ominously the shadow of a
      workers’ revolution in his own country rises before the
      plunderer, the greater his ferocity in crushing and stifling
      Russia and tearing her to pieces. 

    
      We were compelled to sign a “Tilsit”peace. We need
      no self-deception. We must courageously look the bitter,
      unadorned truth straight in the face. We must measure fully, to
      the very bottom, that abyss of defeat, dismemberment,
      enslavement, and humiliation into which we have now been
      pushed. The more clearly we understand this, the firmer, the
      more steeled and tempered will be our will to liberation, our
      aspiration to rise again from enslavement to independence, and
      our unbending determination to ensure that at any price Russia
      ceases to be wretched and impotent and becomes mighty and
      abundant in the full meaning of these words. 

    
      And mighty and abundant she can become, for, after all, we still
      have sufficient territory and natural wealth left to us to
      supply each and all, if not with abundant, at least with
      adequate means, of life. Our natural wealth, our manpower and
      the splendid impetus which the great revolution has given to the
      creative powers of the people are ample material to build a
      truly mighty and abundant Russia. 

    
      Russia will become mighty and abundant if she abandons all
      dejection and all phrase-making, if, with clenched teeth, she
      musters all her forces and strains every nerve and muscle, if
      she realises that salvation lies only along that road
      of world socialist revolution upon which we have set out. March
      forward along that road, undismayed by defeats, lay the firm
      foundation of socialist society stone by stone, work with might
      and main to establish discipline and self-discipline,
      consolidate everywhere organisation, order, efficiency, and the
      harmonious co-operation of all the forces of the people,
      introduce comprehensive accounting of and control over
      production and distribution—such is the way to build up
      military might and socialist might. 

    
      It would be unworthy of a genuine socialist who has suffered
      grave defeat either to bluster or to give way to despair. It is
      not true that our position is hopeless and that all that remains
      for us is to choose between an “inglorious”death
      (inglorious from the point of view of the szlaczcic ),
      such as this harsh peace represents, and a
      “gallant”death in a hopeless fight. It is not true
      that by signing a “Tilsit”peace we have betrayed our
      ideals or our friends. We have betrayed nothing and nobody, we
      have not sanctified or covered up any lie, we have not refused
      to help a single friend or comrade in misfortune in every way we
      could and with everything at our disposal. A general who
      withdraws the remnants of his army into the heart of the country
      when it has been beaten or is in panic-stricken flight, or who,
      in extremity, shields this retreat by a harsh and humiliating
      peace, is not guilty of treachery towards that part of his army
      which he is powerless to help and which has been cut off by the
      enemy. Such a general performs his duty by choosing the only way
      of saving what can still be saved, by refusing to gamble
      recklessly, by not embellishing the bitter truth for the people,
      by “surrendering space in order to gain time”, by
      taking advantage of any and every respite, even the
      briefest, in which to muster his forces and to allow his army to
      rest or recover, if it is affected by disintegration and
      demoralisation. 

    
      We have signed a “Tilsit”peace. When Napoleon I, in
      1807, compelled Prussia to sign the Peace of Tilsit, the
      conqueror smashed the Germans’ entire army, occupied their
      capital and all their big cities, brought in his own police,
      compelled the vanquished to supply him, the conqueror, with
      auxiliary corps for fresh predatory wars, and partitioned
      Germany, concluding alliances with some German states against
      others. Nevertheless, the German people survived even
      such a peace, proved able to muster their forces, to
      rise and to win the right to liberty and independence. 

    
      To all those who are able and willing to think, the example of
      the Peace of Tilsit (which was only one of many harsh and
      humiliating treaties forced upon the Germans at that period)
      clearly shows how childishly naïve is the idea that under
      all conditions a harsh peace means the bottomless pit of ruin,
      while war is the path of valour and salvation. Periods of war
      teach us that peace has not infrequently in history served as a
      respite and a means of mustering forces for new battles. The
      Peace of Tilsit was a supreme humiliation for Germany, but at
      the same time it marked a turn towards a supreme national
      resurgence. At that time historical conditions were such that
      this resurgence could be channelled only in the direction of a
      bourgeois state. At that time, more than a hundred
      years ago, history was made by handfuls of nobles and a
      sprinkling of bourgeois intellectuals, while the worker and
      peasant masses were somnolent and dormant. As a result history
      at that time could only crawl along at a terribly slow pace. 

    
      But now capitalism has raised culture in general, and the
      culture of the masses in particular, to a much higher level. War
      has shaken up the masses, its untold horrors and suffering have
      awakened them. War has given history momentum and it is now
      flying with locomotive speed. History is now being independently
      made by millions and tens of millions of people. Capitalism has
      now matured for socialism. 

    
      Consequently, if Russia is now passing—as she undeniably
      is—from a “Tilsit”peace to a national
      resurgence, to a great patriotic war, the outlet for it is not
      in the direction of a bourgeois state, but in the direction of a
      world socialist revolution. Since October 25, 1917, we have been
      defencists. 

      We are for “defence of the fatherland”; but that
      patriotic war towards which we are moving is a war for a
      socialist fatherland, for socialism as a fatherland, for the
      Soviet Republic as a contingent of the world army of socialism. 

    
      “Hate the Germans, kill the Germans”— such
      was, and is, the slogan of common, i. e., bourgeois,
      patriotism. But we will say “Hate the imperialist
      plunderers, hate capitalism, death to capitalism”and at
      the same time “Learn from the Germans! Remain true to the
      brotherly alliance with the German workers. They are late in
      coming to our aid. We shall gain time, we shall live to see them
      coming, and they will come, to our aid.”

    
      Yes, learn from the Germans! History is moving in zig-zags and
      by roundabout ways. It so happens that it is the Germans who now
      personify, besides a brutal imperialism, the principle of
      discipline, organisation, harmonious co-operation on the basis
      of modern machine industry, and strict accounting and control. 

    
      And that is just what we are lacking. That is just what we must
      learn. That is just what our great revolution needs in order to
      pass from a triumphant beginning, through a succession of severe
      trials, to its triumphant goal. That is just what the Russian
      Soviet Socialist Republic requires in order to cease being
      wretched and impotent and become mighty and abundant for all
      time. 

    N. Lenin
 
      March 11, 1918
    

Endnotes
1.
      The article “The Chief Task of Our Day”together with
      Lenin’s work “’Left-Wing’ Childishness
      and the Petty-Bourgeois Mentality”(see this volume,
      pp. 323-54) were published in May 1918 as a separate pamphlet
      under the title The Chief Task of Our Day, to which
      Lenin wrote a short introduction. 

      
    2.
      The epigraph is taken from Nikolai Nekrasov’s poem “Who Lives Well in Russia”. 


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Speech in the
Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’
and Red Army Deputies, March 12, 1918.







Speech In The Moscow Soviet Of Workers', Peasants' And Red Army Deputies, March 12, 1918







V. I. Lenin
 Speech In The Moscow Soviet Of Workers’, Peasants’ And Red Army Deputies March 12, 1918



Delivered:March 12, 1918
First Published: Izvestia VTsIK No. 47, March 14, 1918; Published according to the text of Izvestia, collated with the verbatim
report 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pp. 164-68.
Translated: Clemens Dutt Edited by Robert Daglish 
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala

Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive March, 2002


    
 Comrades, we are celebrating the anniversary of the Russian revolution at a time when the revolution is passing through difficult days, when many are ready to give way to despondency and disillusionment. But if we look around us, if we recall what the revolution has achieved during this past year and how the international situation is shaping, then not one of us, I am sure, will find room for despair or despondency. There should be no room for doubt that the world socialist revolution, begun in October, will triumph over all difficulties and obstacles, over all the efforts of its enemies. 

    
 Comrades, remember how the Russian revolution developed.... Remember how, in a few days in February, thanks to the joint action of the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, who saw that under tsarism even a bourgeois society could not exist, thanks to the co-operation between the workers and the more enlightened section of the peasants, namely, the soldiers, who had lived through all the horrors of war—remember how in a few days they succeeded in overthrowing the monarchy, which in 1905, 1906 and 1907 had resisted incomparably heavier blows and drowned revolutionary Russia in blood. And when, after the February victory, the bourgeoisie found themselves in power, the revolution went forward with incredible speed. 

    
 The Russian revolution produced results which sharply distinguish it from the revolutions in Western Europe. It produced revolutionary people prepared by the events of 1905 to take independent action; it produced the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies, bodies incomparably more democratic than all those preceding them, able to educate, elevate and lead the oppressed mass of workers, soldiers and peasants. Thanks to these circumstances the Russian revolution within a few months passed through that period of compromise with the bourgeoisie which in Western Europe took entire decades. The bourgeoisie now say that the working class and its representatives, the Bolsheviks, are to blame for the fact that the army was unequal to the situation. But we can now see that if at that time—in March and April—power had not been in the hands of the conciliators, of the bourgeoisie who secured cushy jobs for themselves and placed the capitalists in power, while at the same time leaving the army ragged and starving, if power had not been in the hands of such gentlemen as Kerensky, who called themselves socialists, but who actually carried in their pockets secret treaties binding the Russian people to fight until 1918, then perhaps the Russian army and revolution might have been spared those incredibly severe trials and humiliations through which we have had to pass. If at that time power had passed to the Soviets, if the conciliators, instead of helping Kerensky to drive the army into battle, had come forward with a proposal for a democratic peace, then our army would not have been so badly shattered. They should have said to it: stand by. In one hand let it hold the torn-up secret treaty with the imperialists and the proposal to all nations for a democratic peace; in the other let it hold rifle and gun, and let the front remain absolutely intact. If that had been done, the army and the revolution could have been saved. Such a gesture, even before an enemy like German imperialism, even if it were aided by the whole bourgeoisie, by the entire capitalist world, by all the representatives of the bourgeois parties, such a gesture could, nevertheless, have been of help then. This gesture could have put the enemy in a situation where it would have seen, on the one hand, the proposed democratic peace and the unmasked treaties and, on the other hand, the guns. Today we have not such a strong front. We cannot reinforce it without artillery. The restoration of the front is too difficult, it is proceeding too slowly because we have never come into contact with such an enemy. It was one thing to struggle with that idiot Romanov or that boaster Kerensky, but here we have an enemy which has organised all its forces and the economic life of its country for defence against the revolution. We knew that in June 1917, instead of tearing up the imperialist treaties, Kerensky’s government hurled the soldiers into an offensive, which sapped their strength completely. And now, when the bourgeoisie scream about unparalleled disorganisation and national disgrace, do they imagine that a revolution, born of war, born of unprecedented destruction, can develop calmly, smoothly, peacefully, without suffering, without torment, without horror? Anyone who imagines the revolution beginning in this way is either nothing but a phrase-monger, or one of those flabby intellectuals incapable of understanding the significance of this war and of the revolution. Yes, that is how they reason. But to us it is clear that throughout this whole process a great national resurgence is taking place, which those who scream about national disgrace do not see. 

    
 However that may be, we have extricated ourselves from the war. We are not saying that we extricated ourselves without giving anything in return, without paying a price. But we managed to get out of the war. We gave the people a breathing-space. We do not know how long this breathing-space will last. Possibly it will be exceedingly brief because the imperialist robbers are bearing down on us from the West and the East, and a new war will inevitably begin. We do not close our eyes to the fact that the country lies in ruins. But the people have been able to rid themselves of the tsarist government, of the bourgeois government, and to create Soviet organisations which only now, when the soldiers have returned from the front, have reached the remotest villages. The necessity for them and their significance have been understood by the lowest strata of the people, by the most oppressed and downtrodden of the people, who were wronged and humiliated by tsars, landowners and capitalists, and who were seldom able to put heart and soul into anything or display their creative ability. They not only established Soviet power in the large towns and factory areas, but also in the most remote corners of the country. Every peasant who up to now has known only oppression and robbery at the hands of the authorities, now sees the government of the poor in power, the government which he himself elects, which has liberated him from oppression, and which, despite all the unparalleled obstacles and difficulties, will be able to lead him still farther. 


 Comrades, although we now have to live through days of heavy defeat and oppression, when the head of the Russian revolution is under the boot of the Prussian landowners and imperialists, I am sure, no matter how great may be the anger and indignation in some circles, that deep among the people a constructive process is taking place, an accumulation of energy and discipline, which will give us the strength to survive all blows, and which proves that we have not betrayed, and will not betray, the revolution. If we have been compelled to undergo these trials and defeats, it is because the course of history does not run smoothly and pleasantly, permitting the working people of all countries to rise simultaneously with us. We must not forget the sort of enemy we are dealing with. The enemies with whom we have had to deal before, Romanov, Kerensky and the Russian bourgeoisie—the stupid, unorganised, uncultured bourgeoisie that only yesterday licked the boots of Romanov and then ran about with secret treaties in their pockets—do these enemies amount to anything compared with the international bourgeoisie, who have turned all the achievements of the human mind into a weapon to suppress the will of the working people and have adapted the whole of their organisation to exterminating people? 

    
 This is the enemy that has hurled itself at us just at the moment when we have completely disarmed, when we have to state quite openly: we have no army, we are a country which has lost its army and is forced to accept a very humiliating peace. 

    
 We are not deceiving anybody, we are not betraying any one, we are not refusing to aid our brothers. But we shall have to accept a very onerous peace, we shall have to accept terrible conditions. We shall have to retreat in order to gain time while this is still possible, so that our allies can come to our aid. And we have got allies. No matter how great our hatred of imperialism, no matter how strong the feeling, a justified feeling, of anger and indignation against it, we must recognise that we are now defencists. It is not secret treaties that we are defending, we are defending socialism, we are defending our socialist fatherland. In order to be able to defend it, however, we have had to accept the most bitter humiliation. We know that there are periods in every nation’s history when it is obliged to retreat before the pressure of an enemy with stronger nerves. We have gained a breathing-space, and we must make use of it so that the army may have some sort of respite, so that as a mass (not those tens of thousands in the large cities who attend meetings, but the millions and tens of millions who have dispersed to the villages) it should understand that the old war is over, and a new war is beginning, a war to which we have replied with a peace offer, a war in which we have retreated in order to overcome our lack of discipline, our inertia, our flabbiness—despite which we were able to defeat tsarism and the Russian bourgeoisie, but not the European international bourgeoisie. If we overcome them we shall be the victors, because we have allies, and we are convinced of this. 

    
 However viciously the international imperialists now behave on seeing our defeat, their enemies, who are our allies, are maturing within their own countries. We know and have always known for certain that among the German working class this process is taking place, perhaps more slowly than we expected, than we would have liked, but there is no doubt that indignation against the imperialists is growing, that the number of allies in our work is increasing and that they will come to our aid. 

    
 You must give all your strength, provide the right watch word and enforce discipline. This is our duty to the socialist revolution. Then we shall be able to hold out until the allied proletariat comes to our aid and, together, we shall defeat all the imperialists and capitalists. 





Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Extraordinary Fourth All-Russia
Congress of Soviets. March 14-16, 1918






Extraordinary Fourth All-Russia Congress Of Soviets, March 14-16, 1918





V. I. Lenin
Extraordinary Fourth All-Russia Congress Of 
      Soviets[1]
March 14-16, 1918


Written:March 13, 1918
First Published: Pravda Nos. 47, 38 & 49 for March 16 through 18, 1918
Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
      1972 Volume 27, pp. 169-201.
Translated: Clemens Dutt Edited by Robert Daglish 
Transcription\HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive March, 2002
    

Contents
1. Draft Resolution On Wilson’s Message
    
 2. Report On Ratification Of The Peace Treaty, March 14
    
 3. Reply To The Debate On The Report On Ratification Of The Peace Treaty, March 15
    
 4. Resolution On Ratification Of The Brest Treaty
    


1.

      Draft Resolution On Wilson’s Message[2]

 
      The Congress expresses its gratitude to the American people, and
      primarily to the working and exploited classes of the United
      States of America, in connection with President Wilson’s
      expression of his sympathy for the Russian people through the
      Congress of Soviets at a time when the Soviet Socialist Republic
      of Russia is passing through severe trials.   

    
      The Russian Soviet
      Republic, having become a neutral country, takes advantage of
      the message received from President Wilson to express to all
      peoples that are perishing and suffering from the horrors of the
      imperialist war its profound sympathy and firm conviction that
      the happy time is not far away when the working people of all
      bourgeois countries will throw off the yoke of capital and
      establish the socialist system of society, the only system able
      to ensure a durable and just peace and also culture and
      well-being for all working people. 

    
      Written on March 13 or 16, 1918 Published on March 15, 1918 in
      Pravda No. 49 Published according to the manuscript
    

2
 Report On Ratification Of The Peace Treaty March 14
 
      Comrades, today we have to settle a question that marks a
      turning-point in the development of the Russian revolution, and
      not only of the Russian but also of the international
      revolution, and in order to decide correctly on this very harsh
      peace which representatives of Soviet power have concluded at
      Brest-Litovsk, and which Soviet power asks you to approve, or
      ratify—in order to settle this question correctly it is
      more than ever necessary for us to get an understanding of the
      historical meaning of the turning-point we are at, an
      understanding of the main feature of the development of the
      revolution up to now and the main reason for the severe defeat
      and the period of stern trials we have passed through. 

    
      It seems to me that the chief source of disagreement among the
      Soviet parties [3]
      on this question is that some people too easily give way to a
      feeling of just and legitimate indignation over the defeat of
      the Soviet Republic by imperialism, too easily give way at times
      to despair instead of considering the historical conditions of
      the revolution as they developed up to the time of the present
      peace, and as they appear to us since the peace; instead of
      doing that they try to answer questions of the tactics of the
      revolution on the basis of their immediate feelings. The entire
      history of revolutions, however, teaches us that when we have to
      do with a mass movement or with the class struggle, especially
      one like that at present developing not only throughout a single
      country, albeit a tremendous country, but also involving all
      international relations—in such a case we must base our
      tactics first and foremost on an appraisal of the objective
      situation, we must examine analytically the course of the
      revolution up to this moment and the reason it has taken a turn
      so menacing and so sharp, and so much to our disadvantage. 

     
      If we examine the development of our revolution from that point
      of view we see clearly that it has so far passed through a
      period of relative and largely imaginary self-dependence, and of
      being temporarily independent of international relations. The
      path travelled by our revolution from the end of February 1917
      to February 11 of this year, [4] when the German offensive began, was,
      by and large, a path of easy and rapid successes. If we study
      the development of that revolution on an international scale,
      from the standpoint of the Russian revolution alone, we shall
      see that we have passed through three periods in the past
      year. The first period is that in which the working class of
      Russia, together with all advanced, class-conscious and active
      peasants, supported not only by the petty bourgeoisie but also
      by the big bourgeoisie, swept away the monarchy in a few
      days. This astounding success is to be explained by the fact
      that on the one hand, the Russian people had acquired a big
      reserve of revolutionary fighting potential from the experience
      of 1905, while on the other hand, Russia, an extremely backward
      country, had suffered more than any other from the war and had,
      at an especially early date, reached a stage when it was
      absolutely impossible to continue the war under the old regime. 

     
      This short tempestuous success when a new organisation was
      created—the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and
      Peasants’ Deputies—was followed by the long months
      of the period of transition of our revolution, the period in
      which the government of the bourgeoisie, immediately undermined
      by the Soviets, was kept going and strengthened by the petty
      bourgeois compromising parties, the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, who supported it. It was a government
      that supported the imperialist war and the imperialist secret
      treaties, fed the working class on promises, did literally
      nothing, and preserved the state of economic ruin. The Soviets
      mustered their forces in this period, a period that for us, for
      the Russian revolution, was a long one; it was a long period for
      the Russian revolution but it was a short one from the
      international point of view, because in most of the leading
      countries the period of overcoming petty-bourgeois illusions, of
      compromise by various parties, groups and trends had been taking
      not months but long decades. The span of time, from April 20 to
      the moment Kerensky renewed the imperialist war in June (he had
      the secret imperialist treaty in his pocket), was decisive. This
      second period included our July defeat and the Kornilov revolt,
      and only through the experience of the mass struggle, only when
      the working-class and peasant masses had realised from their own
      experience and not from sermons that petty-bourgeois compromise
      was all in vain—only then, after long political
      development, after long preparations and changes in the moods
      and views of party groups, was the ground made ready for the
      October Revolution; only then did the Russian revolution enter
      the third period of its initial stage, a stage of isolation, or
      temporary separation, from the world revolution. 

     
      This third, or October, period, the period of organisation, was
      the most difficult; at the same time it was a period of the
      biggest and most rapid triumphs. After October, our
      revolution—the revolution that placed power in the hands
      of the revolutionary proletariat, established its dictatorship
      and obtained for it the support of the vast majority of the
      proletariat and the poor peasantry—after October our
      revolution made a victorious, triumphal advance. Throughout
      Russia civil war began in the form of resistance by the
      exploiters, the landowners and bourgeoisie, supported by part of
      the imperialist bourgeoisie. 

     
      Civil war broke out, and in that war the forces of the enemies
      of Soviet power, the forces of the enemies of the working and
      exploited masses, proved to be insignificant; the civil war was
      one continuous triumph for Soviet power because its opponents,
      the exploiters, the landowners and bourgeoisie, had neither
      political nor economic support, and their attacks collapsed. The
      struggle against them was not so much a military operation as
      agitation; section after section, mass after mass, down to the
      working Cossacks, abandoned the exploiters who were trying to
      lead them away from Soviet power. 

     
      This period of the victorious, triumphal advance of the
      dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet power, when great
      masses of the working and exploited people of Russia were drawn
      to the side of Soviet power definitely and irrevocably—
      this period constituted the final and highest point of
      development of the Russian revolution, which had been
      progressing all this time, apparently, independently of world
      imperialism. That was the reason why a country which was
      extremely backward and was the most prepared for the revolution
      by the experience of 1905 was able to promote one class after
      another to power rapidly, easily and systematically, getting rid
      of various political alignments until at last that political
      structure was reached which was the last word, not only in the
      Russian revolution, but also in the West-European workers’
      revolutions, for Soviet power has been consolidated in Russia
      and has won the absolute sympathy of the working and exploited
      people because it has destroyed the old state apparatus that was
      an instrument of oppression and has laid the foundation of a
      state of a new and higher form of which the Paris Commune was
      the prototype. The Commune destroyed the old state machine and
      replaced it by the armed force of the masses themselves,
      replaced bourgeois parliamentary democracy by the democracy of
      the working people, which excluded the exploiters and
      systematically suppressed their resistance. 

     
      That is what the Russian revolution did in this period and that
      is why a small vanguard of the Russian revolution is under the
      impression that this rapid triumphal advance can be expected to
      continue in further victory. That is precisely their mistake
      because the period when the Russian revolution was developing,
      passing state power in Russia from one class to another and
      getting rid of class compromise within the bounds of Russia
      alone—this period-was able to exist historically only
      because the predatory giants of world imperialism were
      temporarily halted in their advance against Soviet power. A
      revolution that overthrew the monarchy in a few days, exhausted
      all possibilities of compromise with the bourgeoisie in a few
      months and overcame all the resistance by the bourgeoisie in a
      civil war of a few weeks, this revolution, the revolution of a
      socialist republic, could live side by side with the imperialist
      powers, among the international plunderers, the wild beasts of
      international imperialism, only so long as the bourgeoisie,
      locked in mortal struggle with each other, were paralysed in
      their offensive against Russia. 

     
      And then began the period that we feel so keenly and see before
      our eyes, the period of disastrous defeats and severe trials for
      the Russian revolution, the period in which the swift, direct
      and open offensive against the enemies of the revolution is over
      while in its place we are experiencing disastrous defeats and
      have to retreat before forces that are immeasurably greater than
      ours, before the forces of international imperialism and finance
      capital, before the military might that the entire bourgeoisie
      with its modern weapons and its organisation has mustered
      against us in the interests of plunder, oppression and the
      strangling of small nations; we had to think of bringing our
      forces up to their level; we had to face a task of tremendous
      difficulty, that of direct combat with enemies that differed
      from Romanov and Kerensky who could not be taken seriously; we
      had to meet the forces of the international imperialist
      bourgeoisie, all its military might, we had to stand face to
      face with the world plunderers. In view of the delay in getting
      help from the international socialist proletariat we naturally
      had to take upon ourselves a conflict with these forces and we
      suffered a disastrous defeat. 

     
      And this epoch is one of disastrous defeats, an epoch of
      retreat, an epoch in which we must save at least a small part of
      our position by retreating before imperialism, by awaiting the
      time when there will be changes in the world situation in
      general, when the forces of the European proletariat arrive, the
      forces that exist and are maturing but which have not been able
      to deal with their enemy as easily as we did with ours; it would
      be a very great illusion, a very great mistake, to forget that
      it was easy for the Russian revolution to begin but difficult
      for it to take further steps. This was inevitable because we had
      to begin with the most backward and most rotten political
      system. The European revolution will have to begin against the
      bourgeoisie, against a much more serious enemy and under
      immeasurably more difficult conditions. It will be much more
      difficult for the European revolution to begin. We see that it
      is immeasurably more difficult to make the first breach in the
      system that is holding back the revolution. It will be much
      easier for the European revolution to advance to the second and
      third stages. Things cannot be different with the alignment of
      forces of the revolutionary and reactionary classes that at
      present obtains in the world. This is the main turn in events
      that is always overlooked by people who view the present
      situation, the extremely serious position of the revolution,
      from the stand point of their own feelings and their
      indignation, and not from the historical standpoint. Historical
      experience teaches us that always, in all revolutions, at a time
      when a revolution takes an abrupt turn from swift victory to
      severe defeats, there comes a period of pseudo-revolutionary
      phrase-making that invariably causes the greatest damage to the
      development of the revolution. And so, comrades, we shall be
      able to appraise our tactics correctly only when we set out to
      consider the turn in events that has hurled us back from swift,
      easy and complete victories to grave defeats. This is an
      extremely difficult and extremely serious question arising out
      of the present turning-point in the development of the
      revolution, the turn from easy victories within the country to
      exceptionally heavy defeats without; it is also a turning-point
      in the entire world revolution, a turn from the period of
      propaganda and agitation on the part of the Russian revolution,
      with imperialism biding its time, to the offensive of
      imperialism against Soviet power, and this turn puts a
      particularly difficult and acute question before the
      international movement in Western Europe. If we are not to
      ignore this historical aspect of the situation we must try to
      understand how Russia’s basic interests in the question of
      the present harsh, or obscene, as it is called, peace took
      shape. 

     
      When arguing against those who refused to see the need to accept
      that peace, I have often come up against the statement that the
      idea of concluding the peace expresses only the interests of the
      exhausted peasant masses, the declassed soldiers, and so on and
      so forth. Whenever I hear such statements, whenever I hear such
      things referred to, I am always amazed that the class aspect of
      national development is forgotten by comrades—people who
      limit themselves exclusively to seeking explanations. As though
      the Party of the proletariat on taking power had not counted on
      the alliance of the proletariat and the semi-proletariat, i. e.,
      the-poor peasantry (i. e., the majority of the peasantry of
      Russia), had not known that only such an alliance would be able
      to hand the government of Russia over to the revolutionary power
      of the Soviets, the power of the majority, the real majority of
      the people, and that without this alliance it would be senseless
      to make any attempt to establish power, especially at difficult
      turning-points in history! As though we could now abandon this
      verity that was accepted by all of us and confine ourselves to a
      contemptuous reference to the exhausted state of the peasantry
      and the declassed soldiers! With regard to the exhausted state
      of the peasantry and the declassed soldiers we must say that the
      country will offer resistance, and that the poor peasants will
      be able to offer resistance only in so far as those poor
      peasants are capable of directing their forces to the struggle. 

     
      When we were about to take power in October it was obvious that
      events were inevitably leading up to it, that the turn towards
      Bolshevism in the Soviets indicated a turn throughout the
      country, and that the Bolsheviks must inevitably take
      power. When we, realising this, took power in October, we said
      to ourselves and to all the people, very clearly and
      unequivocally, that it was a transfer of power to the
      proletariat and the poor peasantry, that the proletariat knew
      the peasantry would support it—you know yourselves in
      what—in its active struggle for peace and its readiness to
      continue the fight against big finance capital. In this we are
      making no mistake, and nobody who sticks to the concept of class
      forces and class alignments can get away from the indisputable
      truth that we cannot ask a country of small peasants, a country
      that has given much for the European and world revolution, to
      carry on the struggle in a difficult situation, a most difficult
      situation, when help from the West-European proletariat has
      undoubtedly been delayed, although there is no doubt that it is
      coming to us, as the facts, the strikes, etc., show. That is why
      I say that such references to the exhaustion of the peasant
      masses, etc., are made by people who simply have no arguments,
      who are absolutely helpless when they seek such arguments, and
      who are quite unable to grasp class relations as a whole, in
      their entirety, the relations of the revolution of the
      proletariat and of the peasant masses; it is only when, at every
      sharp turn in history, we appraise the class relations as a
      whole, the relations of all classes, and do not select
      individual examples and individual cases, that we feel ourselves
      firmly supported by an analysis of probable facts. I realise
      full well that the Russian bourgeoisie are today urging us on
      towards a revolutionary war when it is absolutely impossible for
      us to have such a war. This is essential to the class interests
      of the bourgeoisie. 

     
      When they shout about an obscene peace and do not say a word
      about who brought the army to its present state, I realise quite
      well that it is the bourgeoisie together with the Dyelo
      Naroda people, the Tsereteli and Chernov Mensheviks and
      their yes-men (applause )—I know quite well that
      it is the bourgeoisie who are bawling for a revolutionary
      war. Their class interests demand it, their anxiety to see
      Soviet power make a false move demands it. It is not surprising
      that this comes from people who, on the one hand, fill the pages
      of their newspapers with counter-revolutionary
      scribbling. . . . (Voices : “They’ve all
      been suppressed!”) Unfortunately, not yet all of them, but
      we will close them all down. (Applause.) I should like
      to see the proletariat that would allow the
      counter-revolutionaries, those who support the bourgeoisie and
      collaborate with them, to continue using the monopoly of wealth
      to drug the people with their bourgeois opium. There is no such
      proletariat. (Applause.) 

     
      I realise, of course, that nothing but shouts, howls and screams
      about an obscene peace comes from those publications, I realise
      full well that the people who favour this revolutionary
      war—from the Constitutional-Democrats to the Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries—are those who meet the Germans
      as they advance and say triumphantly, here come the Germans, and
      then allow their officers, again wearing their badges of rank,
      to strut about in the places that have been occupied by the
      German imperialist invaders. Oh no, I am not a bit surprised at
      these bourgeois, these collaborators, preaching a revolutionary
      war. They want Soviet power to be caught in a trap. They have
      shown their hand, these bourgeois and collaborators. We have
      seen them and can still see live specimens, we know that in the
      Ukraine there are Ukrainian Kerenskys, Ukrainian Chernovs and
      Ukrainian Tseretelis—there they are, the
      Vinnichenkos. Those gentlemen, the Ukrainian Kerenskys, Chernovs
      and Tseretelis, concealed from the people the peace they
      concluded with the German imperialists, and today they are
      trying to overthrow Soviet power in the Ukraine with the help of
      German bayonets. That is what those bourgeois and those
      collaborators and their accomplices have done. That is what they
      have done, those Ukrainian bourgeois and collaborators, whose
      example you have before your very eyes; they concealed and are
      still concealing their secret treaties from the people, they are
      attacking Soviet power with the aid of German bayonets. That is
      what the Russian bourgeoisie want, that is where the bourgeois
      yes-men are trying to push Soviet power, wittingly or
      unwittingly; they know that under no circumstances can Soviet
      power undertake an imperialist war against the might of
      imperialism at the present moment. That is why it is only in
      this international situation, in this general class situation,
      that we can understand the full depth of the mistake of those
      who, like the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Party, have allowed
      themselves to be carried away by a theory that is common to the
      history of all revolutions at moments of difficulty, a theory
      that is half desperation and half empty phrases; according to
      this theory, instead of taking a sober view of reality and
      appraising the tasks of the revolution in respect of the
      internal and external enemy from the standpoint of class forces,
      you are asked to settle a serious and very grave problem only
      under the impact of your feelings, merely from  standpoint of
      feelings. The peace is incredibly harsh and shameful. ln my
      statements and speeches I have had occasion to liken it to the
      Peace of Tilsit that the conqueror Napoleon forced on the
      Prussian and German peoples after a series of heavy
      defeats. Yes, the peace is a grave defeat and is humiliating to
      Soviet power, but if you, proceeding from this, and limiting
      yourselves to it, appeal to feelings and arouse discontent in an
      attempt to settle a gigantic historical problem, you will get
      into that ridiculous and pitiful situation into which the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party once got itself, when in 1907, in
      a situation that was somewhat similar in certain respects, that
      party also appealed to the feelings of revolutionaries, when,
      after our revolution had suffered heavy defeats in 1906 and
      1907, Stolypin presented us with the laws on the Third
      Duma—shameful and extremely difficult conditions of work
      in one of the rottenest of representative
      institutions—when our Party, after brief internal wavering
      (the wavering on the question was greater than it is today),
      decided the question in this way: we have no right to give way
      to feelings; no matter how great our indignation and
      dissatisfaction with the shameful Third Duma, we have to
      recognise that it was not chance but the historical necessity of
      a developing class struggle which lacked the strength to
      continue but which could muster that strength even in the
      shameful conditions that have been imposed. We proved to be
      right. Those who tried to attract people by revolutionary
      phrases, by appeals to justice (since they were expressing
      feelings that were trebly legitimate)—those people were
      given a lesson that will not be forgotten by any revolutionary
      capable of thought and possessing ideas. 

     
      Revolutions do not go smoothly enough to ensure rapid and easy
      progress. There has never been any great revolution, even on a
      national scale, that did not experience a hard period of defeat,
      and the attitude of a revolutionary towards the serious question
      of mass movements, of developing revolutions, must not be one of
      declaring the peace obscene and humiliating and then saying he
      cannot reconcile himself to it; it is not sufficient to quote
      agitational phrases, to shower reproaches on us because of the
      peace—that is the known ABC of the revolution, the
      experience of all revolutions. Our experience since
      1905—and if we are rich in anything, if there is any
      reason why the Russian working class and poor peasantry have
      taken upon themselves the most difficult and honourable task of
      beginning the world socialist revolution, it is because the
      Russian people have been able, owing to specific historical
      conditions, to make two great revolutions at the beginning of
      the twentieth century—we have to learn from the experience
      of those revolutions, we have to learn to understand that only
      by studying the changes in the class connections between one
      country and another is it possible to prove definitely that we
      are in no condition to accept battle at the moment; we have to
      take this into consideration and say to ourselves, whatever
      respite we may obtain, no matter how unstable, no matter how
      brief, harsh and humiliating the peace may be, it is better than
      war, because it gives the masses a breathing-space, because it
      provides us with an opportunity to correct what the bourgeoisie
      have done, the bourgeoisie that are shouting wherever they have
      an opportunity to shout, especially under the protection of the
      Germans in the occupied regions. 

     
      The bourgeoisie are shouting that the Bolsheviks are responsible
      for the disintegration of the army, that there is no army and
      the Bolsheviks are to blame for it; but let us look at the past,
      comrades, let us look, firstly, at the development of our
      revolution. Do you not know that desertion and the
      disintegration of our army began long before the revolution, in
      1916, and that everybody who has seen the army will have to
      admit that? And what did our bourgeoisie do to prevent it? Is it
      not clear that the only chance for salvation from the
      imperialists at that time was in their hands, that a chance
      presented itself in March and April, when Soviet organisations
      could have taken power by a simple motion of the hand against
      the bourgeoisie. And if the Soviets had then taken power, if the
      bourgeois and petty-bourgeois intelligentsia, together with the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, instead of helping
      Kerensky deceive the people, conceal the secret treaties and
      lead the army to an offensive—if they had then come to the
      aid of the army, had supplied it with munitions and rations and
      had compelled the bourgeoisie to help the fatherland—not
      the fatherland of the hucksters, not the fatherland of treaties
      that help to slaughter the people (applause )—and
      had themselves participated; if the Soviets had forced the
      bourgeoisie to help the fatherland of the workers and all
      working people, and had helped the ragged, barefoot and hungry
      army, then, perhaps, we should have had a period of ten months,
      long enough to rest the army and gain unanimous support for it,
      so that without the army having moved one step from the front a
      general, democratic peace could have been proposed, the secret
      treaties could have been torn up and the line held without
      retreating a single step. There would then have been a chance of
      peace, which the workers and peasants would have willingly
      supported and approved. That would have been the tactics of the
      defence of the fatherland, not the fatherland of the Romanovs,
      Kerenskys, or Chernovs, a fatherland with secret treaties, a
      fatherland of the treacherous bourgeoisie—not that
      fatherland but the fatherland of the working people. That is who
      is responsible for having made the transition from war to
      revolution and from the Russian revolution to world socialism a
      period of severe trials. That is why such proposals as a
      revolutionary war sound like empty phrases, when we know that we
      have no army, when we know that it would have been impossible to
      hold the army, and people with a knowledge of the situation
      could not help seeing that our decree on demobilisation was not
      an invention but the result of obvious necessity, because it
      would have been impossible to hold the army. The army could not
      have been held. That officer, not a Bolshevik, was right who,
      before the October Revolution, said that the army could not and
      would not fight. [5] This is what has come of months of
      bargaining with the bourgeoisie and of all the speeches about
      the need to continue the war; no matter what noble sentiments on
      the part of many revolutionaries, or of few revolutionaries, may
      have dictated them, they proved to be empty revolutionary
      phrases that played into the hands of international imperialism
      so that it could plunder as much again and more, just as it has
      been doing since our tactical or diplomatic error, since the
      time we did not sign the Brest Treaty. When we told those who
      opposed concluding peace that if we had a respite of any length
      they would realise that the recuperation of the army and the
      interests of the working people were more important than
      anything else, and that peace should have been concluded for
      this reason—they maintained that there could be no
      respite. 

     
      But our revolution differs from all previous revolutions in
      having aroused among the masses a desire to build and create,
      and the working people in the most out-of-the-way villages,
      people humiliated, downtrodden and oppressed by tsars,
      landowners, and bourgeoisie, have been aroused; this is a period
      of the revolution that is only now being accomplished, now that
      the rural revolution is under way, the revolution that is
      building a new way of life. And for the sake of this respite, no
      matter how brief and how small it may be, it was our duty to
      sign the treaty, since we place the interests of the working
      people above the interests of the bourgeois warriors who rattle
      their sabres and call on us to fight. That is what the
      revolution teaches. The revolution teaches that when we make
      diplomatic mistakes, when we assume that the German workers will
      come to our aid tomorrow, when we hope that Liebknecht will be
      victorious immediately (and we know that one way or another
      Liebknecht will win, that is inevitable in the development of
      the working-class movement [applause]), it means that,
      when used unthinkingly, the revolutionary slogans of the
      difficult socialist movement turn into empty phrases. There is
      not a single representative of the working people, there is not
      a single honest worker who would refuse to make the greatest
      sacrifice to help the socialist movement of Germany, because
      during all this time at the front he has learned to distinguish
      between the German imperialists and the soldiers tormented by
      German discipline, most of whom are in sympathy with us. That is
      why I say that the Russian revolution has corrected our mistake
      in practice, has corrected it by giving us the respite. It is
      very probable that it will be an extremely brief one, but we
      have the chance of at least a brief respite in which the army,
      worn out and hungry as it is, will become conscious of the fact
      that it has been given an opportunity to recuperate. It is clear
      to us that the period of the old imperialist wars is over and we
      are threatened with the further horrors of an outbreak of fresh
      wars, but there have been such periods of war in many historical
      epochs, and they have always become most fierce towards the
      end. This must be understood, not only at meetings in Petrograd
      and Moscow; it must be understood by the many tens of millions
      in the countryside; and the more enlightened part of the rural
      population, those returning from the front, those who have
      experienced the horrors of war, must help them understand it;
      the huge masses of peasants and workers must become convinced of
      the necessity for a revolutionary front—they will then say
      we have acted correctly. 

     
      They tell us we have betrayed the Ukraine and Finland—what
      disgrace! But the situation that bas arisen is such that we are
      cut off from Finland, with whom we concluded an unwritten treaty
      before the revolution and have now concluded a formal 
      treaty.[6] They say we are
      surrendering the Ukraine, which Chernov, Kerensky and Tsereteli
      are going to ruin; they say we are traitors, we have betrayed
      the Ukraine! I say: Comrades, I’ve seen enough of the
      history of revolution not to be embarrassed by the hostile
      glances and shouts of people who give way to their feelings and
      are incapable of clear judgement. I will give you a simple
      example. Suppose that two friends are out walking at night and
      they are attacked by ten men. If the scoundrels isolate one of
      them, what is the other to do? He cannot render assistance, and
      if he runs away is he a traitor? And suppose that it is not a
      matter of individuals or of spheres in which questions of direct
      feelings are being settled, but of five armies, each a
      hundred-thousand strong, that surround an army of two hundred
      thousand, and that there is another army that should come to the
      embattled army’s assistance. But if that second army knows
      that it is certain to fall into a trap, it should withdraw; it
      must withdraw, even if the retreat has to be covered by the
      conclusion of an obscene, foul peace—curse as much as you
      like, but it is necessary to conclude the peace. There is no
      reason for considering the feelings of a duelist who draws his
      sword and says that he must die because he is being compelled to
      conclude a humiliating peace. But we all know that, however we
      may decide, we have no army, and no gestures will save us from
      the necessity of withdrawing to gain time and enable our army to
      recuperate; everybody who looks reality in the face and does not
      deceive himself with revolutionary phrase-making will agree with
      this. Anyone who faces the facts without blinding himself with
      phrase-making and arrogance must know this.

     
      If we know this, it is our revolutionary duty to conclude even
      this harsh, super-harsh and rapacious treaty, for by so doing we
      shall reach a better position for ourselves and for our
      allies. Did we actually lose anything by concluding the peace
      treaty of March 3? Anyone who wants to look at things from the
      point of view of mass relations, and not from that of the
      aristocratic duelist, will realise that without an army, or
      having only the sick remnant of an army, it would be
      self-deception, it would he the greatest deception of the
      people, to accept battle and call it a revolutionary war. It is
      our duty to tell the people the truth; yes, the peace is a harsh
      one. The Ukraine and Finland are perishing but we must accept
      this peace and all class-conscious working people in Russia will
      accept it because they know the unvarnished truth, they know the
      meaning of war, they know that to stake everything on one card
      on the assumption that the German revolution will begin
      immediately is self-deception. By concluding peace we have
      obtained what we gave our Finnish friends—a respite, help
      and not destruction. 

     
      I know of examples from history of much more rapacious peace
      treaties having been concluded, treaties that surrendered viable
      nations to the mercy of the conqueror. Let us compare our peace
      to the Peace of Tilsit; the Peace of TiIsit was enforced on
      Prussia and Germany by a conqueror. That peace was so harsh that
      not only were all the capital cities of all the German states
      seized, not only were the Prussians thrown back to Tilsit, which
      would be the same as throwing us back to Omsk or Tomsk; not only
      that—the worst of all was that Napoleon compelled the
      conquered peoples to supply him with auxiliary troops for his
      wars; but nevertheless, when the situation became such that the
      German peoples had to withstand the attacks of the conquer or,
      when the epoch of revolutionary wars in France gave place to the
      epoch of imperialist wars of conquest, then came the revelation
      which those people who wax enthusiastic over empty phrases do
      not want to understand, those people, that is, who picture the
      conclusion of peace as a downfall. This psychology is
      understandable in an aristocratic duelist but not in a worker or
      peasant. The latter has been through the hard school of war and
      has learned to calculate. There have been even greater trials,
      and nations even more backward have come through them. Harsher
      peace treaties have been concluded, the Germans concluded one in
      an epoch when they had no army, or when their army was sick like
      ours. They concluded a very harsh peace with Napoleon. But that
      peace was not the downfall of Germany—on the contrary, it
      was the turning-point, national defence, renewal. We are on the
      eve of just such a turning-point and are experiencing analogous
      conditions. We must look truth in the face and banish all empty
      phrases and declarations. We must say, peace, if it is
      necessary, must be concluded. The war of liberation, the class
      war, the war of the people will take the place of the Napoleonic
      wars. The system of the Napoleonic wars will change, war will
      give place to peace and peace to war, and from every harsh peace
      there has always emerged a more extensive preparation for
      war. The harshest of peace treaties—the Peace of
      Tilsit—has gone down in history as a turning-point towards
      the time when the German people began to swing round; when they
      retreated to Tilsit, to Russia, they were actually gaining time,
      waiting for the international situation that had, at one time,
      favoured Napoleon—he was another plunderer like
      Hohenzollern or Hindenburg—waiting until the situation
      changed, until the mentality of the German people, tormented by
      decades of Napoleonic wars and defeats, had recuperated and the
      German people were resuscitated. That is what history teaches
      us, that is why all despair and empty phrases are criminal, that
      is why everyone will say yes, the old imperialist wars are
      ending—an historical turning-point has come. 

     
      Our revolution has been one long triumph since October, and now
      the lengthy times of hardship have come, we do not know for how
      long, but we do know that it will be a long and difficult period
      of defeats and retreats, because the alignment of forces is what
      it is, because by retreating we shall give the people a chance
      to recuperate. We shall make it possible for every worker and
      peasant to realise the truth that will enable him to understand
      that new wars waged by the imperialist plunderers against the
      oppressed peoples are beginning, and every worker and peasant
      will realise that we must rise in defence of the fatherland,
      because we have been defencists since October. Since October 25
      we have said openly that we stand for the defence of the
      fatherland, because we have a fatherland, the one from which we
      have driven the Kerenskys and Chernovs, because we have torn up
      the secret treaties, because we have crushed the
      bourgeoisie—badly so far, but we shall learn to do it
      better. 

     
      Comrades, there is another important difference between the
      condition of the German people and of the Russian people who
      have suffered a severe defeat at the hands of the German
      invaders—there is a tremendous difference that must be
      mentioned, although I have already touched upon it briefly in
      the preceding part of my speech. Comrades, when the German
      people, over a hundred years ago, entered a period of the most
      cruel wars of conquest, a period when they had to retreat and
      conclude one shameful treaty after another before they were
      awakened—at that time the German people were weak and
      backward, just that and nothing more. They had against them not
      only the military forces and the might of the conqueror
      Napoleon, they had against them a country that was far above
      Germany in the revolutionary and political sense and in every
      other respect, a country that had risen far above all others, a
      country that had reached the top. That country was far above the
      people who were languishing in subjection to the imperialists
      and landowners. A people that, I repeat, had been nothing but a
      weak and backward people, managed to learn from its bitter
      lessons and to raise itself up. We are in a better position; we
      are not merely a weak and backward people, we are the people who
      have been able—not because of any special services or of
      historical predestination, but because of a definite conjunction
      of historical circumstances—who have been able to accept
      the honour of raising the banner of the international socialist
      revolution. (Applause.) 

     
      I am well aware, comrades, that the banner is in weak hands, I
      have said that outright several times already, and the workers
      of the most backward country will not be able to hold that
      banner unless the workers of all advanced countries come to
      their aid. The socialist reforms that we have accomplished are
      far from perfect, they are weak and insufficient; they will
      serve as a guide to the advanced West-European workers who will
      say to themselves, “The Russians haven’t made a very
      good beginning on the job that has to be done”; the
      important thing is that our people are not merely a weak and
      backward people as compared with the Germans, they are the
      people who have raised the banner of revolution. Although the
      bourgeoisie of any country you like are filling the columns of
      their press with slander of the Bolsheviks, although the voice
      of the imperialist press in France, Britain, Germany, etc.,
      curses the Bolsheviks in unison, you will not find a meeting of
      workers in any country at which the names and slogans of our
      socialist government give rise to bursts of
      indignation. (Voice : ’That’s a
      lie!”) No, it is not, it is the truth, and anyone who has
      been in Germany, Austria, Switzerland or America during the past
      few months will tell you it is the truth and not a lie, that the
      names and slogans of representatives of Soviet power in Russia
      are greeted with the greatest enthusiasm by the workers and
      that, despite all the lies of the bourgeoisie of Germany,
      France, etc., the working-class masses have realised that no
      matter how weak we may be, their cause is being served here in
      Russia. Yes, our people have a very heavy burden to bear, the
      burden they have themselves taken up; but a people that has been
      able to establish Soviet power cannot perish. Again I
      repeat—there is not a single politically conscious
      socialist, not a single worker among those who think over the
      history of the revolution, who can dispute the fact that Soviet
      power— despite all the defects that I know only too well
      and fully appreciate—is the highest type of state, the
      direct successor to the Paris Commune. It has ascended a step
      higher than the other European revolutions so that we are not
      experiencing the difficult conditions that the German people
      experienced a hundred years ago; the change in the balance of
      forces among the plunderers, taking advantage of the conflict
      and satisfying the demands of plunderer Napoleon, plunderer
      Alexander I and the plundering British monarchy—that was
      the only thing left, the one chance, for the German people,
      oppressed by feudalism; and yet the German people did not perish
      from the Peace of Tilsit. But we, I say again, have better
      conditions, we have a powerful ally in all West-European
      countries, the international socialist proletariat, the
      proletariat that is on our side no matter what our enemies may
      say. (Applause.) True, it is not easy for that ally to
      raise his voice, any more than it was easy for us until the end
      of February 1917. That ally is living in the underground, under
      conditions of the military prison into which all imperialist
      countries have been turned, but he knows us and understands our
      cause; it is difficult for him to come to our aid, and Soviet
      troops, therefore, will need much time and patience and will
      have to go through many trials before the time comes when he
      will aid us—we shall use even the slightest chance of
      procrastination, for time is working on our side. Our cause is
      gaining strength, the forces of the imperialists are weakening,
      and no matter what trials and defeats may emerge from the
      “Tilsit” peace, we are beginning the tactics of
      withdrawal and, once more I say it, there is no doubt the
      politically-conscious proletariat and, likewise, the
      politically-conscious peasants are on our side, and we shall be
      able not only to make heroic at tacks, but also to make a heroic
      retreat and we shall wait until the international socialist
      proletariat comes to our aid and shall then begin a second
      socialist revolution that will be world-wide in its
      scope. (Applause.) 

    
Pravda (Sotsial-Demokrat ) Nos. 47 and 48, March 16
      and 17, 1918; Published according to the verbatim report, collated with the Pravda text
    

3
Reply To The Debate On The Report On Ratification Of The Peace Treaty March 15
 
      Comrades, had I desired to find a confirmation of what was said
      in my first speech about the nature of the revolutionary war
      that was proposed to us, the best and clearest confirmation
      would have been given me by the report of the representative of
      the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries.[7] I think it will be most expedient if I
      quote his speech from the verbatim report and we shall see what
      arguments they adduce in confirmation of their propositions. 

     
      Here is a specimen of the arguments on which they rely. There
      has been talk here of the volost gathering.[8] Those who consider this
      meeting a volost gathering can resort to such arguments, but it
      is clear that these people are repeating our words but are
      incapable of thinking them out. People repeat what the
      Bolsheviks taught the Left S.R.s when the latter were still
      among the Rights, and when they speak it is evident that they
      have learnt by rote what we said, but they have not understood
      on what it was based, and now they repeat it. Tsereteli and
      Chernov were defencists, and now we are defencists, we are
      “traitors”,  we are “betrayers”. The
      accomplices of the bourgeoisie speak here about a volost
      gathering—they make eyes when they say this—but
      every worker understands very well the aims of the defencism by
      which Tsereteli and Chernov were guided and the grounds which
      cause us to be defencists. 

     
      If we were to support the Russian capitalists who wanted to be
      given the Dardanelles, Armenia and Galicia, as it was written in
      the secret treaty, that would be defencism in the spirit of
      Chernov and Tsereteli, and that defencism was disgraceful then,
      but now our defencism is honourable. (Applause.) 

     
      And when, alongside such arguments, in the verbatim report of
      Kamkov’s speech I find twice repeated the statement that
      the Bolsheviks are agents of German imperialism (applause
      from the Right ), a harsh term—I am very glad that
      all those who pursued Kerensky’s policy emphasise it by
      their applause. (Applause. ) And indeed, of course, it
      is not for me to object to harsh words. I shall never raise any
      objection to that. Only, in order to be harsh one must have the
      right to be so, and the right to be harsh is given by
      one’s words not differing from one’s deeds. That is
      the little condition which many intellectuals do not appreciate,
      but which the workers and peasants have grasped even at volost
      gatherings—it is such a meagre thing, the volost
      gathering—they have grasped it both at volost gatherings
      and in Soviet organisations, and their word does not differ from
      their deed. But we are very well aware that they, the Left
      S.R.s, remained in the party of the Right S.R.s until October,
      during the time when the latter were sharing the rewards of
      office, when they acted as agents because they had been promised
      ministerial posts in return for keeping silent about the secret
      treaties. (Applause.) But it is quite impossible to
      call agents of imperialism people who actually proclaimed war
      against it, tore up the treaties and undertook the risk that
      this involved, undertook to drag out the negotiations in Brest,
      knowing that this would ruin the country, endured the military
      attack and a series of unprecedented defeats, and did not
      conceal the slightest thing from the people. 

     
      Martov has assured us here that he has not read the treaty. Let
      those who like to, believe him. We know that these people are
      accustomed to read a lot of newspapers, but they have not read
      the treaty. (Applause.) Let those who wish, believe
      it. But I tell you that, while the party of the S.R.s knows very
      well that we are giving way in the face of violence, which has
      been fully exposed by us, that we are doing so deliberately,
      frankly saying that we are unable to fight just now but are
      giving way—history. knows of a number of most shameful
      treaties and a number of wars—when people in reply to this
      produce the word “agents”,  this harshness exposes
      them, and when they assure us that they disclaim responsibility
      for what they are doing—is it not hypocrisy, when people
      disclaim responsibility but continue to be in the government? I
      maintain that when they say that they disclaim
      responsibility—they do not divest themselves of it, and
      they are quite wrong in thinking this is a volost gathering. No,
      this is everything that is honest and best among the working
      masses. (Applause.) This is no bourgeois parliament to
      which people are elected once or twice a year to take their
      seats and receive a salary. These are people sent from the
      provinces and tomorrow they will be in the provinces and will
      relate that if the party of Left S.R.s is losing votes, it
      deserves to, because the party which acts in this way is the
      same soap bubble among the peasantry as it proved to be among
      the working class. (Applause, voices:
      “Quite right.”) 

     
      Further, I will quote you one more passage from Kamkov’s
      speech to show how every representative of the working and
      exploited people reacts to it. “When yesterday Comrade
      Lenin asserted here that Comrades Tsereteli and Chernov and
      others had demoralised the army, can we really not find the
      courage to say that Lenin and I also demoralised the
      army?” He is a long way wide of the
      mark. (Applause.) He has heard that we were defeatists,
      and he has recalled this when we have ceased to be
      defeatists. He has recalled it at the wrong time. They have
      learnt the word by heart, they have a revolutionary-sounding toy
      rattle to play with, but they are incapable of giving some
      thought to the actual state of affairs. (Applause.) I
      assert that out of a thousand volost gatherings where Soviet
      power has been consolidated, in more than nine hundred there are
      people who will tell the Party of Left S.R.s that they do not
      deserve any confidence. They will say—all right; we
      demoralised the army and we must recall that now. But how did we
      demoralise the army? We were defeatists at the time of the tsar,
      but at the time of Tsereteli and Chernov we were not
      defeatists. We published in Pravda a proclamation which
      Krylenko, who was then still being persecuted, addressed to the
      army: “Why I am going to Petrograd.” He said:
      “We are not calling on you for mutinies.” That was
      not demoralisation of the army. Those who declared this war to
      be a great war were the ones who demoralised the army. 

     
      It was Tsereteli and Chernov who demoralised the army because
      they spoke grand words to the people, words which many Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries were accustomed to throw out at
      random. It is easy to play with words, but the Russian people at
      volost gatherings are accustomed to think over them and take
      them seriously. If, however, the people were told that we were
      striving for peace and discussing the conditions of the
      imperialist war, then I ask: and what about the secret treaties
      and the June offensive? That is how they demoralised the
      army. If they spoke to the people about the struggle against the
      imperialists, about defence of the homeland, the people asked
      themselves: do they seize the capitalists by the scruff of the
      neck somewhere?—that is how they demoralised the army, and
      that is why I said, and no one has refuted it, it would have
      been the salvation of the army if we had taken power in March or
      April, and if instead of the furious hatred of the exploiters
      because we suppressed them—they quite justifiably hate
      us—if instead of this they had put the interests of the
      homeland of the working and exploited people higher than the
      interests of the homeland of Kerensky and Ryabushinsky’s
      secret treaties, and of designs on Armenia, Galicia and the
      Dardanelles, that would have spelt salvation. And in this
      connection—beginning with the great Russian Revolution,
      and especially from March, when a half-hearted appeal to the
      peoples of all countries[9] was issued—the government, which
      issued the appeal that called for the overthrow of the bankers
      of all countries, was itself sharing profits and favours with
      the bankers—that is what demoralised the army and why the
      army could not keep going. (Applause.) 

     
      And I assert that we—beginning from this appeal of
      Krylenko’s, which was not the first, [10] and which I am recalling
      because it stuck in my mind—we did not demoralise the army
      but said: hold the front—the sooner you take power the
      easier will it be to retain it, and to say now: we are against
      civil war and for an uprising—how unworthy this is and how
      despicable this chatter of some people. When this reaches the
      countryside and when the soldiers there, who have seen war not
      as the intellectuals have, and who know that it is easy to wave
      only a cardboard sword, when they say that at the critical
      moment they, unshod, badly clothed and suffering, were helped by
      being driven into an offensive—they are now being told
      that it doesn’t matter that there will be no army, there
      will be an uprising instead. To drive the people against a
      regular army with superior technical equipment—that is
      criminal, and we, as socialists, taught that it is so. Indeed,
      the war taught a great deal, not only that people suffered, but
      also that those who have the greatest technical equipment,
      organisation and discipline, and the best machines, will gain
      the upper hand; the war taught this, and it is excellent that it
      did so. It has to be learnt that it is impossible to live in
      modern society without machines, without discipline—one
      has either to master modern techniques or be crushed. Years of
      most painful suffering have taught the peasants what war is. And
      when anyone goes speech-making at the volost gatherings, when
      the party of Left S.R.s goes there, they will receive
      well-merited punishment. (Applause.) 

     
      One more example, another quotation from Kamkov’s
      speech. (He reads it.) 

     
      It is sometimes surprisingly easy to raise questions; only there
      is a saying—an impolite, rude one—which refers to
      such questions—I’m afraid I can’t change the
      proverb—I will remind you of it: one fool can ask more
      questions than ten wise men can answer. 

     
      Comrades, in the quotation I have just read out I am invited to
      answer the question: will the respite last one week, two weeks,
      or will it last more? I assert that at any volost gathering or
      at any factory a person who in the name of a serious party comes
      out with such a question will be laughed at by the people and
      chased away, because at any volost gathering they will
      understand that there is no point in raising questions about
      something that cannot be known. That will be understood by any
      worker and peasant. (Applause.) If you absolutely
      insist on an answer, I will tell you that of course any Left
      S.R. who writes in the newspapers or speaks at meetings will say
      what this duration depends on: it depends on when Japan attacks,
      with what forces, and what resistance it encounters; on the
      extent to which the Germans get into difficulties in Finland, in
      the Ukraine; on when the offensive on all fronts begins; on how
      it develops; on the further course of the internal conflict in
      Austria and Germany, and on many other things as
      well. (Applause.) 

     
      Therefore, when at a serious meeting people with an air of
      triumph raise the question: answer me, what kind of a respite
      will it be?—I say that such people will be chased out of
      workers’ and peasants’ meetings by those who
      understand that after three years of war torment, every week of
      respite is a very great boon. (Applause.) And I assert that
      whatever the abuse now heaped on us here, if tomorrow all the
      abusive terms addressed to us from the Rights, almost-Rights,
      near-Rights, Left S.R.s, Cadets, and Mensheviks were collected
      together and published, even if some hundreds of poods were the
      result, as far as I am concerned all this would weigh as light
      as a feather compared with the fact that among us in the
      Bolshevik group nine-tenths of its representatives have said: we
      know war and we see that now, when we have secured this short
      respite, it is an advantage for the recovery of our sick
      army. And at every peasant meeting nine-tenths of the peasants
      will say what everyone who concerns himself with the matter
      knows, and when able to help in any way we have not rejected and
      do not reject any practical proposal. 

     
      We have gained the possibility of a respite, even if only for
      twelve days, thanks to the policy which has countered
      revolutionary phrase-making and “public”
      opinion. When Kamkov and the Left S.R.s play a game with you and
      make eyes at you, then, on the one hand, they are making eyes at
      you and, on the other, they are saying to the
      Constitutional-Democrats: put that down in our favour, indeed,
      we are heart and soul with you. (Voice from the hall :
      “It’s a lie.”) And when one of the
      representatives of the S.R.s, apparently not even of the Lefts,
      but of the super-Lefts, a Maximalist, spoke about phrase-making,
      he said that phrase-making was everything that concerned
      honour. (A voice : “Quite right.”) Well, of
      course, in the Right-wing camp they call out “quite
      right”; this exclamation is pleasanter to me than the
      exclamation “it’s a lie”,  although that does
      not impress me in the slightest either. But if I were to accuse
      them of phrase-making without giving any clear and precise
      confirmation of it, but the fact is I quoted two examples and I
      took them not from my imagination but from actual occurrence. 

     
      Remember, were not the representatives of the S.R.s in the same
      situation when in 1907 they gave their signatures to Stolypin
      that they would faithfully and truly serve the Emperor Nicholas
      II? I hope that I have learnt something from the long years of
      the revolution, and when I am defamed by accusations of
      treachery, I say: one must first of all be able to find
      one’s way in history. If we wanted to alter the course of
      history and it turns out that it was we who altered course and
      not history—then execute us. History is not to be
      convinced by speeches, and history will show that we were right,
      that we brought the workers’ organisations into the Great
      October Revolution of 1917, but only thanks to the fact that we
      rose above phrase-making and knew how to look at the facts, to
      learn from them. And when now, on March 14-15, it has become
      clear that if we had fought we should have helped imperialism,
      we should have finally wrecked the transport system and lost
      Petrograd—we see that to play with words and wave a
      cardboard sword is useless. But when Kamkov comes to me and asks
      “will this respite be for long?”,  it is impossible
      to give an answer because internationally there has not been an
      objective revolutionary situation. There cannot be a long
      respite for reaction now because the objective situation is
      everywhere revolutionary, because everywhere the working-class
      masses are indignant, are at the limit of their patience, at the
      limit of exhaustion from the war; that is a fact. It is
      impossible to escape from this fact, and therefore I have been
      proving to you that there was a period when the revolution went
      ahead and we went in front and the Left S.R.s stepped out
      perkily behind us. (Applause.) But now a period has
      begun when we have to retreat in the face of overwhelming
      force. That is an absolutely concrete description. No one will
      rebut me on this. Historical analysis is bound to confirm
      it. Here you have our Marxist, almost Marxist, Martov, speaking
      ill of the volost gathering; he speaks ill of the closing down
      of newspapers; he boasts that the oppressed and offended
      newspapers were closed down because they were helping to
      overthrow Soviet power, he speaks ill of. . . About this he does
      not keep silent. Such things he sets before you, but an attempt
      to answer the historical question put point-blank by me, whether
      it is the truth or not that since October we have made a
      triumphant advance. . . . (Voices from the Right :
      “No.”) You say “no”,  but all these say
      “yes”. I ask: can we now make a victorious advance
      in an offensive against world imperialism. We cannot, and
      everyone knows it. When this, a frank simple statement, is made
      forthrightly in order to teach people
      revolution—revolution is a profound, difficult and complex
      science—in order to teach both the workers and the
      peasants, the people who are making the revolution, how to do
      so, our enemies cry out: cowards, traitors, the flag has been
      abandoned; they fall back on words, they wave their
      arms. No. The whole history of revolutions has shown many such
      revolutionary phrase-mongers and nothing is left of them but
      stench and smoke. (Applause.) 

     
      Another example I cited, comrades, was that of Germany, of
      Germany which was crushed by Napoleon, of Germany which
      witnessed shameful peace alternating with wars. I am asked: are
      we going to observe the treaties for a long time? If it were a
      three-year-old child who asked me: are you going to observe the
      treaty or not?—it would be both pleasant and
      naïve. But when grown-up Kamkov of the party of Left S.R.s
      asks it, I know a few adult workers and peasants will believe in
      the naïveté, but the majority of them will say:
      “Stop being hypocritical.” For the historical
      example I cited shows as clearly as can be that emancipatory
      wars of peoples that have lost an army—and that has
      happened more than once—of peoples crushed to the extent
      of complete loss of all their territory, crushed to such an
      extent that they have surrendered auxiliary corps to the
      conqueror for new annexationist campaigns—cannot be struck
      out of history, and can in no way be erased. If, however, the
      Left S.R. Kamkov, in rebutting me, said, as I saw in the
      verbatim report: “In Spain, however, there were
      revolutionary wars,” he thereby confirmed what I am
      saying, indeed he hit out at himself. Spain and Germany
      precisely confirm my example that to decide the question of the
      historical period of annexationist wars on the basis of
      “are you going to observe the treaty and, when you violate
      it, when will they catch you. . . ?” is indeed worthy of
      children. History tells us that every treaty results from a
      cessation of struggle and a change in the relationship of
      forces, that there have been peace treaties which were shattered
      in a few days, that there have been peace treaties which were
      shattered after a month, that there were periods of many years
      when Germany and Spain concluded peace and violated it after a
      few months, violated it several times, and in a series of wars
      the peoples learnt what waging war means. When Napoleon led
      German armies in order to strangle other peoples he taught them
      revolutionary war. Such was the course of history. 

     
      That is why I tell you, comrades, that I am deeply convinced
      that the decision adopted by nine-tenths of our Bolshevik
      group[11] will
      be approved by nine-tenths of all the politically-conscious
      working people of Russia—workers and
      peasants. (Applause.) 

     
      We have a means of checking whether I spoke the truth or whether
      I am mistaken, for you will go into the provinces and each one
      of you will report to the local Soviets, and everywhere there
      will be local decisions. I will say in conclusion: do not
      succumb to provocation. The bourgeoisie knows what it is doing,
      the bourgeoisie knows why it rejoiced in Pskov, rejoiced
      recently in Odessa, the bourgeoisie of the Vinnichenkos, of the
      Ukrainian Kerenskys, of Tsereteli and Chernov. It rejoiced
      because it understood perfectly what a tremendous mistake in
      diplomacy, in taking account of the situation, Soviet power had
      committed by trying to wage war with a fleeing, sick army. The
      bourgeoisie is trying to draw you into the pitfall of war. One
      has not only to attack but also to retreat. Every soldier knows
      that. Realise that the bourgeoisie is trying to draw both you
      and us into a trap. Realise that the whole bourgeoisie and all
      its voluntary and involuntary accomplices are setting this
      trap. You will be able to endure the most severe defeats and to
      maintain the most difficult positions, and by retreating to gain
      time. Time is on our side. The imperialists, having glutted
      themselves, will burst, and in their womb a new giant is
      developing; it is growing more slowly than we should like, but
      it is growing, it will come to our aid, and when we see that it
      is beginning to strike its first blow, we shall say: the time
      for retreat has come to an end, the era of the world offensive
      and the era of the victory of the world socialist revolution is
      beginning. (Stormy applause, continuing for a long
      time.) 

    
Pravda No. 49, March 16, 1918; Published according to
      the verbatim report, collated with the Pravda text
    

4
Resolution On Ratification Of The Brest Treaty

      The Congress confirms (ratifies) the peace treaty signed by our
      representatives at Brest-Litovsk on March 3, 1918. 

     
      The Congress recognises as correct the actions of the Central
      Executive Committee and the Council of People’s Commissars
      in deciding to conclude the present incredibly harsh, rapacious
      and humiliating peace in view of our having no army and of the
      extreme war weariness of the people, who in their distress have
      received no support from the bourgeoisie and bourgeois
      intelligentsia, but have seen that distress made use of for
      selfish class purposes. 

     
      The Congress also recognises the undoubted correctness of the
      actions of the peace delegation that refused to enter into a
      detailed discussion on the German peace terms, because those
      terms were imposed on us in the form of an obvious ultimatum and
      by undisguised force. 

     
      The Congress most insistently urges upon all workers, soldiers
      and peasants, all the working and oppressed masses, the main,
      immediate and most urgent task of the moment—the
      improvement of the discipline and self-discipline of the working
      people; the creation throughout the country of strong,
      well-founded organisations that cover, as far as possible, all
      production and distribution; a ruthless struggle against the
      chaos, disorganisation and economic ruin which are historically
      inevitable as the legacy of a most agonising war, but which are,
      at the same time, the main obstacle to the complete victory of
      socialism and the strengthening of the foundations of socialist
      society. 

     
      Today, after the October Revolution, after the overthrow of the
      political power of the bourgeoisie in Russia, after our
      denunciation and publication of all secret imperialist treaties,
      after the cancellation of the foreign loans, after the
      workers’ and peasants’ government has proposed a
      just peace to all peoples without exception, Russia, having
      escaped from the clutches of the imperialist war, has the right
      to announce that she is not a participant in the plunder and
      suppression of other countries. 

     
      The Russian Soviet Federative Republic, having unanimously
      condemned predatory wars, from now on deems it its right and its
      duty to defend the socialist fatherland against all possible
      attacks by any of the imperialist powers. 

     
      The Congress therefore deems it the unconditional duty of all
      working people to muster all forces to re-establish and improve
      the defence potential of our country, to re-establish its
      military strength on the basis of a socialist militia and the
      universal military training of all adolescents and adults of
      both sexes. 

     
      The Congress expresses its absolute confidence that Soviet
      power, which has valiantly fulfilled all the obligations of the
      international solidarity of the workers of all countries in
      their struggle for socialism against the yoke of capital, will
      in future do everything possible to promote the international
      socialist movement, to secure and shorten the road leading
      mankind to deliverance from the yoke of capital and from wage
      slavery, to the creation of a socialist society and to an
      enduring, just peace between the peoples. 

     
      The Congress is firmly convinced that the international
      workers’ revolution is not far away, that the full victory
      of the socialist proletariat is assured despite the fact that
      the imperialists of all countries do not hesitate to use the
      most brutal means for the suppression of the socialist
      movement. 

    
Pravda (Sotsial-Demokrat) No. 47, March 16, 1918

      Published according to the Pravda text, collated with the manuscript
    

Endnotes
1.
Extraordinary Fourth All-Russia Congress of Soviets,
      which was held to decide the question of the ratification of the
      Peace Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, was held in Moscow from March 14 to
      16, 1918. On March 13 this question was discussed by the Communist
      group of the Congress; Lenin spoke at the meeting (for the
      secretarial record of this speech see Lenin Miscellany
XI, pp. 68-70). By 453 votes to 36 the group approved the
      signing of the treaty. Not all the delegates had arrived at the
      time and the group was not present in full strength. 

    
      According to the minutes, the Congress was attended by 1,232
      delegates with a vote; they included 795 Bolsheviks, 283 Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, 25 Socialist-Revolutionaries of the
      Centre, 21 Mensheviks, and 11 Menshevik-Internationalists. The
      questions on the agenda were: ratification of the peace treaty;
      transfer of the capital; election of the All-Russia C.E.C. After
      a statement on the peace treaty by G. V. Chicherin,
      People’s Deputy Commissar for Foreign Affairs, Lenin gave
      the report on the main question on the agenda on behalf of the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee; the second report on
      behalf of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries against
      ratification of the treaty was given by B. D. Kamkov. 

    
      The Mensheviks, Right and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries,
      Maximalists, anarchists and others put up a solid front against
      ratification of the treaty. After a keen debate a signed vote
      was taken and the Congress adopted Lenin’s resolution in
      favour of ratification by an overwhelming majority. There were
      784 votes in favour, 261 against and 115 delegates abstained. In
      connection with the ratification of the Brest Treaty the Left
      S.R.s withdrew from the Council of People’s
      Commissars. The “Left Communists” refused to take
      part in the voting and stated in a special declaration that the
      conclusion of peace would undermine the country’s defence
      and the gains of the revolution. By refusing to vote, the
      “Left Communists” violated the decisions of the
      Seventh Party Congress and the Communist group of the
      Extraordinary Fourth All-Russia Congress of Soviets and the
      decision taken by the Central Committee, which met while the
      Congress was on, that there should be no action against the
      decisions of the Party.
 
    
      The Congress passed a resolution on the transfer of the capital
      of the Soviet state to Moscow and elected a Central Executive
      Committee consisting of 200 members.

    
      The decision of the Congress on ratification of the peace treaty
      was approved by the local Soviets, the Party organisations and
      the working people at numerous meetings and conferences held at
      the time.
 
    
2. The
      draft resolution was written by Lenin in reply to a message from
      Woodrow Wilson, President of the United States, in which he tried,
      by expressing sympathy he probably did not feel for the Russian
      people over the German occupation of the Baltic States,
      Byelorussia and the Ukraine, to influence the decision of the
      Congress and prevent Soviet Russia from ratifying the peace treaty
      with Germany. 
 
      The draft resolution was read out by Y. M. Sverdlov and approved by the Congress. 

    
3.      
      The reference is to the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary
      parties, which were represented in the Soviets of
      Workers’, Peasants’ and Soldiers’
      Deputies. The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, however,
      soon took the path of direct counter-revolution and on June 14,
      1918 the All-Russia C.E.C. passed a decision expelling the
      counter-revolutionary Socialist-Revolutionaries (the Rights and
      the Centre) and the Mensheviks from the All-Russia Central
      Executive Committee and the local Soviets. The decision was
      published on June 18 in Izvestia VTsIK No. 123. 
      
    
4.
      Lenin appears to connect the new turn in the development of the
      revolution with February 10, when Germany broke off peace
      negotiations in Brest-Litovsk. The German action was facilitated
      by L. D. Trotsky’s refusal to conclude peace on the terms
      proposed by the German imperialists. Lenin also mentions this
      date in the plan he made for his report to the Extraordinary
      Fourth All-Russia Congress of Soviets on ratification of the
      Brest Treaty. In another document, the plan for his speech at a
      meeting of the Communist group of the Congress of Soviets, Lenin
      defines the turning point in the development of the revolution
      as February 17. The German offensive along the whole front began
      on February 18, 1918. 

    
5.
      Lenin has in mind the speech at the meeting of the Petrograd
      Soviet on September 21 (October 4), 1917 by Dubasov, an army
      officer who had returned from the front. Describing the mood of
      the soldiers, Dubasov stated that they wanted only one thing, an
      end to the war, and that they would not go on fighting. 

    
6.
      The reference is to the Treaty between the Russian and Finnish
      Socialist Republics, the first treaty in history between
      socialist countries. In the middle of February 1918, the
      revolutionary government of the Finnish republic proposed a
      treaty of friendship to the Soviet Government. The
      Russia-Finland Co-ordinative Commission was formed to draw up
      the treaty and its draft was discussed at several meetings of
      the Council of People’s Commissars, Lenin making several
      amendments to it. The treaty was signed on March 1 by a special
      commission headed by Lenin. It was endorsed by the Council of
      People’s Commissars and published on March 10, 1918 in
      Izvestia VTsIK No. 45 (see Decrees of the Soviet
      Government, Russ. ed., Vol: 1, 1957, pp. 503-10). Based on
      recognition of the state sovereignty of Finland, the treaty
      provided evidence of the Soviet Government’s consistent
      adherence to the principle of the right of nations to
      self-determination. 

    7.
      Lenin is referring to the second report, by B. D. Kamkov, on the
      question of ratification of the peace treaty. 

    8.
      In his speech at the Congress the Menshevik L. Martov claimed
      that the contents of the treaty were not known to the Congress
      delegates and compared them to peasants at a volost gathering,
      forced by the local authorities to sign papers without knowing
      what was in them. 
 
    9.
      Lenin is referring to the appeal of the Petrograd Soviet of
      Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies “To the
      Peoples of the Whole World”,  which was published in the
      leading newspapers on March 15 (28), 1917. For an appraisal of
      this half-hearted Menshevik-Socialist-Revolutionary appeal see
      Lenin’s speech on war, delivered June 9 (22) 1917 at the
      First All-Russia Congress of Soviets (present edition, Vol. 25,
      pp. 29-42).   

    10.
      The Appeal to the Soldiers of All the Belligerent Countries was
      the first appeal written by Lenin on behalf of the Central
      Committee of the Bolshevik Party, the St. Petersburg Committee
      and the editorial board of Pravda (see present edition,
      Vol. 24, pp. 186-88).  

    11.
      When the resolution on ratification of the Peace Treaty of
      Brest-Litovsk was put to the vote at the Communist group of the
      Extraordinary Fourth All-Russia Congress of Soviets on March 13,
      1918, 453 votes were cast in favour of ratification and 36
      against. 
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Comment on the Behaviour of the
“Left Communists”






Comment on the Behaviour of the "Left Communists"








V. I. Lenin
 Comment on the Behaviour of the “Left Communists”


Written:Second half of March, 1918
First Published: First published in 1929 in Lenin Miscellany 
XI  Published according to the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pp. 202.
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish 
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala

Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive March, 2002


Since the conclusion of the Brest peace, some comrades who call themselves “Left Communists” have formed an “Opposition” in the Party, and in consequence of this their activity is slipping further and further towards a completely disloyal and impermissible violation of Party discipline. 

 
   Comrade Bukharin has refused to accept the post of member of the C.C. to which he was appointed by the Party Congress. 


   Comrades Smirnov, Obolensky and Yakovleva have resigned from their posts as People’s Commissars and as business manager of the Supreme Economic Council. 


      These are absolutely disloyal, uncomradely actions that violate
      Party discipline, and such behaviour was and remains a step
      towards a split on the part of the above-mentioned
      comrades. . . . [Here the manuscript breaks
      off.— Editor]



Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Original
version of the Article The Immediate Tasks of the
  Soviet Government











“Left-Wing” Childishness



V. I. Lenin
The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government[1]

Written:
March-April 1918
First Published: Published on April 28, 1918
in Pravda No. 83 and Izvestia VTsIK No.85;
Published according to the text of the pamphlet: N. Lenin, The
Immediate Task of the Soviet Government 2nd ed., Moscow, 1918,
collated with the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works,
4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages
235-77
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert
Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
& Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin
Internet Archive March, 2002
 

1. The International Position of the
Soviet Government and the Fundamental Tasks of the Socialist Revolution
2. The
General Slogan of the Moment .
3. The New Phase of the Struggle
Against the Bourgeoisie
4. The Significance of the Struggle
for Country-wide Accounting and Control
5. Raising the Productivity of Labour
6. The Organisation of Competition
7. “Harmonious Organisation” and
Dictatorship .
8. The Development of Soviet
Organisation .
9. Conclusion


10.Endnotes


The International Position Of The Russian Soviet Republic And The
Fundamental Tasks Of The Socialist Revolution


Thanks to the peace which has been achieved—despite its extremely
onerous character and extreme instability—the Russian Soviet Republic
has gained an opportunity to concentrate its efforts for a while on the
most important and most difficult aspect of the socialist revolution,
namely, the task of organisation.
This task was clearly and definitely set before all the working and
oppressed people in the fourth paragraph (Part 4) of the resolution
adopted at the Extraordinary Congress
of Soviets in Moscow on March 15, 1918, in that paragraph (or part)
which speaks of the self-discipline of the working people and of the
ruthless struggle against chaos and disorganisation. [See
also Resolution On Ratification
Of The
Brest Treaty—Editor.]
Of course, the peace achieved by the Russian Soviet Republic is
unstable not because she is now thinking of resuming military
operations; apart from bourgeois counter-revolutionaries and their
henchmen (the Mensheviks and others), no sane politician thinks of
doing that. The instability of the peace is due to the fact that in the
imperialist states bordering on Russia to the West and the East, which
command enormous military forces, the military party, tempted by
Russia’s momentary weakness and egged on by capitalists, who hate
socialism and are eager for plunder, may gain the upper hand at any
moment.
Under these circumstances the only real, not paper, guarantee of
peace we have is the antagonism among the imperialist powers, which has
reached extreme limits, and which is apparent on the one hand in the
resumption of the imperialist butchery of the peoples in the West, and
on the other hand in the extreme intensification of imperialist rivalry
between Japan and America for supremacy in the Pacific and on the
Pacific coast.
It goes without saying that with such an unreliable guard for
protection, our Soviet Socialist Republic is in an extremely unstable
and certainly critical international position. All our efforts must be
exerted to the very utmost to make use of the respite given us by the
combination of circumstances so that we can heal the very severe wounds
inflicted by
the war upon the entire social organism of Russia and bring about an
economic revival, without which a real increase in our country’s
defence potential is inconceivable.
It also goes without saying that we shall be able to render
effective assistance to the socialist revolution in the West which has
been delayed for a number of reasons, only to the extent that we are
able to fulfil the task of organisation confronting us.
A fundamental condition for the successful accomplishment of the
primary task of organisation confronting us is that the people’s
political leaders, i.e., the members of the Russian Communist Party
(Bolsheviks), and following them all the class-conscious
representatives of the mass of the working people, shall fully
appreciate the radical distinction in this respect between previous
bourgeois revolutions and the present socialist revolution.
In bourgeois revolutions, the principal task of the mass of working
people was to fulfil the negative or destructive work of abolishing
feudalism, monarchy and medievalism. The positive or constructive work
of organising the new society was carried out by the property-owning
bourgeois minority of the population. And the latter carried out this
task with relative ease, despite the resistance of the workers and the
poor peasants, not only because the resistance of the people exploited
by capital was then extremely weak, since they were scattered and
uneducated, but also because the chief organising force of anarchically
built capitalist society is the spontaneously growing and expanding
national and international market.
In every socialist revolution, however—and consequently in the
socialist revolution in Russia which we began on October 25, 1917—the
principal task of the proletariat, and of the poor peasants which it
leads, is the positive or constructive work of setting up an extremely
intricate and delicate system of new organisational relationships
extending to the planned production and distribution of the goods
required for the existence of tens of millions of people. Such a
revolution can be successfully carried out only if the majority of the
population, and primarily the majority of the working people, engage in
independent creative work as makers of history. Only if the proletariat
and the poor peasants display sufficient class-consciousness, devotion
to principle, self-sacrifice and perseverance, will the victory of the
socialist revolution be assured. By creating a new, Soviet type of
state, which gives the working and oppressed people the chance to take
an active part in the independent building up of a new society, we
solved only a small part of this difficult problem . The principal
difficulty lies in the economic sphere, namely, the introduction of the
strictest and universal accounting and control of the production and
distribution of goods, raising the productivity of labour and socialising
production in practice.
The development of the Bolshevik Party, which today is the governing
party in Russia, very strikingly indicates the nature of the
turning-point in history we have now reached, which is the peculiar
feature of the present political situation, and which calls for a new
orientation of Soviet power, i.e., for a new presentation of new tasks.
The first task of every party of the future is to convince, the
majority of the people that its programme and tactics are correct. This
task stood in the forefront both in tsarist times and in the period of
the Chernovs’ and Tseretelis’ policy of compromise with the Kerenskys
and Kishkins. This task has now been fulfilled in the main, for, as the
recent Congress of Soviets in Moscow incontrovertibly proved, the
majority of the workers and peasants of Russia are obviously on the
side of the Bolsheviks; but of course, it is far from being completely
fulfilled (and it can never be completely fulfilled).
The second task that confronted our Party was to capture political
power and to suppress the resistance of the exploiters. This task has
not been completely fulfilled either, and it cannot be ignored because
the monarchists and Constitutional-Democrats on the one hand, and their
henchmen and hangers-on, the Mensheviks and Right
Socialist-Revolutionaries, on the other, are continuing their efforts
to unite for the purpose of overthrowing Soviet power. In the main,
however, the task of suppressing the resistance of the exploiters was
fulfilled in the period from October 25, 1917, to (approximately)
February 1918, or to the surrender of Bogayevsky.[2]
A third task is now coming to the fore as the immediate task and one
which constitutes the peculiar feature of the present situation,
namely, the task of organising administration of Russia. Of
course, we advanced and tackled this task on the very day following
October 25, 1917. Up to now, however, since the resistance of the
exploiters still took the form of open civil war, up to now the task of
administration could not become the main, the central
task.
Now it has become the main and central task. We, the Bolshevik
Party, have convinced Russia. We have won Russia from the
rich for the poor, from the exploiters for the working people. Now we
must administer Russia. And the whole peculiarity of the
present situation, the whole difficulty, lies in understanding the
specific features of the transition from the principal task of
convincing the peopIe and of suppressing the exploiters by armed force
to the principal task of administration.
For the first time in human history a socialist party has managed to
complete in the main the conquest of power and the suppression of the
exploiters, and has managed to approach directly the task of administration.
We must prove worthy executors of this most difficult (and most
gratifying) task of the socialist revolution. We must fully realise
that in order to administer successfully, besides being able
to convince people, besides being able to win a civil war, we must be
able to do practical organisational work. This is the most
difficult task, because it is a matter of organising in a new way the
most deep-rooted, the economic, foundations of life of scores of
millions of people. And it is the most gratifying task, because only after
it has been fulfilled (in the principal and main outlines) will it be
possible to say that Russia has become not only a Soviet, but
also a socialist, republic.

The General Slogan Of The Moment
The objective situation reviewed above, which has been created by
the extremely onerous and unstable peace, the terrible state of ruin,
the unemployment and famine we inherited from the war and the rule of
the bourgeoisie (represented by Kerensky and the Mensheviks and Right
Socialist-Revolutionaries who supported him), all this has inevitably
caused extreme weariness and even exhaustion of wide sections of the
working people. These people insistently demand—and cannot but demand—a
respite. The task of the day is to restore the productive forces
destroyed by the war and by bourgeois rule; to heal the wounds
inflicted by the war, by the defeat in the war, by profiteering and the
attempts of the bourgeoisie to restore the overthrown rule of the
exploiters; to achieve economic revival; to provide reliable protection
of elementary order. It may sound paradoxical, but in fact, considering
the objective conditions indicated above, it is absolutely certain that
at the present moment the Soviet system can secure Russia’s transition
to socialism only if these very elementary, extremely elementary
problems of maintaining public life are practically solved in spite of
the resistance of the bourgeoisie, the Mensheviks and the Right
Socialist-Revolutionaries. In view of the specific features of the
present situation, and in view of the existence of Soviet power with
its land socialisation law, workers’ control law, etc., the practical
solution of these extremely elementary problems and the overcoming of
the organisational difficulties of the first stages of progress toward
socialism are now two aspects of the same picture.
Keep regular and honest accounts of money, manage economically, do
not be lazy, do not steal, observe the strictest labour discipline—it
is these slogans, justly scorned by the revolutionary proletariat when
the bourgeoisie used them to conceal its rule as an exploiting class,
that are now, since the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, becoming the
immediate and the principal slogans of the moment. On the one hand, the
practical application of these slogans by the mass of working
people is the sole condition for the salvation of a country
which has been tortured almost to death by the imperialist war and by
the imperialist robbers (headed by Kerensky); on the other hand, the
practical application of these slogans by the Soviet State,
by its methods, on the basis of its laws, is a
necessary and sufficient condition for the final victory of
socialism. This is precisely what those who contemptuously brush aside
the idea of putting such “hackneyed” and “trivial” slogans in the
forefront fail to understand. In a small-peasant country, which
overthrew tsarism only a year ago, and which liberated itself from the
Kerenskys less than six months ago, there has naturally remained not a
little of spontaneous anarchy, intensified by the brutality and
savagery that accompany every protracted and reactionary war, and there
has arisen a good deal of despair and aimless bitterness. And if we add
to this the provocative policy of the lackeys of the bourgeoisie (the
Mensheviks, the Right Socialist-Revolulionaries, etc.) it will become
perfectly clear what prolonged and persistent efforts must be exerted
by the best and the most class-conscious workers and peasants in order
to bring about a complete change in the mood of the people and to bring
them on to the proper path of steady and disciplined labour. Only such
a transition brought about by the mass of the poor (the proletarians
and semi-proletarians) can consummate the victory over the bourgeoisie
and particularly over the peasant bourgeoisie, more stubborn and
numerous.

The New Phase Of The 
Struggle Against The Bourgeoisie
The bourgeoisie in our country has been conquered, but it has not
yet been uprooted, not yet destroyed, and not even utterly broken. That
is why we are faced with a new and higher form of struggle against the
bourgeoisie, the transition from the very simple task of further
expropriating the capitalists to the much more complicated and
difficult task of creating conditions in which it will be impossible
for the bourgeoisie to exist, or for a new bourgeoisie to arise. Clearly, this task is
immeasurably more significant than the previous one; and until it is
fulfilled there will be no socialism.
If we measure our revolution by the scale of West-European
revolutions we shall find that at the present moment we are
approximately at the level reached in 1793 and 1871. We can be
legitimately proud of having risen to this level, and of having
certainly, in one respect, advanced somewhat further, namely: we have
decreed and introduced through out Russia the highest type of
state—Soviet power. Under no circumstances, however, can we rest
content with what we have achieved, because we have only just started
the transition to socialism, we have not yet done the
decisive thing in this respect.
The decisive thing is the organisation of the strictest and
country-wide accounting and control of production and distribution of
goods. And yet, we have not yet introduced accounting and
control in those enterprises and in those branches and fields of
economy which we have taken away from the bourgeoisie; and without this
there can be no thought of achieving the second and equally essential
material condition for introducing socialism, namely, raising the
productivity of labour on a national scale.
That is why the present task could not be defined by the simple
formula: continue the offensive against capital. Although we have
certainly not finished off capital and although it is certainly
necessary to continue the offensive against this enemy of the working
people, such a formula would be inexact, would not be concrete, would
not take into account the peculiarity of the present
situation in which, in order to go on advancing successfully in
the future, we must “suspend” our offensive now.
This can be explained by comparing our position in the war against
capital with the position of a victorious army that has captured, say,
a half or two-thirds of the enemy’s territory and is compelled to halt
in order to muster its forces, to replenish its supplies of munitions,
repair and reinforce the lines of communication, build new storehouses,
bring up new reserves, etc. To suspend the offensive of a victorious
army under such conditions is necessary precisely in order to gain the
rest of the enemy’s territory, i.e., in order to achieve complete
victory. Those who have failed to understand that the objective state
of affairs at the present moment dictates to us precisely such a
“suspension” of the offensive against capital have failed to understand
anything at all about the present political situation.
It goes without saying that we can speak about the “suspension” of
the offensive against capital only in quotation marks, i.e., only
metaphorically. In ordinary war, a general order can be issued to stop
the offensive, the advance can actually be stopped. In the war against
capital, however, the advance cannot be stopped, and there can be no
thought of our abandoning the further expropriation of capital. What we
are discussing is the shifting of the centre of gravity of
our economic and political work. Up to now measures for the direct
expropriation of the expropriators were in the forefront. Now
the organisation of accounting and control in those enterprises in
which the capitalists have already been expropriated, and in all other
enterprises, advances to the forefront.
If we decided to continue to expropriate capital at the same rate at
which we have been doing it up to now, we should certainly suffer
defeat, because our work of organising proletarian accounting and
control has obviously— obviously to every thinking person—fallen
behind the work of directly “expropriating the
expropriators”. If we now concentrate all our efforts on the
organisation of accounting and control, we shall be able to solve this
problem, we shall be able to make up for lost time, we shall completely
win our “campaign” against capital.
But is not the admission that we must make up for lost time
tantamount to admission of some kind of an error? Not in the least.
Take another military example. If it is possible to defeat and push
back the enemy merely with detachments of light cavalry, it should be
done. But if this can be done successfully only up to a certain point,
then it is quite conceivable that when this point has been reached, it
will be necessary to bring up heavy artillery. By admitting that it is
now necessary to make up for lost time in bringing up heavy artillery,
we do not admit that the successful cavalry attack was a mistake.
Frequently, the lackeys of the bourgeoisie reproached us for having
launched a “Red Guard” attack on capital. The reproach is absurd and is
worthy only of the lackeys of the money-bags, because at one time
the “Red Guard” attack on capital was absolutely dictated by
circumstances. Firstly, at that time capital put up military
resistance through the medium of Kerensky and Krasnov, Savinkov and
Gotz (Gegechkori is putting up such resistance even now), Dutov and
Bogayevsky. Military resistance cannot be broken except by military
means, and the Red Guards fought in the noble and supreme historical
cause of liberating the working and exploited people from the yoke of
the exploiters.
Secondly, we could not at that time put methods of administration in
the forefront in place of methods of suppression, because the art of
administration is not innate, but is acquired by experience. At that
time we lacked this experience; now we have it. Thirdly, at that time
we could not have specialists in the various fields of knowledge and
technology at our disposal because those specialists were either
fighting in the ranks of the Bogayevskys, or were still able to put up
systematic and stubborn passive resistance by way of sabotage.
Now we have broken the sabotage. The “Red Guard” attack on capital was
successful, was victorious, because we broke capital’s military
resistance and its resistance by sabotage.
Does that mean that a “Red Guard” attack on capital is always
appropriate, under all circumstances, that we have no
other means of fighting capital? It would be childish to think so. We
achieved victory with the aid of light cavalry, but we also have heavy
artillery. We achieved victory by methods of suppression; we shall be
able to achieve victory also by methods of administration. We must know
how to change our methods of fighting the enemy to suit changes in the
situation. We shall not for a moment renounce “Red Guard” suppression
of the Savinkovs and Gegechkoris and all other landowner and bourgeois
counter-revolutionaries. We shall not be so foolish, however, as to put
“Red Guard” methods in the forefront at a time when the period in which
Red Guard attacks were necessary has, in the main, drawn to a close
(and to a victorious close), and when the period of utilising bourgeois
specialists by the proletarian state power for the purpose of
reploughing the soil in order to prevent the growth of any bourgeoisie
whatever is knocking at the door.
This is a peculiar epoch, or rather stage of development, and in
order to defeat capital completely, we must be able to adapt the forms
of our struggle to the peculiar conditions of this stage.
Without the guidance of experts in the various fields of knowledge,
technology and experience, the transition to socialism will be
impossible, because socialism calls for a conscious mass advance to
greater productivity of labour compared with capitalism, and on the
basis achieved by capitalism. Socialism must achieve this advance in
its own way, by its own methods—or, to put it more concretely, by
Soviet methods. And the specialists, because of the whole social
environment which made them specialists, are, in the main, inevitably
bourgeois. Had our proletariat, after capturing power, quickly solved
the problem of accounting, control and organisation on a national scale
(which was impossible owing to the war and Russia’s backwardness), then
we, after breaking the sabotage, would also have completely
subordinated these bourgeois experts to ourselves by means of universal
accounting and control. Owing to the considerable “delay” in
introducing accounting and control generally, we, although we have
managed to conquer sabotage, have not yet created the
conditions which would place the bourgeois specialists at our disposal.
The mass of saboteurs are “going to work”, but the best organisers and
the top experts can be utilised by the state either in the old way, in
the bourgeois way (i.e., for high salaries), or in the new way, in the
proletarian way (i.e., creating the conditions of national accounting
and control from below, which would inevitably and of itself
subordinate the experts and enlist them for our work).
Now we have to resort to the old bourgeois method and to agree to
pay a very high price for the “services” of the top bourgeois experts.
All those who are familiar with the subject appreciate this, but not
all ponder over the significance of this measure being adopted by the
proletarian state. Clearly, this measure is a compromise, a departure
from the principles of the Paris Commune and of every proletarian
power, which call for the reduction of all salaries to the level of the
wages of the average worker, which urge that careerism be fought not
merely in words, but in deeds.
Moreover, it is clear that this measure not only implies the
cessation—in a certain field and to a certain degree—of the offensive
against capital (for capital is not a sum of money, but a definite
social relation); it is also a step backward on the part of
our socialist Soviet state power, which
from the very outset proclaimed and pursued the policy of reducing high
salaries to the level of the wages of the average worker.[3]
Of course, the lackeys of the bourgeoisie, particularly the small
fry, such as the Mensheviks, the Novaya Zhizn people and the
Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, will giggle over our confession that
we are taking a step backward. But we need not mind their giggling. We
must study the specific features of the extremely difficult and new
path to socialism without concealing our mistakes and weaknesses, and
try to be prompt in doing what has been left undone. To conceal from
the people the fact that the enlistment of bourgeois experts by means
of extremely high salaries is a retreat from the principles of the
Paris Commune would be sinking to the level of bourgeois politicians
and deceiving the people. Frankly explaining how and why we took this
step backward, and then publicly discussing what means are available
for making up for lost time, means educating the people and learning
from experience, learning together with the people how to build
socialism. There is hardly a single victorious military campaign in
history in which the victor did not commit certain mistakes, suffer
partial reverses, temporarily yield something and in some places
retreat. The “campaign” which we have undertaken against capitalism is
a million times more difficult than the most difficult military
campaign, and it would be silly and disgraceful to give way to
despondency because of a particular and partial retreat.
We shall now discuss the question from the practical point of view.
Let us assume that the Russian Soviet Republic requires one thousand
first-class scientists and experts in various fields of knowledge,
technology and practical experience to direct the labour of the people
towards securing the speediest possible economic revival. Let us assume
also that we shall have to pay these “stars of the first magnitude"—of
course the majority of those who shout loudest about the corruption of
the workers are themselves utterly corrupted by bourgeois morals—25,000
rubles per annum each. Let us assume that this sum (25,000,000 rubles)
will have to be doubled (assuming that we have to pay bonuses for
particularly successful and rapid fulfilment of the most important
organisational and technical tasks), or even quadrupled (assuming that
we have to enlist several hundred foreign specialists, who are more
demanding). The question is, would the annual expenditure of fifty or a
hundred million rubles by the Soviet Republic for the purpose of
reorganising the labour of the people on modern scientific and
technological lines be excessive or too heavy? Of course not. The
overwhelming majority of the class-conscious workers and peasants will
approve of this expenditure because they know from practical experience
that our backwardness causes us to lose thousands of millions, and that
we have not yet reached that degree of organisation,
accounting and control which would induce all the “stars” of the
bourgeois intelligentsia to participate voluntarily in our
work.
It goes without saying that this question has another side to it.
The corrupting influence of high salaries—both upon the Soviet
authorities (especially since the revolution occurred so rapidly that
it was impossible to prevent a certain number of adventurers and rogues
from getting into positions of authority, and they, together with a
number of inept or dishonest commissars, would not be averse to
becoming “star” embezzlers of state funds) and upon the mass of the
workers—is indisputable. Every thinking and honest worker and poor
peasant, however, will agree with us, will admit, that we cannot
immediately rid ourselves of the evil legacy of capitalism, and that we
can liberate the Soviet Republic from the duty of paying an annual

“tribute” of fifty million or one hundred million rubles (a tribute for
our own-backwardness in organising country-wide accounting
and control from below ) only by organising ourselves, by
tightening up discipline in our own ranks, by purging our ranks of all
those who are “preserving the legacy of capitalism”, who “follow the
traditions of capitalism”, i.e., of idlers, parasites and embezzlers of
statefunds (now all the land, all the factories and all the railways
are the “state funds” of the Soviet Republic). If the class-conscious
advanced workers and poor peasants manage with the aid of the Soviet
institutions to organise, become disciplined, pull themselves together,
create powerful labour discipline in the course of one year, then in a
year’s time we shall throw off this “tribute”, which can be reduced
even before that . . . in exact proportion to the successes we achieve
in our workers’ and peasants’ labour discipline and organisation. The
sooner we ourselves, workers and peasants, learn the best labour
discipline and the most modern technique of labour, using the bourgeois
experts to teach us, the sooner we shall liberate ourselves from any

“tribute” to these specialists.
Our work of organising country-wide accounting and control of
production and distribution under the supervision of the proletariat
has lagged very much behind our work of directly expropriating the
expropriators. This proposition is of fundamental importance for
understanding the specific features of the present situation and the
tasks of the Soviet government that follow from it. The centre of
gravity of our struggle against the bourgeoisie is shifting to the
organisation of such accounting and control. Only with this as our
starting-point will it be possible to determine correctly the immediate
tasks of economic and financial policy in the sphere of nationalisation
of the banks, monopolisation of foreign trade, the state control of
money circulation, the introduction of a property and income tax
satisfactory from the proletarian point of view, and the introduction
of compulsory labour service.
We have been lagging very far behind in introducing socialist
reforms in these spheres (very, very important spheres), and this is
because accounting and control are insufficiently organised in general.
It goes without saying that this is one of the most difficult tasks,
and in view of the ruin caused by the war, it can be fulfilled only
over a long period of time; but we must not forget that it is precisely
here that the bourgeoisie—and particularly the numerous petty and
peasant bourgeoisie—are putting up the most serious fight, disrupting
the control that is already being organised, disrupting the grain
monopoly, for example, and gaining positions for profiteering and
speculative trade. We have far from adequately carried out the things
we have decreed, and the principal task of the moment is to concentrate
all efforts on the businesslike, practical realisation of the
principles of the reforms which have already become law (but not yet
reality).
In order to proceed with the nationalisation of the banks and to go
on steadfastly towards transforming the banks into nodal points of
public accounting under socialism, we must first of all, and above all,
achieve real success in increasing the number of branches of the
People’s Bank, in attracting deposits, in simplifying the paying in and
withdrawal of deposits by the public, in abolishing queues, in catching
and shooting bribe-takers and rogues, etc. At first we must
really carry out the simplest things, properly organise what is
available, and then prepare for the more intricate things.
Consolidate and improve the state monopolies (in grain, leather,
etc.) which have already been introduced, and by doing so prepare for
the state monopoly of foreign trade. Without this monopoly we shall not
be able to “free ourselves” from foreign capital by paying “tribute”.[4] And
the possibility of building up socialism depends entirely upon whether
we shall be able, by paying a certain tribute to foreign capital during
a certain transitional period, to safeguard our internal economic
independence.
We are also lagging very far behind in regard to the collection of
taxes generally, and of the property and income tax in particular. The
imposing of indemnities upon the bourgeoisie—a measure which in
principle is absolutely permissible and deserves proletarian
approval—shows that in this respect we are still nearer to the methods
of warfare (to win Russia from the rich for the poor) than to the
methods of administration. In order to become stronger, however, and in
order to be able to stand firmer on our feet, we must adopt the latter
methods, we must substitute for the indemnities imposed upon the
bourgeoisie the constant and regular collection of a property and
income tax, which will bring a greater return to the
proletarian state, and which calls for better organisation on our part
and better accounting and control.[5]
The fact that we are late in introducing compulsory labour service
also shows that the work that is coming to the fore at the present time
is precisely the preparatory organisational work that, on the one hand,
will finally consolidate our gains and that, on the other, is necessary
in order to prepare for the operation of “surrounding” capital and
compelling it to “surrender”. We ought to begin introducing compulsory
labour service immediately, but we must do so very gradually and
circumspectly, testing every step by practical experience, and, of
course, taking the first step by introducing compulsory labour service for
the rich. The introduction of work and consumers’ budget books for
every bourgeois, including every rural bourgeois, would be an important
step towards completely “surrounding” the enemy and towards the
creation of a truly popular accounting and control of the production
and distribution of goods.

The Significance Of The Struggle

For Country-Wide Accounting And Control
The state, which for centuries has been an organ for oppression and
robbery of the people, has left us a legacy of the people’s supreme
hatred and suspicion of everything that is connected with the state. It
is very difficult to overcome this, and only a Soviet government can do
it. Even a Soviet government, however, will require plenty of time and
enormous perseverance to accomplish it. This “legacy” is especially
apparent in the problem of accounting and control—the fundamental
problem facing the socialist revolution on the morrow of the overthrow
of the bourgeoisie. A certain amount of time will inevitably pass
before the people, who feel free for the first time now that the
landowners and the bourgeoisie have been overthrown, will
understand—not from books, but from their own, Soviet
experience—will understand and feel that without
comprehensive state accounting and control of the production and
distribution of goods, the power of the working people, the freedom of
the working people, cannot be maintained, and that a return
to the yoke of capitalism is inevitable.
All the habits and traditions of the bourgeoisie, and of the petty
bourgeoisie in particular, also oppose state control, and
uphold the inviolability of “sacred private property”, of “sacred”
private enterprise. It is now particularly clear to us how correct is
the Marxist thesis that anarchism and anarcho-syndicalism are bourgeois
trends, how irreconcilably opposed they are to socialism, proletarian
dictatorship and communism. The fight to instill into the people’s
minds the idea of Soviet state control and accounting, and to
carry out this idea in practice; the fight to break with the rotten
past, which taught the people to regard the procurement of bread and
clothes as a “private” affair, and buying and selling as a transaction

“which concerns only myself"—is a great fight of world-historic
significance, a fight between socialist consciousness and
bourgeois-anarchist spontaneity.
We have introduced workers’ control as a law, but this law is only
just beginning to operate and is only just beginning to penetrate the
minds of broad sections of the proletariat. In our agitation we do not
sufficiently explain that lack of accounting and control in the
production and distribution of goods means the death of the rudiments
of socialism, means the embezzlement of state funds (for all property
belongs to the state and the state is the Soviet state in which power
belongs to the majority of the working people). We do not sufficiently
explain that carelessness in accounting and control is downright aiding
and abetting the German and the Russian Kornilovs, who can overthrow
the power of the working people only if we fail to cope with
the task of accounting and control, and who, with the aid of the whole
of the rural bourgeoisie, with the aid of the Constitutional-Democrats,
the Mensheviks and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, are “watching”
us and waiting for an opportune moment to attack us. And the advanced
workers and peasants do not think and speak about this sufficiently.
Until workers’ control has become a fact, until the advanced workers
have organised and carried out a victorious and ruthless crusade
against the violators of this control, or against those who are
careless in matters of control, it will be impossible to pass from the
first step (from workers’ control) to the second step towards
socialism, i.e., to pass on to workers’ regulation of production.
The socialist state can arise only as a network of producers’ and
consumers’ communes, which conscientiously keep account of their
production and consumption, economise on labour, and steadily raise the
productivity of labour, thus making it possible to reduce the working
day to seven, six and even fewer hours. Nothing will be achieved unless
the strictest, country-wide, comprehensive accounting and control of grain
and the production of grain (and later of all other essential
goods) are set going. Capitalism left us a legacy of mass organisations
which can facilitate our transition to the mass accounting and control
of the distribution of goods, namely, the consumers’ co-operative
societies. In Russia these societies are not so well developed as in
the advanced countries, nevertheless, they have over ten million
members. The Decree on Consumers’ Co-operative Societies,[6] issued the
other day, is an extremely significant phenomenon, which strikingly
illustrates the peculiar position and the specific tasks of the Soviet
Socialist Republic at the present moment.
The decree is an agreement with the bourgeois co-operative societies
and the workers’ co-operative societies which still adhere to the
bourgeois point of view. It is an agreement, or compromise, firstly
because the representatives of the above-mentioned institutions not
only took part in discussing the decree, but actually had a decisive
say in the matter, for the parts of the decree which were strongly
opposed by these institutions were dropped. Secondly, the essence of
the compromise is that the Soviet government has abandoned the
principle of admission of new members to co-operative societies without
entrance fees (which is the only consistently proletarian principle);
it has also abandoned the idea of uniting the whole population of a
given locality in a single co-operative society. Contrary to
this principle, which is the only socialist principle and which
corresponds to the task of abolishing classes, the “working-class
co-operative societies” (which in this case call themselves “class”
societies only because they subordinate themselves to the class
interests of the bourgeoisie) were given the right to continue to
exist. Finally, the Soviet government’s proposal to expel the
bourgeoisie entirely from the boards of the co-operative societies was
also considerably modified, and only owners of private capitalist
trading and industrial enterprises were forbidden to serve on the
boards.
Had the proletariat, acting through the Soviet government, managed
to organise accounting and control on a national scale, or at least
laid the foundation for such control, it would not have been necessary
to make such compromises. Through the food departments of the Soviets,
through the supply organisations under the Soviets we should have
organised the population into a single co-operative society under
proletarian management. We should have done this without the assistance
of the bourgeois co-operative societies, without making any concession
to the purely bourgeois principle which prompts the workers’
co-operative societies to remain workers’ societies side by side

with bourgeois societies, instead of subordinating these
bourgeois co-operative societies entirely to themselves, merging the
two together and taking the entire management of the society
and the supervision of the consumption of the rich in their own
hands.
In concluding such an
agreement with the bourgeois co-operative societies, the Soviet
government concretely defined its tactical aims and its peculiar
methods of action in the present stage of development as follows: by
directing the bourgeois elements, utilising them, making certain
partial concessions to them, we create the conditions for further
progress that will be slower than we at first anticipated, but surer,
with the base and lines of communication better secured and with the
positions which have been won better consolidated. The Soviets can (and
should ) now gauge their successes in the field of socialist
construction, among other things, by extremely clear, simple and
practical standards, namely, in how many communities (communes or
villages, or blocks of houses, etc.) co-operative societies have been
organised, and to what extent their development has reached the point
of embracing the whole population .

Raising the Productivity of Labour
In every socialist revolution, after the proletariat has solved the
problem of capturing power, and to the extent that the task of
expropriating the expropriators and suppressing their resistance has
been carried out in the main, there necessarily comes to the forefront
the fundamental task of creating a social system superior to
capitalism, namely, raising the productivity of labour, and in this
connection (and for this purpose) securing better organisation of
labour. Our Soviet state is precisely in the position where, thanks to
the victories over the exploiters—from Kerensky to Kornilov—it is able
to approach this task directly, to tackle it in earnest. And here it
becomes immediately clear that while it is possible to take over the
central government in a few days, while it is possible to suppress the
military resistance (and sabotage) of the exploiters even in different
parts of a great country in a few weeks, the capital solution of the
problem of raising the productivity of labour requires, at all events
(particularly after a most terrible and devastating war), several
years. The protracted nature of the work is certainly dictated by
objective circumstances.
The raising of the productivity of labour first of all requires that
the material basis of large-scale industry shall be assured, namely,
the development of the production of fuel, iron, the engineering and
chemical industries. The Russian Soviet Republic enjoys the favourable
position of having at its command, even after the Brest peace, enormous
reserves of ore (in the Urals), fuel in Western Siberia (coal), in the
Caucasus and the South-East (oil), in Central Russia (peat), enormous
timber reserves, water power, raw materials for the chemical industry
(Karabugaz), etc. The development of these natural resources by methods
of modern technology will provide the basis for the unprecedented
progress of the productive forces.
Another condition for raising the productivity of labour is,
firstly, the raising of the educational and cultural level of the mass
of the population. This is now taking place extremely rapidly, a fact
which those who are blinded by bourgeois routine are unable to see;
they are unable to understand what an urge towards enlightenment and
initiative is now developing among the “lower ranks” of the people
thanks to the Soviet form of organisation. Secondly, a condition for
economic revival is the raising of the working people’s discipline,
their skill, the effectiveness, the intensity of labour and its better
organisation.
In this respect the situation is particularly bad and even hopeless
if we are to believe those who have allowed themselves to be
intimidated by the bourgeoisie or by those who are serving the
bourgeoisie for their own ends. These people do not understand that
there has not been, nor could there be, a revolution in which the
supporters of the old system did not raise a howl about chaos, anarchy,
etc. naturally, among the people who have only just thrown off an
unprecedentedly savage yoke there is deep and widespread seething and
ferment; the working out of new principles of labour discipline by the
people is a very protracted process, and this process could not even
start until complete victory had been achieved over the landowners and
the bourgeoisie.
We, however, without in the least yielding to the despair (it is
often false despair) which is spread by the bourgeoisie and the
bourgeois intellectuals (who have despaired of retaining their old
privileges), must under no circumstances conceal an obvious evil. On
the contrary, we shall expose it and intensify the Soviet methods of
combating it, because the victory of socialism is inconceivable without
the victory of proletarian conscious discipline over spontaneous
petty-bourgeois anarchy, this real guarantee of a possible restoration
of Kerenskyism and Kornilovism.
The more class-conscious vanguard of the Russian proletariat has
already set itself the task of raising labour discipline. For example,
both the Central Committee of the Metalworkers’ Union and the Central
Council of Trade Unions have begun to draft the necessary measures and
decrees.[7]This
work must be supported and pushed ahead with all speed. We must raise
the question of piece-work[8] and apply and test it in practice; we must
raise the question of applying much of what is scientific and
progressive in the Taylor system; we must make wages correspond to the
total amount of goods turned out, or to the amount of work done by the
railways, the water transport system, etc., etc.
The Russian is a bad worker compared with people in advanced
countries. It could not be otherwise under the tsarist regime and in
view of the persistence of the hangover from serfdom. The task that the
Soviet government must set the people in all its scope is—learn to
work. The Taylor system, the last word of capitalism in this respect,
like all capitalist progress, is a combination of the refined brutality
of bourgeois exploitation and a number of the greatest scientific
achievements in the field of analysing mechanical motions during work,
the elimination of superfluous and awkward motions, the elaboration of
correct methods of work, the introduction of the best system of
accounting and control, etc. The Soviet Republic must at all costs
adopt all that is valuable in the achievements of science and
technology in this field. The possibility of building socialism depends
exactly upon our success in combining the Soviet power and the Soviet
organisation of administration with the up-to-date achievements of
capitalism. We must organise in Russia the study and teaching of the
Taylor system and systematically try it out and adapt it to our own
ends. At the same time, in working to raise the productivity of labour,
we must take into account the specific features of the transition
period from capitalism to socialism, which, on the one hand, require
that the foundations be laid of the socialist organisation of
competition, and, on the other hand, require the use of compulsion, so
that the slogan of the dictatorship of the proletariat shall not be
desecrated by the practice of a lily-livered proletarian government.

The Organisation Of Competition
Among the absurdities which the bourgeoisie are fond of spreading
about socialism is the allegation that socialists deny the importance
of competition. In fact, it is only socialism which, by abolishing
classes, and, consequently, by abolishing the enslavement of the
people, for the first time opens the way for competition on a really
mass scale. And it is precisely the Soviet form of organisation, by
ensuring transition from the formal democracy of the bourgeois republic
to real participation of the mass of working people in administration,
that for the first time puts competition on a broad basis. It is much
easier to organise this in the political field than in the economic
field; but for the success of socialism, it is the economic field that
matters.
Take, for example, a means of organising competition such as
publicity. The bourgeois republic ensures publicity only formally; in
practice, it subordinates the press to capital, entertains the “mob”
with sensationalist political trash and conceals what takes place in
the workshops, in commercial transactions, contracts, etc., behind a
veil of “trade secrets”, which protect “the sacred right of property”.
The Soviet government has abolished trade secrets[9]; it has taken a new
path; but we have done hardly anything to utilise publicity for the
purpose of encouraging economic competition. While ruthlessly
suppressing the thoroughly mendacious and insolently slanderous
bourgeois press, we must set to work systematically to create a press
that will not entertain and fool the people with political sensation
and trivialities, but which will submitthe questions of everyday
economic life to the people’s judgement and assist in the serious study
of these questions. Every factory, every village is a producers’ and
consumers’ commune, whose right and duty it is to apply the general
Soviet laws in their own way ("in their own way”, not in the sense of
violating them, but in the sense that they can apply them in various
forms) and in their own way to solve the problem of accounting in the
production and distribution of goods. Under capitalism, this was the

â“private affairâ” of the individual capitalist, landowner
or kulak. Under the Soviet system, it is not a private affair, but a
most important affair of state.
We have scarcely yet started on the enormous, difficult but
rewarding task of organising competition between communes, of
introducing accounting and publicity in the process of the production
of grain, clothes and other things, of transforming dry, dead,
bureaucratic accounts into living examples, some repulsive, others
attractive. Under the capitalist mode of production, the significance
of individual example, say the example of a co-operative workshop, was
inevitably very much restricted, and only those imbued with
petty-bourgeois illusions could dream of "correcting” capitalisim
through the example of virtuous institutions. After political power has
passed to the proletariat, after the expropriators have been
expropriated, the situation radically changes andeas prominent
socialists have repeatedly pointed out—force of example for the first
time is able to influence the people. Model communes must and will
serve as educators, teachers, helping to raise the backward communes.
The press must serve as an instrument of socialist construction, give
publicity to the successes achieved by the model communes in all their
details, must study the causes of these successes, the methods of
management these communes employ, and, on the other hand, must put on
the “black list” those communes which persist in the “traditions of
capitalism”, i.e., anarchy, laziness, disorder and profiteering. In
capitalist society, statistics were entirely a matter for “government
servants”, or for narrow specialists; we must carry statistics to the
people and make them popular so that the working people themselves may
gradually learn to understand and see how long and in what way it is
necessary to work, how much time and in what way one may rest, so that the
comparison of the business results of the various communes may
become a matter of general interest and study, and that the most
outstanding communes may be rewarded immediately (by reducing the
working day, raising remuneration, placing a larger amount of cultural
or aesthetic facilities or values at their disposal, etc.).
When a new class comes on to the historical scene as the leader and
guide of society, a period of violent “rocking”, shocks, struggle and
storm, on the one hand, and a period of uncertain steps, experiments,
wavering, hesitation in regard to the selection of new methods
corresponding to new objective circumstances, On the other, are
inevitable. The moribund feudal nobility avenged themselves on the
bourgeoisie which vanquished them and took their place, not only by
conspiracies and attempts at rebellion and restoration, but also by
pouring ridicule over the lack of skill, the clumsiness and the
mistakes of the “upstarts” and the “insolent” who dared to take over
the “sacred helm” of state without the centuries of training which the
princes, barons, nobles and dignitaries had had; in exactly the same
way the Kornilovs and Kerenskys, the Gotzes and Martovs, the whole of
that fraternity of heroes of bourgeois swindling or bourgeois
scepticism, avenge themselves on the working class of Russia for having
had the “audacity” to take power.
Of course, not weeks, but long months and years are required for a
new social class, especially a class which up to now has been oppressed
and crushed by poverty and ignorance, to get used to its new position,
look around, organise its work and promote its own

organisers. It is understandable that the Party which leads the
revolutionary proletariat has not been able to acquire the experience
and habits of large organisational undertakings embracing millions and
tens of millions of citizens; the remoulding of the old, almost
exclusively agitators’ habits is a very lengthy process. But there is
nothing impossible in this, and as soon as the necessity for a change
is clearly appreciated, as soon as there is firm determination to
effect the change and perseverance in pursuing a great and difficult
aim, we shall achieve it. There is an enormous amount of organising
talent among the “people”, i.e., among the workers and the peasants who
do not exploit the labour of others. Capital crushed these talented
people in thousands; it killed their talent and threw them on to the
scrap-heap. We are not yet able to find them, encourage them, put them
on their feet, promote them. But we shall learn to do so if we set
about it with all-out revolutionary enthusiasm, without which there can
be no victorious revolutions.
No profound and mighty popular movement has ever occurred in history
without dirty scum rising to the top, without adventurers and rogues,
boasters and ranters attaching themselves to the inexperienced
innovators, without absurd muddle and fuss, without individual
“leaders” trying to deal with twenty matters at once and not finishing
any of them. Let the lap-dogs of bourgeois society, from Belorussov to
Martov, squeal and yelp about every extra chip that is sent flying in
cutting down the big, old wood. What else are lap-dogs for if not to
yelp at the proletarian elephant? Let them yelp. We shall go our way
and try as carefully and as patiently as possible to test and discover
real organisers, people with sober and practical minds, people who
combine loyally to socialism with ability without fuss (and in spite of
muddle and fuss) to get a large number of people working together
steadily and concertedly within the framework of Soviet organisation.
Only such people, after they have been tested a dozen times, by being
transferred from the simplest to the more difficult tasks, should be
promoted to the responsible posts of leaders of the people’s labour,
leaders of administration. We have not yet learned to do this, but we
shall learn.

“Harmonious Organisation” And Dictatorship
The resolution adopted by the recent Moscow Congress of Soviets
advanced as the primary task of the moment the establishment of a
“harmonious organisation”, and the tightening of discipline.[See also Resolution
On Ratification Of The Brest Treaty—Editor.]
Everyone now readily “votes for” and “subscribes to” resolutions of
this kind; but usually people do not think over the fact that the
application of such resolutions calls for coercion—coercion precisely
in the form of dictatorship. And yet it would be extremely stupid and
ahsurdly utopian to assume that the transition from capitalism to
socialism is possible without coercion and without dictatorship. Marx’s
theory very definitely opposed this petty-bourgeois-democratic and
anarchist absurdity long ago. And Russia of 1917-18 confirms the
correctness of Marx’s theory in this respect so strikingly, palpably
and imposingly that only those who are hopelessly dull or who have
obstinately decided to turn thelr backs on the truth can be under any
misapprehension concerning this. Either the dictatorship of Kornilov
(if we take him as the Russian type of bourgeois Cavaignac), or the
dictatorship of the proletariat—any other choice is out of the
question for a country which is developing at an extremely rapid
rate with extremely sharp turns and amidst desperate ruin created by
one of the most horrible wars in history. Every solution that offers a
middle path is either a deception of the people by the bourgeoisie—for
the bourgeoisie dare not tell the truth, dare not say that they need
Kornilov—or an expression of the dull-wittedness of the petty-bourgeois
democrats, of the Chernovs, Tseretelis and Martovs, who chatter about
the unity of democracy, the dictatorship of democracy, the general
democratic front, and similar nonsense. Those whom even the progress of
the Russian Revolution of 1917-18 has not taught that a middle course
is impossible, must be given up for lost. 
On the other hand, it is not difficult to see that during every
transition from capitalism to socialism, dictatorship is necessary for
two main reasons, or along two main channels. Firstly, capitalism
cannot be defeated and eradicated without the ruthless suppression of
the resistance of the exploiters, who cannot at once be deprived of
their wealth, of their advantages of organisation and knowledge, and
consequently for a fairly long period will inevitably try to overthrow
the hated rule of the poor; secondly, every great revolution, and a
socialist revolution in particular, even if there is no external war,
is inconceivable without internal war, i.e., civil war, which is even
more devastating than external war, and involves thousands and millions
of cases of wavering and desertion from one side to another, implies a
state of extreme indefiniteness, lack of equilibirium and chaos. And of
course, all the elements of disintegration of the old society, which
are inevitably very numerous and connected mainly with the petty
bourgeoisie (because it is the petty bourgeoisie that every war and
every crisis ruins and destroys first), are bound to “reveal
themselves” during such a profound revolution. And these elements of
disintegration cannot “reveal themselves” otherwise than in
an increase of crime, hooliganism, corruption, profiteering and
outrages of every kind. To put these down requires time and requires
an iron hand.
There has not been a single great revolution in history in which the
people did not instinctively realise this and did not show salutary
firmness by shooting thieves on the spot. The misfortune of previous
revolutions was that the revolutionary enthusiasm of the people, which
sustained them in their state of tension and gave them the strength to
suppress ruthlessly the elements of disintegration, did not last long.
The social, i.e., the class, reason for this instability of the
revolutionary enthusiasm of the people was the weakness of the
proletariat, which alone is able (if it is sufficiently
numerous, class-conscious and disciplined) to win over to its side the
majority of the working and exploited people (the majority of the
poor, to speak more simply and popularly) and retain power sufficiently
long to suppress completely all the exploiters as well as all the
elements of disintegration.
It was this historical experience of all revolutions, it was this
world-historic—economic and political—lesson that Marx summed up when
he gave his short, sharp, concise and expressive formula: dictatorship
of the proletariat. And the fact that the Russian revolution has been
correct in its approach to this world-historic task has been proved
by the victorious progress of the Soviet form of organisation among all
the peoples and tongues of Russia. For Soviet power is nothing but an
organisational form of the dictatorship of the proletariat, the
dictatorship of the advanced class, which raises to a new democracy and
to independent participation in the administration of the state tens
upon tens of millions of working and exploited peoples who by their own
experience learn to regard the disciplined and class-conscious vanguard
of the proletariat as their most reliable leader.
Dictatorship, however, is a big word, and big words should not be
thrown about carelessly. Dictatorship is iron rule, government that is
revolutionarily bold, swift and ruthless in suppressing both exploiters
and hooligans. But our government is excessively mild, very often it
resembles jelly more than iron. We must not forget for a moment that
the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois element is fighting against the
Soviet system in two ways; on the one hand, it is operating from
without, by the methods of the Savinkovs, Gotzes, Gegechkoris and
Kornilovs, by conspiracies and rebellions, and by their filthy
“ideological” reflection, the flood of lies and slander in the
Constitutional-Democratic, Right Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
press; on the other hand, this element operates from within and takes
advantage of every manifestation of disintegration, of every weakness,
in order to bribe, to increase indiscipline, laxity and chaos. The
nearer we approach the complete military suppression of the
bourgeoisie, the more dangerous does the element of petty-bourgeois
anarchy become. And the fight against this element cannot be waged
solely with the aid of propaganda and agitation, solely by organising
competition and by selecting organisers. The struggle must also be
waged by means of coercion.
As the fundamental task of the government becomes, not military
suppression, but administration, the typical manifestation of
suppression and compulsion will be, not shooting on the spot, but trial
by court. In this respect also the revolutionary people after October
25, 1917 took the right path and demonstrated the viability of the
revolution by setting up their own workers’ and peasants’ courts, even
before the decrees dissolving the bourgeois bureaucratic judiciary were
passed. But our revolutionary and people’s courts are extremely,
incredibly weak. One feels that we have not yet done away with the
people’s attitude towards the courts as towards something official and
alien, an attitude inherited from the yoke of the landowners and of the
bourgeoisie. It is not yet sufficiently realised that the courts are an
organ which enlists precisely the poor, every one of them, in the work
of state administration (for the work of the courts is one of the
functions of state administration), that the courts are an organ
of the power of the proletariat and of the poor peasants, that the
courts are an instrument for inculcating discipline. There is
not yet sufficient appreciation of the simple and obvious fact that if
the principal misfortunes of Russia at the present time are hunger and
unemployment, these misfortunes cannot be overcome by spurts, but only
by comprehensive, all-embracing, country-wide organisation and
discipline in order to increase the output of bread for the people and
bread for industry (fuel), to transport these in good time to the
places where they are required, and to distribute them properly; and it
is not fully appreciated that, consequently, it is those who
violate labour discipline at any factory, in any undertaking, in any
matter, who are responsible for the sufferings caused by the
famine and unemployment, that we must know how to find the guilty ones,
to bring them to trial and ruthlessly punish them. Where the
petty-bourgeois anarchy against which we must now wage a most
persistent struggle makes itself felt is in the failure to appreciate
the economic and political connection between famine and unemployment,
on the one hand, and general laxity in matters of organisation and
discipline, on the other—in the tenacity of the small-proprietor

outlook, namely, I’ll grab all I can for myself; the rest can go hang.
In the rail transport service, which perhaps most strikingly
embodies the economic ties of an organism created by large-scale
capitalism, the struggle between the element of petty-bourgeois laxity
and proletarian organisation is particularly evident. The
“administrative” elements provide a host of saboteurs and bribe-takers;
the best part of the proletarian elements fight for discipline; but
among both elements there are, of course, many waverers and “weak”
characters who are unable to withstand the “temptation” of
profiteering, bribery, personal gain obtained by spoiling the whole
apparatus, upon the proper working of which the victory over famine and
unemployment depends.
The struggle that has been developing around the recent decree on
the management of the railways, the decree which grants individual
executives dictatorial powers (or “unlimited” powers),[10] is
characteristic. The conscious (and to a large extent, probably,
unconscious) representatives of petty bourgeois laxity would like to
see in this granting of “unlimited” (i.e., dictatorial) powers to
individuals a departure from the collegiate principle, from democracy
and from the principles of Soviet government. Here and there, among
Left Socialist-RevoIutionaries, a positively hooligan agitation, i.e.,
agitation appealing to the base instincts and to the small proprietor’s
urge to “grab all he can”, has been developed against the dictatorship
decree. The question has become one of really enormous significance.
Firstly, the question of principle, namely, is the appointment of
individuals, dictators with unlimited powers, in general compatible
with the fundamental principles of Soviet government? Secondly, what
relation has this case—this precedent, if you will—to the special tasks
of government in the present concrete situation? We must deal very
thoroughly with both these questions.
That in the history of revolutionary movements the dictatorship of
individuals was very often the expression, the vehicle, the channel of
the dictatorship of the revolutionary classes has been shown by the
irrefutable experience of history. Undoubtedly, the dictatorship of
individuals was compatible with bourgeois democracy. On this point, how
ever, the bourgeois denigrators of the Soviet system, as well as their
petty-bourgeois henchmen, always display sleight of hand: on the one
hand, they declare the Soviet system to be something absurd,
anarchistic and savage, and carefully pass over in silence all our
historical examples and theoretical arguments which prove that the
Soviets are a higher form of democracy, and what is more, the beginning
of a socialist form of democracy; on the other hand, they
demand of us a higher democracy than bourgeois democracy and say:
personal dictatorship is absolutely incompatible with your, Bolshevik
(i.e., not bourgeois, but socialist ), Soviet democracy.
These are exceedingly poor arguments. If we are not anarchists, we
must admit that the state, that is, coercion, is
necessary for the transition from capitalism to socialism. The form of
coercion is determined by the degree of development of the given
revolutionary class, and also by special circumstances, such as, for
example, the legacy of a long and reactionary war and the forms of
resistance put up by the bourgeoisie and the petty bourgeoisie. There
is, therefore, absolutely no contradiction in principle
between Soviet (that is, socialist) democracy and the exercise
of dictatorial powers by individuals. The difference between
proletarian dictatorship and bourgeois dictatorship is that the former
strikes at the exploiting minority in the interests of the exploited
majority, and that it is exercised—also through individuals—not
only by the working and exploited people, but also by organisations
which are built in such a way as to rouse these people to
history-making activity. (The Soviet organisations are organisations of
this kind.)
In regard to the second question, concerning the significance of
individual dictatorial powers from the point of view of the specific
tasks of the present moment, it must be said that large-scale machine
industry—which is precisely the material source, the productive source,
the foundation of socialism—calls for absolute and strict unity of
will, which directs the joint labours of hundreds, thousands and tens
of thousands of people. The technical, economic and historical
necessity of this is obvious, and all those who have thought about
socialism have always regarded it as one of the conditions of
socialism. But how can strict unity of will be ensured? By thousands
subordinating their will to the will of one.
Given ideal class-consciousness and discipline on the part of those
participating in the common work, this subordination would be something
like the mild leadership of a conductor of an orchestra. It may assume
the sharp forms of a dictatorship if ideal discipline and
class-consciousness are lacking. But be that as it may, unquestioning
subordination to a single will is absolutely necessary for the
success of processes organised on the pattern of large-scale machine
industry. On the railways it is twice and three times as necessary. In
this transition from one political task to another, which on the
surface is totally dissimilar to the first, lies the whole originality
of the present situation. The revolution has only just smashed the
oldest, strongest and heaviest of fetters, to which the people
submitted under duress. That was yesterday. Today, however, the same
revolution demands—precisely in the interests of its development and
consolidation, precisely in the interests of socialism—that the people unquestioningly
obey the single will of the leaders of labour. Of course, such a
transition cannot be made at one step. Clearly, it can be achieved only
as a result of tremendous jolts, shocks, reversions to old ways, the
enormous exertion of effort on the part of the proletarian vanguard,
which is leading the people to the new ways. Those who drop into the
philistine hysterics of Novaya Zhizn or Vperyod,[11] Dyelo
Naroda or [12]

do not stop to think about this.
Take the psychology of the average, ordinary representative of the
toiling and exploited masses, compare it with the objective, material
conditions of his life in society. Before the October Revolution he did
not see a single instance of the propertied, exploiting
classes making any real sacrifice for him, giving up anything for his
benefit. He did not see them giving him the land and liberty
that had been repeatedly promised him, giving him peace, sacrificing
“Great Power” interests and the interests of Great Power secret
treaties, sacrificing capital and profits. He saw this only after
October 25, 1917, when he took it himself by force, and had to defend
by force what he had taken, against the Kerenskys, Gotzes, Gegechkoris,
Dutovs and Kornilovs. Naturally, for a certain time, all his attention,
all his thoughts, all his spiritual strength, were concentrated on
taking a breath, on unbending his back, on straightening his shoulders,
on taking the blessings of life that were there for the taking, and
that had always been denied him by the now overthrown exploiters. Of
course, a certain amount of time is required to enable the ordinary
working man not only to see for himself, not only to become convinced,
but also to feel that he cannot simply “take”, snatch, grab things,
that this leads to increased disruption, to ruin, to the return of the
Kornilovs. The corresponding change in the conditions of life (and
consequently in the psychology) of the ordinary working men is only
just beginning. And our whole task, the task of the Communist Party
(Bolsheviks), which is the class-conscious spokesman for the strivings
of the exploited for emancipation, is to appreciate this change, to
understand that it is necessary, to stand at the head of the exhausted
people who are wearily seeking a way out and lead them along the true
path, along the path of labour discipline, along the path of
co-ordinating the task of arguing at mass meetings about the
conditions of work with the task of unquestioningly obeying the will of
the Soviet leader, of the dictator, during the work.
The “mania for meetings” is an object of the ridicule, and still
more often of the spiteful hissing of the bourgeoisie, the Mensheviks,
the Novaya Zhizn people, who see only the chaos, the
confusion and the outbursts of small-proprietor egoism. But without the
discussions at public meetings the mass of the oppressed could never
have changed from the discipline forced upon them by the exploiters to
conscious, voluntary discipline. The airing of questions at public
meetings is the genuine democracy of the working people, their way of
unbending their backs, their awakening to a new life, their first steps
along the road which they themselves have cleared of vipers (the
exploiters, the imperialists, the landowners and capitalists) and which
they want to learn to build themselves, in their own way, for
themselves, on the principles of their own Soviet, and not
alien, not aristocratic, not bourgeois rule. It required precisely the
October victory of the working people over the exploiters, it required
a whole historical period in wllich the workillg people themselves
could first of all discuss the new conditions of life and the new
tasks, in order to make possible the durable transition to superior
forms of labour discipline, to the conscious appreciation of the
necessity for the dictatorship of the proletariat, to unquestioning
obedience to the orders of individual representatives of the Soviet
government during the work.
This transition has now begun.
We have successfully fulfilled the first task of the revolution; we
have seen how the mass of working people evolved in themselves the
fundamental condition for its success: they united their efforts
against the exploiters in order to overthrow them. Stages like that of
October 1905, February and October 1917 are of world-historic
significance.
We have successfully fulfilled the second task of the revolution: to
awaken, to raise those very “lower ranks” of society whom the
exploiters had pushed down, and who only after October 25, 1917
obtained complete freedom to overthrow the exploiters and to begin to
take stock of things and arrange life in their own way. The airing of
questions at public meetings by the most oppressed and downtrodden, by
the least educated mass of working people, their coming over to the
side of the Bolsheviks, their setting up every where of their own
Soviet organisations—this was the second great stage of the revolution.
The third stage is now beginning. We must consolidate what we
ourselves have won, what we ourselves have decreed, made law,
discussed, planned—consolidate all this in stable forms of everyday
labour discipline. This is the most difficult, but the most
gratifying task, because only its fulfilment will give us a socialist
system. We must learn to combine the “public meeting” democracy of the
working people—turbulent, surging, overflowing its banks like a spring
flood—with iron discipline while at work, with unquestioning
obedience to the will of a single person, the Soviet leader, while
at work.
We have not yet learned to do this.
We shall learn it.
Yesterday we were mennced by the restoration of bourgeois
exploitation, personified by the Kornilovs, Gotzes, Dutovs, Gegechkoris
and Bogayevskys. We conquered them. This restoration, this very same
restoration menaces us today in another form, in the form of the
element of petty-bourgeois laxity and anarchism, or small-proprietor
“it’s not my business” psychology, in the form of the daily, petty, but
numerous sorties and attacks of this element against proletarian
discipline. We must, and we shall, vanquish this element of
petty-bourgeois anarchy.

The Development Of Soviet Organisation
The socialist character of Soviet, i.e., proletarian,
democracy, as concretely applied today, lies first in the fact that the
electors are the working and exploited people; the bourgeoisie is
excluded. Secondly, it lies in the fact that all bureaucratic
formalities and restrictions of elections are abolished; the people
themselves determine the order and time of elections, and are
completely free to recall any elected person. Thirdly, it lies in the
creation of the best mass organisation of the vanguard of the working
people, i.e., the proletariat engaged in large-scale industry, which
enables it to lead the vast mass of the exploited, to draw them into
independent political life, to educate them politically by their own
experience; therefore for the first time a start is made by the entire
population in learning the art of administration, and in beginning to
administer.
These are the principal distinguishing features of the democracy now
applied in Russia, which is a higher type of democracy, a
break with the bourgeois distortion of democracy, transition to
socialist democracy and to the conditions in which the state can begin
to wither away.
It goes without saying that the element of petty-bourgeois
disorganisation (which must inevitably be apparent to some
extent in every proletarian revolution, and which is
especially apparent in our revolution, owing to the petty-bourgeois
character of our country, its backwardness and the consequences of a
reactionary war) cannot but leave its impress upon the Soviets as well.
We must work unremittingly to develop the organisation of the
Soviets and of the Soviet government. There is a petty-bourgeois
tendency to transform the members of the Soviets into
“parliamentarians”, or else into bureaucrats. We must combat this by
drawing all the members of the Soviets into the practical
work of administration. In many places the departments of the Soviets
are gradually merging with the Commissariats. Our aim is to draw the
whole of the poor into the practical work of administration, and
all steps that are taken in this direction—the more varied they are,
the better—should be carefully recorded, studied, systematised, tested
by wider experience and embodied in law. Our aim is to ensure that every

toiler, having finished his eight hours’ “task” in productive labour,
shall perform state duties without pay; the transition to
this is particularly difficult, but this transition alone can guarantee
the final consolidation of socialism. Naturally, the novelty and
difficulty of the change lead to an abundance of steps being taken, as
it were, gropingly, to an abundance of mistakes, vacillation—without
this, any marked progress is impossible. The reason why the present
position seems peculiar to many of those who would like to be regarded
as socialists is that they have been accustomed to contrasting
capitalism with socialism abstractly, and that they profoundly put
between the two the word “leap” (some of them; recalling fragments of
what they have read of Engels’s writings, still more profoundly add the
phrase “leap from the realm of necessity into the realm of freedom”[13].
The majority of these so-called socialists, who have “read in books”

about socialism but who have never seriously thought over the matter,
are unable to consider that by “leap” the teachers of socialism meant
turning-points on a world historical scale, and that leaps of this kind
extend over decades and even longer periods. Naturally, in such times,
the notorious “intelligentsia” provides an infinite number of mourners
of the dead. Some mourn over the Constituent Assembly, others mourn
over bourgeois discipline, others again mourn over the capitalist
system, still others mourn over the cultured landowner, and still
others again mourn over imperialist Great Power policy, etc., etc.
The real interest of the epoch of great leaps lies in the fact that
the abundance of fragments of the old, which sometimes accumulate more
rapidly than the rudiments (not always immediately discernible) of the
new, calls for the ability to discern what is most important in the
line or chain of development. History knows moments when the most
important thing for the success of the revolution is to heap up as
large a quantity of the fragments as possible, i.e., to blow up as many
of the old institutions as possible; moments arise when enough has been
blown up and the next task is to perform the “prosaic” (for the
petty-bourgeois revolutionary, the “boring”) task of clearing away the
fragments; and moments arise when the careful nursing of the rudiments
of the new system, which are growing amidst the wreckage on a soil
which as yet has been badly cleared of rubble, is the most important
thing.
It is not enough to be a revolutionary and an adherent of socialism
or a Communist in general. You must be able at each particular moment
to find the particular link in the chain which you must grasp with all
your might in order to hold the whole chain and to prepare firmly for
the transition to the next link; the order of the links, their form,
the manner in which they are linked together, the way they differ from
each other in the historical chain of events, are not as simple and not
as meaningless as those in an ordinary chain made by a smith.
The fight against the bureaucratic distortion of the Soviet form of
organisation is assured by the firmness of the connection between the
Soviets and the “people”, meaning by that the working and exploited
people, and by the flexibility and elasticity of this connection. Even
in the most democratic capitalist republics in the world, the poor
never regard the bourgeois parliament as “their” institution. But the
Soviets are “theirs” and not alien institutions to the mass of workers
and peasants. The modern “Social-Democrats” of the Scheidemann or, what
is almost the same thing, of the Martov type are repelled by the
Soviets, and they are drawn towards the respectable bourgeois
parliament, or to the Constituent
Assembly, in the same way as Turgenev, sixty years ago, was drawn
towards a moderate monarchist and noblemen’s Constitution and was
repelled by the peasant democracy of Dobrolyubov and Chernyshevsky.[14]
It is the closeness of the Soviets to the “people”, to the working
people, that creates the special forms of recall and other means of
control from below which must be most zealously developed now. For
example, the Councils of Public Education, as periodical conferences of
Soviet electors and their delegates called to discuss and control the
activities of the Soviet authorities in this field, deserve full
sympathy and support. Nothing could be sillier than to transform the
Soviets into something congealed and self-contained. The more
resolutely we now have to stand for a ruthlessly firm government, for
the dictatorship of individuals in definite processes of work,
in definite aspects of purely executive functions, the more
varied must be the forms and methods of control from below in order to
counteract every shadow of a possibility of distorting the principles
of Soviet government, in order repeatedly and tirelessly to weed out
bureaucracy.

Conclusion
An extraordinarily difficult, complex and dangerous situation in
international affairs; the necessity of manoeuvring and retreating; a
period of waiting for new outbreaks of the revolution which is maturing
in the West at a painfully slow pace; within the country a period of
slow construction and ruthless “tightening up”, of prolonged and
persistent struggle waged by stern, proletarian discipline against the
menacing element of petty-bourgeois laxity and anarchy—these in brief
are the distinguishing features of the special stage of the socialist
revolution in which we are now living. This is the link in the
historical chain of events which we must at present grasp with all our
might in order to prove equal to the tasks that confront us before
passing to the next link to which we are drawn by a special brightness,
the brightness of the victories of the international proletarian
revolution.
Try to compare with the ordinary everyday concept “revolutionary”
the slogans that follow from the specific conditions of the present
stage, namely, manoeuvre, retreat, wait, build slowly, ruthlessly
tighten up, rigorously discipline, smash laxity. . . . Is it surprising
that when certain “revolutionaries” hear this they are seized with
noble indignation and begin to “thunder” abuse at us for forgetting the
traditions of the October Revolution, for compromising with the
bourgeois experts, for compromising with the bourgeoisie, for being
petty bourgeois, reformists, and so on and so forth?
The misfortune of these sorry “revolutionaries” is that even those
of them who are prompted by the best motives in the world and are
absolutely loyal to the cause of socialism fail to understand the
particular, and particularly “unpleasant”, condition that a backward
country, which has been lacerated by a reactionary and disastrous war
and which began the socialist revolution long before the more advanced
countries, inevitably has to pass through; they lack stamina in the
difficult moments of a difficult transition. Naturally, it is the “Left
Socialist-Revolutionaries” who are acting as an “official” opposition
of this kind against our Party. Of course, there are and
always will be individual exceptions from group and class types. But
social types remain. In the land in which the small-proprietor
population greatly predominates over the purely proletarian population,
the difference between the proletarian revolutionary and
petty-bourgeois revolutionary will inevitably make itself felt, and
from time to time will make itself felt very sharply. The
petty-bourgeois revolutionary wavers and vacillates at every turn of
events; he is an ardent revolutionary in March 1917 and praises

“coalition” in May, hates the Bolsheviks (or laments over their
“adventurism”) in July and apprehensively turns away from them at the
end of October, supports them in December, and, finally, in March and
April 1918 such types, more often than not, turn up their noses
contemptuously and say: “I am not one of those who sing hymns to
’organic’ work, to practicalness and gradualism.”
The social origin of such types is the small proprietor, who has
been driven to frenzy by the horrors of war, by sudden ruin, by
unprecedented torments of famine and devastation, who hysterically
rushes about seeking a way out, seeking salvation, places his
confidence in the proletariat and supports it one moment and the next
gives way to fits of despair. We must clearly understand and firmly
remember the fact that socialism cannot be built on such a social
basis. The only class that can lead the working and exploited people is
the class that unswervingly follows its path without losing courage and
without giving way to despair even at the most difficult, arduous and
dangerous stages. Hysterical impulses are of no use to us. What we need
is the steady advance of the iron battalions of the proletariat.


Endnotes
[1] In the
manuscript, Lenin’s work The Immediate rasks of the Soviet
Gouernment was headed “Theses on the Tasks of the Soviet
Government in the Present Situation”. Lenin’s theses were discussed at
a meeting of the Party Central Committee on April 26, 1918.
The Central Committee unanimously approved them and
passed a decision to have them published as an article in Pravda
and Izvestia, and also as a separate pamphlet. In 1918 the
pamphlet went through more than ten editions, in Moscow, Petrograd,
Saratov, Kazan, Tambov and other cities of Russia. It was published in
the same year in English in New York, and in French in Geneva; an
abridged version in German, edited by F. Platten, appeared in Zurich
under the title Am Tage nach der Revolution.
The Central Committee instructed Lenin to give a
report on the immediate tasks of the Soviet government at a meeting of
the All-Russia C.E.C. and to formulate the Theses briefly as a
resolution (see this volume, pp. 314-17).
[2] Bogayevsky,
M. P. (1881-1918)—counter-revolutionary leader and organiser of
the civil war against Soviet power on the Don. He was defeated and
surrendered in the spring of 1918.
[3] On
November 18 (December 1), 1917 the Council of People’s Commissars,
acting on a proposal made by Lenin, passed a decision “On the
Remuneration of People’s Commissars and Senior Government Employees and
Officials” (published on November 23 [December 6], 1917 in No. 16 of
the Newspaper of the Provisional Workers’ and Peasants’ Government
). Drafted by Lenin it fixed the maximum monthly salary of a People’s
Commissar at 500 rubles with an additional 100 rubles for every member
of his family unable to work. This corresponded roughly to the worker’s
average monthly wage. On January 2 (15),1918, in answer to an inquiry
from the People’s Commissar for Labour A. G Shlyapnikov, the Council of
People’s Commissars issued a decision written by Lenin explaining that
the Decree of November 18 (December 1), 1917 fixed no limit for the
payment of experts and thus sanctioned higher remuneration for
scientific and technical experts.
[4] Control
over foreign trade was initiated in the early days of Soviet power. At
first this was handled by the Petrograd Revolutionary Military
Committee, which considered applications for the import and export of
goods and supervised the work of the customs. By a decree of the
Council of People’s Commissars of December 29 1917 (January 11, 1918)
foreign trade was placed under the control of the People’s Commissariat
for Trade and Industry. This kind of control and customs inspection,
however, was not enough to protect the Soviet economy from foreign
capital. Lenin emphasised later that the working class of Soviet Russia
“would be totally unable to build up its own industry and make Russia
an industrial country without the protection, not of tariffs, but of
the monopoly of foreign trade” (see V. I. Lenin, On the Foreign
Policy of the Soviet State, Moscow, p. 424). In December 1917
Lenin proposed introducing a state monopoly on foreign trade, a decree
on which was passed by the Council of People’s Commissars on April 22,
1918 (see Decrees of the Soviet Government, Russ. ed., Vol.
2, 1959, pp. 158-60).
[5] In the
first months of Soviet power indemnities and special taxes were one of
the principal sources of revenue, particularly in the provinces. When
Soviet power became more firmly establisiled the question arose of how
to devise a regular system of taxation based primarily on a progressive
income tax and a property tax which would make it possible to place the
main burden of taxation on the well-to-do sections of the population.
At the First All-Russia Congress of Representatives of the Financial
Departments of the Soviets, Lenin pointed out: “We have many plans in
this sphere and have cleared the ground on which to build the
foundation, but the actual foundation of that building has not yet been
built. The time for this has now come” (see this volume, pp. 384-85).
The Congress accepted Lenin’s proposal on the need to introduce an
income tax and property tax and elected a special commission to draw up
the requisite Statute on the basis of Lenin’s theses.
On June 17,1918 the Council of People’s Commissars
approved the Decree on the Amendment of the Decree of November 24, 1917
on the Levying of Direct Taxes, which laid down a strict system of
income and property taxation (see Decrees of the Soviet Government,
Russ. ed., Vol. 2, 1959, pp. 441-43).
[6] Decree
on Consumers’ Co-operative Societies was passed by the Council of
People’s Commissars on April 10, 1918, approved at a meeting of the
All-Russia C.E.C. on April 11, and published over Lenin’s signature in Pravda
No. 71 of April 13 and Izvestia VTsIK No. 75 of April 16.
The first draft of the decree, written by Lenin, was
worked out in detail by the People’s Commissariat for Food and
published on January 19 (February 1) in Izvestia TsIK No. 14.
The draft decree was bitterly opposed by bourgeois co-operators, who
insisted that co-operative societies should be independent of the
organs of Soviet power. In order to use the existillg co-operative
apparatus for accounting and control of the distribntion of foodstuffs
the Council of People’s Commissars made several concessions during its
negotiations with bourgeois co-operators (March to the beginning of
April 1918). On April 9 and 10 the C.P.C. discussed the draft decree
proposed by the co-operators. Lenin revised the draft considerably (he
rewrote points 11, 12 and 13), and the decree with his amendments was
passed by the Council of People’s Commissars, and then by the
All-Russia C.E.C.
[7] The
organisation of social production on socialist principles made it
necessary to draw up new internal regulations for the nationalised
enterprises, and new regulations on labour discipline and on enrolling
all able-bodied persons for socially useful work. These questions
acquired special importance in the period of the peaceful
breathing-space in the spring of 1918.
The first regulations concerning labour discipline
were worked out by the Soviet trade unions in conjunction with
managerial bodies. They were discussed at a number of meetings of the
Presidium of the Supreme Economic Council with representatives of the
central organs of the trade unions taking part. On March 27 the
Presidium of the Supreme Economic Council after a debate in which Lenin
participated passed a decision charging the All-Russia Central Council
of Trade Unions with the task of drawing up a general statute on labour
discipline. On April 1, with Lenin taking part, the Presidium examined
the draft resolution on labour discipline drawn up by the A.C.C.T.U.
and proposed that it should be re-worded as a decree, taking into
account Lenin’s remarks and suggestions. The re-worded Statute on
Labour Discipline passed by the A.C.C.T.U. on April 3 was published in
the magazine Narodnoye Khozyaistvo No. 2, for April 1918. In
this statute the A.C.C.T.U. stated that strict regulations regarding
internal management should be introduced at all state-owned
enterprises, that output quotas and account of labour productivity
should be established, that piece-work and a system of bonuses for
exceeding output quotas should be introduced, and that stern action
should be taken against those who violated labour discipline. On the
basis of the Statute speciflc internal regulations were drawn up at
factories and these played an important part in the organisation of
socialist industry. The Central Committee of the Metalworkers’ Union
was one of the first to carry out Lenin’s instructions on raising
labour productivity by introducing a system of piece-work and bonuses.
When the question of improving labour discipline was discussed by the
A.C.C.T.U. representatives of the Central Committee of the
Metalworkers’ Union got the thesis on the need for piece rates included
in the resolution submitted on April 1 for consideration by the
Presidium of the Supremc Economic Council. In April, on the basis of
the decisions taken by the A.C.C.T.U. the Central Committee of the
Metalworkers’ Union instructed all the lower organisations of the union
to adopt piece-work and the bonus system in the metal industry.
[8] After the
October Revolution piece-work was almost everywhere superseded by a
time system of payment, which had an adverse effect on labour
productivity and labour discipline.
The introduction of piece-work, which came closest
to the socialist principle of “to each according to his work”, began at
the first nationalised enterprises. During the period of respite, piece
work was widely adopted in industry. By July 1918, for instance, a
quarter of the workers of Petrograd went over to piece-work. The
principle of payment according to the piece was finally endorsed by the
pubucation in December 1918 of the Soviet Labour Code.
[9] This
refers to the right protected by bourgeois law to keep secret all
production, trade and financial operations and also all the relevant
documents at private capitalist enterprises.
In his work The Impending Catastrophe and How
to Combat It Lenin showed that commercial secrecy in the hands of
the bourgeoisie was “an instrument for concealing financial swindles
and the fantastically high profits of big capital” (see present
edition, Vol. 25, p. 339), and showed why commercial secrecy should be
abolished. The resolution of the Sixth Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)

“On the Economic Situation” demanded the abolition of commercial
secrecy as an essential measure for making workers’ control effective
(see The C.P.S.U. in the Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses,
Conferences and Plenums of the Central Committee, Part 1,
Russ. ed., 1954, p. 378). After the October Revolution commercial
secrecy was abolished by the Statute on Workers’ Control passed by the
All-Russia C.E.C. and the Council of People’s Commissars on November 14
(27), 1917.
[10] The
reference is to the decree of the Council of People’s Commissars “On
Centralisation of Management, Protection of Roads and the Improvement
of Their Carrying Capacity” (see Decrees of the Soviet Government,
Vol. 2 Russ. ed., 1959, pp. 18-20). Having considered on March 18, 1918
the draft decree proposed by the People’s Commissariat for Ways of
Communication on non-interference by various institutions in the
affairs of the Railway Department, the Council of People’s Commissars
instructed a special commission to revise the decree on the basis of
the following theses put forward by Lenin: (1) Considerable
centralisation. (2) Appointment of responsible executives at every
local centre as elected by the railway organisations. (3) Unquestioning
obedience to their orders. (4) Dictatorial rights to be given to the
military detachments for maintaining order. (5) Steps to be taken
immediately to take account of rolling stock and its whereabouts. (6)
Steps to be taken to set up a technical department. (7) Fuel.
Lenin made several important amendments to the
draft, which was submitted by the commission and considered at a
meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars on March 21, before being
approved by the government. In view of the hostilily with which the
decree was greeted by the All-Russia Executive Committee of Railwaymen
(Vikzhedor), which was strongly influenced by the Mensheviks and the
Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, the People’s Commissariat for Ways of
Communication on March 23 proposed amending the decree at a meeting of
the Council of People’s Commissars. The representatives of Vikzhedor
who attended the meeting attacked the decree on the grounds that it
meant the “destruction of the role of Vikzhedor and its replacement by
the individual authority of a Commissar”. Arguing against the opponents
of the decree, Lenin explained the need for taking the very firmest
measures to eliminate sabotage and inefficiency on the railways and
introduced amendments making the decree even more categorical. With
these amendments the decree was finally approved by the government on
March 23 and published over Lenin’s signature on March 26 in No. 57 of Izvestia
VTsIK.
[11] Vperyod
(Forward )—a Menshevik daily newspaper, which began to appear
in March 1917 in Moscow as the organ of the Moscow organisation of
Mensheviks, and subsequently as the organ of the committees of the
R.S.D.L.P. (Mensheviks) of the Moscow organisation and the Central
Region On April 2, 1918 the newspaper became the organ of the
Mensheviks’ Central Committee as well, and L. Martov, F. I. Dan and A.
S. Martynov joined its editorial board, It was banned for its
counter-revolutionary activities in February 1919 by decision of the
All-Russia C.E.C.
[12] Nash
Vek (Our Age )—one of the names of the newspaper Rech,
the central organ of the counter-revolutionary party of the
Constitutional-Democrats. After it had been banned by a decision of the
Petrograd Revolutionary Military Committee of October 26 (November 8),
1917, the newspaper continued to appear until August 1918 under various
names: Nasha Rech (Our Speech ), Svobodnaya Rech

(Free Speech ), Vek (Age ), Novaya Rech
(New Speech ) and Nash Vek.
[13] Lenin
is referring to and quoting from Anti-D&uumlhring by F.
Engels, Section Three. Socialism. Chapter II. Theoretical.
[14]
Chernyshevsky describes Turgenev’s attitude to Dobrolyubov and himself
in an account of a conversation he had with Turgenev in the early
sixties of the last century (see the article “An Expression of
Gratitude” in Complete Collected Works by N. G.
Chernyshevsky, Vol. 10, Russ. ed., Moscow, 1951, pp. 122-23).

Collected Works
Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 



==========

## Concerning the Decree of
Revolutionary Tribunals










Concerning the Decree on Revolutionary Tribunals



V. I. Lenin
Concerning the Decree on Revolutionary
      Tribunals[1]


First Published: 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXI Published 
      according to the manuscript From V. I. Lenin 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, 
      Moscow, Volume 26, 1972, pages 219 through 220
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna
Transcription\HTML Markup: Robert Cymbala and David Walters
      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive March,
      2001

    

To Members Of The Collegium Of The Commissariat For Justice, And A Copy To The Chairman
      Of The C.E.C.
March 30, 1918
The decree on Soviet tribunals is in my opinion quite wrong and requires
      radical revision.
It is incorrect to annul the decree on press tribunals without a preliminary summary (and
      discussion) of the results of their work.
It is incorrect to establish the post of a one-man “tribune” outside the
      Collegium of the Commissariat for Justice. The result is something like the worst precedents
      of a “Prosecutor-General”.
Instead of devoting attention to reforms of institutions, to petty or almost verbal
      reforms ("tribune"), attention should be directed to the practical results of the work of the
      Collegium for Justice in setting up a really revolutionary court that is rapid and
      mercilessly severe in dealing with counter-revolutionaries, hooligans, idlers and
      disorganisers.
Lenin
B
Draft Decision Of The Council Of People’s Commissars
The Council of People’s Commissars instructs the Commissariat for Justice to revise
      the draft decree on tribunals in the direction of abolishing the one-man power of the
      “tribune” and laying chief stress not on petty alterations of the institutions
      set up since October 1917, but on the practical results to be achieved by setting up courts
      that will act really swiftly and with revolutionary ruthlessness against
      counter-revolutionaries, bribe-takers, disorganisers and violators of discipline.
The final draft is to be published and submitted to the C.E.C.

Endnotes
[1] The first draft of the Decree on
      Revolutionary Tribunals was submitted by the People’s Commissariat for Justice on March
      30, 1918 for approval by the Council of People’s Commissars. When it was discussed by
      the Council a decision (document “B") proposed by Lenin, stating that it should be
      radically revised, was accepted. The draft was revised on the basis of Lenin’s
      instructions, approved at a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars on May 4,
      1918 and published on May 17, 1918.

Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Preface to the Collected
articles Against the Stream











Preface to the Collected Articles "Against the Stream"







V. I. Lenin
 Preface To The Collected Articles
Against The Stream


Written: March, 1918
First Published: 1918 in the collected articles Against the 
Stream, Publishing House of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ 
      Deputies Published according to the text of the collected articles
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress 
      Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972, page 221
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna
Transcription\HTML Markup: Robert Cymbala and David Walters
      
Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive March, 2001
    


      The majority of the articles in this publication appeared abroad
      in Sotsial-Demokrat (Central Organ of the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party-Bolsheviks), which was issued
      from the end of 1914 to the beginning of 1917 in
      Switzerland. Only one large magazine article is taken from the
      periodical Kommunist [1] (only one issue of which appeared in 1915 in Switzerland). 

    
      To understand correctly the connection between the individual
      articles, one must bear in mind the chronological sequence of
      their publication in the newspaper. 

    
      The articles are divided into two main categories. One part is
      devoted to an appraisal of the war and the political tasks
      arising from this appraisal. The other part examines internal
      Party relations, the struggle of groups, which for a long time
      seemed to short-sighted people to be “chaos” or a
      “personal conflict”, and which in fact has now led,
      as everyone can see, to a demarcation of the real socialists
      from the lackeys of the bourgeoisie, the Lieberdans,[2] Martovs
      and Co. 

    
      Obviously, the first part or first category of articles is
      incomparably more important. No class-conscious worker who
      wishes to understand the development of the ideas of
      the international socialist revolution and its first victory on
      October 25, 1917, can manage without an acquaintance with these
      articles. 
    
N. Lenin
    

Endnotes
[1]
Kommunist—a magazine organised by Lenin. It was
    published in Geneva by the editors of the newspaper
    Sotsial-Demokrat in 1915. Only one issue (a double issue)
    appeared. It contained three articles by Lenin: “ The
    Collapse of the Second International”, “ The Voice of
    an Honest French Socialist ”, and “ Imperialism and
    Socialism in Italy” (see present edition, Vol. 21,
    pp. 205-59, 349-56, 357-66).

    

      Lenin had planned to make Kommunist an international
      organ of the Left Social-Democrats. But the editors of
      Sotsial-Demokrat soon became involved in serious
      disagreements with Bukharin, Pyatakov and Bosch, which grew
      worse after the magazine appeared. In view of this group’s
      anti-Party conduct the editors of Sotsial-Demokrat, on
      Lenin’s suggestion, announced that they considered it
      impossible to continue publishing the magazine. 

    
[2]
Lieberdans—ironic nickname for the Menshevik
    leaders, Lieber and Dan, and their supporters. It caught on after
    a satirical article by Demyan Bedny called “The
    Lieberdan” had appeared in the Moscow Bolshevik newspaper
    Sotsial-Demokrat No. 141, August 25 (September 7),
    1917.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Theses on Banking Policy









Theses on Banking Policy



Vladimir Lenin’s
Theses on Banking Policy

Written: March or April, 1918
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: Proletarskaya Revolutsia Magazine,
    No. 6 (53), 1926
Online Version: marx.org 1997; marxists.org 1999
Transcribed: Conal
    Tuohy
HTML Markup: Brian
    Baggins and David Walters

Theses on Banking Policy were approved at one of the
    meetings between Lenin and bank employees that took place in March and
    April 1918. The theses were drawn up by Lenin in the form of minutes, with
    notes on the results of the voting on the various points and any special
    opinions expressed by those taking part. The Decree on the nationalisation
    of the banks was passed on December 14 (27), 1917 by the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee.
 
A report to be compiled of what has been received in private banks,
    including in the report the liquidation of all affairs of each private
    bank. (Unanimous.)
On the question of how to draw up the report, the following opinions
    expressed:
The former staff (the Commissariat for the State Bank having the right
    to remove some employees) of each private bank will be given an ultimatum
    requiring them to put in order in a very brief period of time all the
    affairs of the bank and to draw up a balance sheet in final form, firstly
    for December 14, 1917, and, secondly, for the last day of operations.
Private banks, in fulfilling this function of compiling reports and
    liquidating all affairs of the bank, act exclusively as branches of the
    united People’s Bank of the Russian Republic and only for the purpose of
    liquidation, without carrying out any new operations. (Hanecki and Gukovsky
    and Lenin.)
Special opinion of Spunde:
The balance sheet for 14:XII:1917 should be drawn up by a
    special commission appointed by us.
No need to draw up another balance sheet.
Further operations, as from 14:XII:l917, to be carried
    out in the name of the People’s Bank.
All private banks, and also the State Bank, to be declared the united
    People’s Bank of the Russian Republic.
All the work of compiling reports to be under the supervision of the
    Commissariat for the State Bank.
The largest possible number of experienced collaborators to be invited,
    including former employees of the State Bank and private banks.
    (Unanimous.)
Banking policy, without being confined to nationalisation of the banks,
    must gradually but steadily be directed towards converting the banks into a
    single apparatus for accounting and regulation of the socialistically
    organised economic life of the country as a whole.
Spunde and Lenin in favour.
    Gukovsky against.
    Ganecki abstains, considers this impossible to carry out.
Extraordinary measures for opening the largest possible number of
    branches of the People’s Bank throughout the country.
These branches to be located in towns and villages so as to provide
    greatest convenience for the public.
Existing branches of former private banks to be used as branches of the
    People’s Bank.
Declaration of inviolability of deposits (which, of course, does not
    diminish the right of the state to levy taxes).
Free circulation of cheques.
Full preservation of workers’ control with regard to withdrawal of money
    from the banks.
Limitation of withdrawals of money for consumer purposes to be
    retained.
A series of improved facilities for the public to be introduced for the
    purpose of accelerating deposits of money in the banks and withdrawal of
    money from the banks, as well as simplification of formalities.
Adoption of measures so that the population should keep in the banks all
    money not absolutely necessary for consumer purposes. Preparation of a law
    and practical steps for compulsory implementation of this principle.In
    their activity, all branches of the People’s Bank within the bounds of the
    Federative Russian Soviet Republic are to be guided strictly by the
    instructions and directives of the central board of management, without
    having the right to establish any local rules and restrictions. exceptions
    are permitted only with the consent of the central board of management.

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Speech at a Meeting in the
Alexeyevsky Riding School, April 7, 1918











Speech At A Meeting In The Alexeyevsky Riding School



V. I. Lenin
Speech At A Meeting In The Alexeyevsky Riding School
April 7, 1918[1]
Newspaper Report


Written:April 7, 1918
First Published:Izvestia Saralovshovo Soveta
No- 71, April 13, 1918 Published according to the newspaper text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 224 to 225.
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish 
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2003. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

(Lenin’s appearance on the platform was greeted with a storm of applause.) We are now passing through the hardest months of the revolution, said Leinn. There is famine, which we must exert all our strength to combat, while the Right S.R.s and Mensheviks look on with malicious joy. Their tactics are the tactics of Dutov and Kornilov, the tactics of the officer cadets who organised an uprising in Moscow against the Soviet government. In this respect the Mensheviks, who are striving to overthrow the Soviet government, are on their side, are on the side of the bourgeoisie, and are thereby betraying us. When we apply the death penalty by shooting, they turn into Toistoyans and shed crocodile tears, shouting about our cruelty. They have forgotten how, along with Kerensky, they drove the workers into the slaughter, while the secret treaties were hidden in their pockets. They have forgotten this and have turned into meek Christians, fretting about mercy.

We cannot overcome our enemies without arms; they are very well aware of that but all the same they try to discredit US.

We have to put the national economy in order, and this gigantic task is the more difficult because our revolution is the first to have gone so far along the path of social transformation. To lighten this difficult task, we have to learn, but to learn not from books, but from action, from experience. Only Soviet power is any good for building the national economy, and therefore I am proposing that you should bring thousands of our comrades into the Soviets throughout the country. Besides that, we have to develop comradely discipline. The workers and peasants must realise that the land and factories belong to them and they must be as careful of them as of their own property.
 
Only now, on looking back and seeing the utter helplessness of the bourgeoisie and the worthlessness of the sabotaging intelligentsia, am I certain of the tremendous progress we have made. In order to continue advancing successfully we must get rid of ignorance and negligence, but it is much more difficult to do that than to overthrow the idiot Romanov or the fool Kerensky.

Germany is strangling us, Japan is attacking us.[2] And it is in this difficult period that the Mensheviks and Right S.R.s, those tender lambs, are shouting about our cruelty, forgetting the gallows that they erected for Comrade Shahumyan.[3] In reply to them, I can say: No, we do not reject the use of force by us against the exploiters.

These tears of the Mensheviks and Right S.R.s evoked by our cruelty are their last attempt at taking part in the political life of the country and at the same time a sign of their weakness. We shall fight them mercilessly. We have to pay now for all the legacy of tsarism, for Nicholas’s and Kerensky’s rule. When, however, we have conquered disorganisation and apathy, then by our unceasing work we shall achieve the great victory of socialism. (Loud applause.)


Endnotes
[1]
The meeting in the Alexeyevsky Riding School in Moscow, attended by 8,000 people,was in protest against the shooting down by the Menshevik government of Georgia of a workers’ meeting held in Tiflis on February 23, 1918, the day of the convocation of the Transcaucasian Seim. After speeches by V. I. Lenin, N. V. Krylenko, N. I. Podvoisky and others, a resolution was passed unanimously slating: “We, workers, ... brand with scorn the criminal and treacherous tactics of the Mensheviks and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, who deal brutally with the Caucasian workers and peasants and associate themselves with the bourgeoisie in welcoming the invasion of foreign plunderers. We declare that the working class has nothing in common with these traitors and will reply to any attempt at seizing the power of the workers and peasants by ruthless suppression of the capitalist counter-revolutionaries and their agents.” (Pravda No. 67, April 9, 1918.)
Lenin’s speetch did not appear in the leading newspapers. In Pravda 677, April 9, 1918 a short notice appeared stating: “Comrade Lenin made a long and vivid speech. He was greeted with loud applause.” 
[2]
Imperialist Japan had just begun its occupation of the Far East. On December 3;0, 1917 (January 12, 1918) a Japanese warship and merchant ship entered the Port of Vladivostok without informing the heal Soviet authorities. The same day the Japanese Consul General irViaclivostok sent the city authorities a Note stating on behalf of the Japanese Government that Japanese warships had been dispatched to the port "for the purpose of protecting our natioaals".

On March 29, 1918 the Menshevik-Socialist-Revolutionary municipal council fell in with the wishes of the Japanese military by declaring itself unable to maintain order in Vladivostok. On April 4, two Japanese were murdered in a planned and organised act of provocation. With this as a pretext, Japanese troops assisted by Russian whiteguards made their first landing and oceugied V1adivostok on April 5. The occupation of the city marked the eginning of the open intervention of the countries of the Entente in the Far East.

When news of the Japanese intervention was received, Lenin sent the Vladivostok Soviet specific instructions on how to fightthe occupying forces (see this volume, p. 226).

[3]
Shahumyan, S. G. (1878-1918)-Temporary Commissar Extraordinary for Caucasian Affairs and Chairman of the Baku Sovietwas constantly persecuted by the Transcaucasian counter-revolutionary Menshevik government. In February 1918 it became known that the Mensheviks intended to murder him. This is what Lenin is referring to when be speaks of a gallows being erected for Comrade Shahumyan. The plot was not carried out at the time simply because Shahumyan successfully evaded capture by the Transcaucasian Menshevik government.

In August 1918 Shabnmyan and other leading Party workers in Baku were arrested by the British intervention forces with the assistance of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. He was one of the 26 Baku commissars who were shot.

Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Directives to the Vladivostok Soviet











Directives To The Vladivostok Soviet



V. I. Lenin
Directives To The Vladivostok Soviet[1]


Written:April 7, 1918
First Published:Published in 1934 in the collection: V. I. Lenin, From 
the Epoch of the Civil War; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, page 226.
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish 
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala

Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive March, 2002




The following telegram must be sent by the direct line to Irkutsk (for Vladivostok):

We consider the situation very serious and issue the most categorical warning to the comrades. Do not harbour any illusions: the Japanese will certainly attack. That is inevitable. Probably all the Allies without exception will help them. Hence it is necessary to begin preparations without the least delay and to prepare seriously, exerting every effort. Above all, attention must be devoted to correct withdrawal retreat, and removal of stores and railway materials. Do not set yourselves unrealisable aims. Prepare to sap and blow up railway lines, and to remove rolling stock and locomotives; prepare minefields around Irkutsk or in the Transbaikal area. Twice every week inform us exactly how many locomotives and how much rolling stock have been removed, and how much remains. Otherwise we do not and shall not believe anything. We have no currency notes now, but we shall have plenty as from the second half of April, but our help is conditional on your practical success in removing rolling stock and locomotives from Vladivostok, in preparing to blow up bridges and so forth.



Lenin

April 7

Endnotes
[1]
Immediately after the Japanese landing in Vladivostok a plenary meeting of the Central Executive Committee of the Soviets of Siberia (Tsentrosibir) passed a resolution protesting against the illegal action taken by the Japanese Government; military law was declared throughout Siberia and all local Soviets undertook to redouble their efforts to organise a Red Army. On April 5 Lenin sent a telegram to Tsentrosibir approving this decision and particularly stressed that "no assurances can now be believed and the only serious guarantee is substantial military preparation on our part" (Lenin Miscellany XXXIV, p. 22). In some localities, however, hopes were entertained of settling the conflict with the aid of commissions from the Entente countries. Lenin sent the telegram published here to discourage these illusions.

Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech on the Financial
Question at the Session of the All-Russia C.E.C, April
18, 1918











Speech On The Financial Question At The Session Of The All-Russia C.E.C.



V. I. Lenin
Speech On The Financial Question At The Session Of The All-Russia C.E.C.

April 18, 1918



Written:April 18, 1918
First Published:Brief newspaper report published on April 19, 1918
in Izvestia VTsIK, No. 77; First Published in full in 1920 in the book Minutes of the Sessions of the All-Russia C.E.C., 4th Convocation. Verbatim Report, Moscow Published according to the text of the book
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 227 to 228
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish 
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala

Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive March, 2002



One thing is clear at the present time: we shall not solve the financial problem in the immediate future, and shall not restore the financial machinery to its usual channels. That is clear to all. It must be said, however, that so far unfortunately none of us are doing anything in this department to find even the landmarks by which it will be possible to bring the financial apparatus on to the proper course. Comrade Gukovsky has proposed a plan to us. I shall not dwell upon whether this plan is good or bad. One thing only is clear to me: at the present time it is impossible to fulfill even the best plan in the financial sphere because as a matter of fact the machinery has not been organised for fulfilling it. If we were to try to carry out any kind of taxation, we would immediately come up against the fact that at present individual regions impose taxation according as someone takes it into his head to do so, as lie has occasion to do so, and as local conditions allow him. In this respect the Soviets, which have power locally, are not connected with one another at the present time. On the one hand, they are therefore divorced from the central authority and, on the other hand, they are insufficiently organised to be able actually to carry out what we draw up here. Let us take an example. I have personally had occasion to see Soviets which not only could not put into effect this financial plan that we are outlining, but which even in their own localities very often do not possess the power that they should have. Very often, owning to the policy which we see in operation just now, these Soviets do not make use of their power, are unable to use it, because power is actually in the hands of certain groups which are often hostile to the Soviets, do not obey the Soviets and which, unfortunately, have a definite armed force at their disposal. In order not to speak abstractly, I shall cite an example. Not far from Moscow, in Ryazan Gubernia, I observed the following. There is a Soviet. Alongside it there is a Revolutionary Military Committee. The latter regards itself as autonomous In relation to the Soviet and itself imposes taxes, without even rendering any account to the Soviet. The Soviet itself also imposes taxes. As you see, if under such circumstances we try to carry out a plan from here, of course, it will not work and, of course, nothing will come of it, because even there, locally the Revolutionary Military Committee does not obey the Soviet and consequently, too, the Soviet cannot do anything for the central government. Hence something has to be done. It is necessary to set up a different organisation so that all the decrees published do not remain merely decrees, and so that they can be put into effect and not left hanging in the air.

Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech in the Moscow Soviet of
Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies,
April 23, 1918. Verbatim Report











Speech In The Moscow Soviet Of Workers’, Peasants’ And Red Army Deputies



V. I. Lenin
 Speech in the Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies
 April 23, 1918
Verbatim Report


Delivered:April 23, 1918
First Published:Published on April 24, 1918 in Pravda No. 79 
and Izvestia VTsIK No. 21; Published according to the Pravda text, collated 
with the verbatim report and the Izvestia text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 229-293.
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish 
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala

Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive March, 2002



 
  Comrades, allow me first of all to greet the newly elected Moscow Soviet of Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies. 



 
   You have had to elect a new membership at an extremely grave time, at a tragic moment when the development of our revolution is entering its most dangerous and difficult phase. Elements hostile to the revolution, all those who support the enemies of the people, all those who follow in the wake of the bourgeoisie, had put great hopes in the elections to our Soviet, for at the present time we are passing through an extremely difficult period, when the victorious advance of the revolution has ended and it has entered a phase of painful experiences and even defeats. And at this moment the proletariat has again shown us the great strength of its class-consciousness. The workers, appreciating the full difficulty of the period we are passing through, clearly understand that the removal of the great afflictions which have now fallen to the lot of the working people depends not on us, but on the whole course of historical events. With heroic determination the workers will shoulder the burden of new deprivations, if they can defend thereby the gains of the October Revolution. 



 
   There is no doubt that, along with severe trials, the revolution has nevertheless entered a phase of new, inconspicuous victories, which do not catch the eye but are not less important than the brilliant victories of the epoch of the October barricades. We are confronted in all their 





magnitude by our two mortal enemies; facing us in full armour are the external and the internal enemies, ready to tear the revolution to pieces and awaiting a suitable moment to deliver a knock-out blow. The external enemy is international imperialism. Armed to the teeth and possessing a wealth of technical equipment, it is awaiting the moment for a new predatory attack on Soviet Russia. Bearing this in mind, we must with merciless clear-sightedness look the ominous truth squarely in the face. 



 
   At the present time, as a result of the most reactionary war which our tormented country has had to endure, we do not have sufficient forces for an active, armed struggle against world reaction; we do not have an army, we do not have the forces with which to oppose the excellently organised contingents of international counter-revolution, which have the strength that comes with up-to-date equipment and ideal discipline. For the time being we are alone and surrounded by deadly enemies. 



 
   At the time of the October uprising of the working people, when we unfurled the Red banner of the socialist revolution before the workers, we went through a period of easy, dazzling success. The workers of other countries, who heard the far-off roar of the Russian revolution, understood what was taking place in Russia and realised that the Russian proletariat’s action furthered their own vital cause. At that time, we easily coped with the reactionary gangs, we easily suppressed the remnants of the Menshevik gangs who were in revolt against the people and who opposed us not by open struggle arms in hand but by the dirty weapon of lies, slander and unprecedented treachery. As a result of our struggle against the counter-revolution we achieved a big victory, as seen from the fact that the counter-revolutionary Kornilov, foremost in audacity, was killed by his own soldiers, who had revolted against him.[1]


 
   Waging an extensive struggle against the domestic counter-revolution on all fronts, we took advantage of the hitch suffered by the international bourgeoisie and delivered a well-timed, powerful body-blow at the now shattered counter-revolution. We can say with confidence that in the main the civil war is at an end. There will be some skirmishes, of course, and in some towns street fighting will 



flare up here or there, due to isolated attempts by the reactionaries to overthrow the strength of the revolution—the Soviet system—but there is no doubt that on the internal front reaction has been irretrievably smashed by the efforts of the insurgent people. Thus we have survived the first period of development of the revolution—the beginning of which dates from the October days—a period of intoxicating success, which did, in fact, go to the heads of some people. 



 
   I repeat again that the most difficult, the gravest phase in the life of our revolution has now begun. The task before us is the inflexible exertion of all our strength and its application to new creative work, for only iron endurance and labour discipline will enable the revolutionary Russian proletariat, as yet so solitary in its gigantic revolutionary work, to hold out till the time of deliverance when the international proletariat will come to our aid. 



 
   We are a revolutionary working-class contingent that has advanced to the forefront, not because we are better than other workers, not because the Russian proletariat is superior to the working class of other countries, but solely because we were one of the most backward countries in the world. We shall achieve final victory only when we succeed at last in conclusively smashing international imperialism, which relies on the tremendous strength of its equipment and discipline. But we shall achieve victory only together with all the workers of other countries, of the whole world. 



 
   By force of circumstances, we have had to make an onerous peace in Brest, and we do not hide the fact that at any moment this peace may be treacherously violated by the numerous enemies of the revolution who are advancing upon us from all sides, and against whom we are powerless to begin an active struggle at the present moment. Bear in mind that anyone who would call you just now to this active, armed, open struggle against international predatory imperialism would commit an act of treachery to the people, would be a voluntary or involuntary agent provocateur and servitor of one or other clique of the imperialists. And anyone who acts in opposition to the tactics to which we have adhered in the recent period—even if he calls himself the most “Left”, even super-Left, Communist—is a bad revolutionary, I will say more, is not a revolutionary at all. (Applause.) 



 
   Our backwardness has put us in the forefront, and we shall perish unless we are capable of holding out until we receive powerful support from workers who have risen in revolt in other countries. Our task consists in steadily continuing our tactics of proletarian struggle. 



 
   We have one extremely dangerous secret enemy, more dangerous than many open counter-revolutionaries; this enemy is the deadly enemy of the socialist revolution and Soviet power, which is a people’s parliament of a new type for the poor, one that has hitherto not existed anywhere—this enemy is the anarchy of the petty proprietor. There is no doubt that we have come near to surmounting the most difficult obstacles in the way of the development of the socialist revolution. The first and foremost task confronting us is the full realisation of the dictatorship of the proletariat in all spheres: in the organisation of labour discipline, in production, and in the distribution of products. The enemy of whom I have spoken is the anarchy of the petty proprietors, whose life is guided by one thought: “I grab all I can—the rest can go hang.” This enemy is more powerful than all the Kornilovs, Dutovs and Kaledins put together. 



 
   These petty kulaks, petty employers and proprietors say: “All the time we have been oppressed, all the time we have been crushed—well, how can we fail to take advantage of such a favourable opportunity.” This phenomenon is a serious obstacle and unless we overcome it victory is inconceivable, for a new Kornilov will grow from each petty proprietor, from each greedy grabber. 



 
   Alongside this danger, the terrible spectre of approaching famine and mass unemployment confronts us, but we see that all class-conscious workers, whose numbers increase not daily but hourly, take into consideration and understand that at the present time the sole means of struggle against these grave dangers is the unrelaxing exertion of all our strength and powerful endurance. And let it be remembered by those who give way to despair, and who lose heart and vigour at difficult moments in our revolution, that we have always said that we cannot pass from capitalism to the full victory of socialism by the bloodless and easy path of persuasion and conciliation, and that we can only reach our goal as the result of a furious struggle. 



 
   The dictatorship of the proletariat stands for the use of force against the exploiters. Our road is through endurance, proletarian solidarity, and the iron dictatorship of the working people. There is no doubt that in many cases the Soviet government has not displayed sufficient determination in the struggle against counter-revolution, and in this respect it has had the appearance not of iron, but of jelly, from which socialism cannot be built. We have not conquered petty-bourgeois anarchy. This country, which the course of history has advanced to the foremost position in the arena of the world revolution, a country devastated and bled white, is in an extremely grave situation and we shall be crushed if we do not counter ruin, disorganisation and despair with the iron dictatorship of the class-conscious workers. We shall be merciless both to our enemies and to all waverers and harmful elements in our midst who dare to bring disorganisation into our difficult creative work of building a new life for the working people. 



 
   We have begun to solve a problem the mastery of which will bring the full guarantee and consolidation of socialism. To overcome all difficulties, to struggle successfully against famine and unemployment, we shall perform an imperceptible, modest but difficult task of state importance, and anyone who opposes us will be a bitter enemy of the world proletariat. 



 
   The elections to the Moscow Soviet have shown how great is the workers’ insight into current events. They have realised that Soviet power is not a showy ornament but something of their own flesh and blood. This last act, that of the elections to our Soviet, has spelt defeat for all those who pinned their hopes on these elections, for all the wavering elements, and this gives me hope and confidence that we are on the right road, which will lead us to the full victory of socialism. (Ovation.) 



Endnotes
[1] In April 1918 it was reported in the press that General Kornilov had been killed by his own soldiers. Later it was established that Kornilov had been killed by an artillery shell on April 13, 1918 during an action against units of the Red Army near Ekaterinodar (now Krasnodar).  


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## The Immediate Tasks of the
Soviet Government











The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government



V. I. Lenin
The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government[1]

Written: March-April 1918
First Published: Published on April 28, 1918 in Pravda
 No. 83 and Izvestia VTsIK No.85; Published according to the text of the pamphlet: N.
 Lenin, The Immediate Task of the Soviet Government 2nd ed., Moscow, 1918, collated
 with the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition,
 Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 235-77
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
 Cymbala
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2002). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
 perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
 Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

This Progress Publishers translation, 
   originally published in 1963, is preceeded by another version published in 1919 
   by the Rand School of Social Sciences.  This earlier version differs in content
   and is entitled The Soviets At Work. Mr. 
   Roland Sheppard has prepared a “side-by-side” version
   (available for download here)
   which compares the differences of the two translations.
 



1. The International Position of the Soviet Government and
 the Fundamental Tasks of the Socialist Revolution
2. The General Slogan of the
 Moment .
3. The New Phase of the Struggle Against the
 Bourgeoisie
4. The Significance of the Struggle for Country-wide
 Accounting and Control
5. Raising the Productivity of Labour
6. The Organisation of Competition
7. “Harmonious Organisation” and Dictatorship .
8. The Development of Soviet Organisation .
9. Conclusion


10.Endnotes


The International Position Of The Russian Soviet Republic And The Fundamental Tasks Of
 The Socialist Revolution


Thanks to the peace which has been achieved—despite its extremely onerous character and extreme instability—the Russian Soviet Republic has gained an opportunity to concentrate its efforts for a while on the most important and most difficult aspect of the socialist revolution, namely, the task of organisation. This task was clearly and definitely set before all the working and oppressed people in the fourth paragraph (Part 4) of the resolution adopted at the Extraordinary Congress of Soviets in Moscow on March 15, 1918, in that paragraph (or part) which speaks of the self-discipline of the working people and of the ruthless struggle against chaos and disorganisation.[See also Resolution On Ratification Of The Brest Treaty—Editor.] Of course, the peace achieved by the Russian Soviet Republic is unstable not because she is now thinking of resuming military operations; apart from bourgeois counter-revolutionaries and their henchmen (the Mensheviks and others), no sane politician thinks of doing that. The instability of the peace is due to the fact that in the imperialist states bordering on Russia to the West and the East, which command enormous military forces, the military party, tempted by Russia’s momentary weakness and egged on by capitalists, who hate socialism and are eager for plunder, may gain the upper hand at any moment. Under these circumstances the only real, not paper, guarantee of peace we have is the antagonism among the imperialist powers, which has reached extreme limits, and which is apparent on the one hand in the resumption of the imperialist butchery of the peoples in the West, and on the other hand in the extreme intensification of imperialist rivalry between Japan and America for supremacy in the Pacific and on the Pacific coast.
It goes without saying that with such an unreliable guard for protection, our Soviet Socialist Republic is in an extremely unstable and certainly critical international position. All our efforts must be exerted to the very utmost to make use of the respite given us by the combination of circumstances so that we can heal the very severe wounds innicted by the war upon the entire social organism of Russia and bring about an economic revival, without which a real increase in our country’s defence potential is inconceivable.
It also goes without saying that we shall be able to render effective assistance to the socialist revolution in the West which has been delayed for a number of reasons, only to the extent that we are able to fulfil the task of organisation confronting us.
A fundamental condition for the successful accomplishment of the primary task of organisation confronting us is that the people’s political leaders, i.e., the members of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), and following them all the class-conscious representatives of the mass of the working people, shall fully appreciate the radical distinction in this respect between previous bourgeois revolutions and the present socialist revolution.
In bourgeois revolutions, the principal task of the mass of working people was to fulfil the negative or destructive work of abolishing feudalism, monarchy and medievalism. The positive or constructive work of organising the new society was carried out by the property-owning bourgeois minority of the population. And the latter carried out this task with relative ease, despite the resistance of the workers and the poor peasants, not only because the resistance of the people exploited by capital was then extremely weak, since they were scattered and uneducated, but also because the chief organising force of anarchically built capitalist society is the spontaneously growing and expanding national and international market.
In every socialist revolution, however—and consequently in the socialist revolution in Russia which we began on October 25, 1917—the principal task of the proletariat, and of the poor peasants which it leads, is the positive or constructive work of setting up an extremely intricate and delicate system of new organisational relationships extending to the planned production and distribution of the goods required for the existence of tens of millions of people. Such a revolution can be successfully carried out only if the majority of the population, and primarily the majority of the working people, engage in independent creative work as makers of history. Only if the proletariat and the poor peasants display sufficient class-consciousness, devotion to principle, self-sacrifice and perseverance, will the victory of the socialist revolution be assured. By creating a new, Soviet type of state, which gives the working and oppressed people the chance to take an active part in the independent building up of a new society, we solved only a small part of this difficult problem . The principal difficulty lies in the economic sphere, namely, the introduction of the strictest and universal accounting and control of the production and distribution of goods, raising the productivity of labour and socialising production in practice.
The development of the Bolshevik Party, which today is the governing party in Russia, very strikingly indicates the nature of the turning-point in history we have now reached, which is the peculiar feature of the present political situation, and which calls for a new orientation of Soviet power, i.e., for a new presentation of new tasks.
The first task of every party of the future is to convince, the majority of the people that its programme and tactics are correct. This task stood in the forefront both in tsarist times and in the period of the Chernovs’ and Tseretelis’ policy of compromise with the Kerenskys and Kishkins. This task has now been fulfilled in the main, for, as the recent Congress of Soviets in Moscow incontrovertibly proved, the majority of the workers and peasants of Russia are obviously on the side of the Bolsheviks; but of course, it is far from being completely fulfilled (and it can never be completely fulfilled).
The second task that confronted our Party was to capture political power and to suppress the resistance of the exploiters. This task has not been completely fulfilled either, and it cannot be ignored because the monarchists and Constitutional-Democrats on the one hand, and their henchmen and hangers-on, the Mensheviks and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, on the other, are continuing their efforts to unite for the purpose of overthrowing Soviet power. In the main, however, the task of suppressing the resistance of the exploiters was fulfilled in the period from October 25, 1917, to (approximately) February 1918, or to the surrender of Bogayevsky.[2]
A third task is now coming to the fore as the immediate task and one which constitutes the peculiar feature of the present situation, namely, the task of organising administration of Russia. Of course, we advanced and tackled this task on the very day following October 25, 1917. Up to now, however, since the resistance of the exploiters still took the form of open civil war, up to now the task of administration could not become the main, the central task.
Now it has become the main and central task. We, the Bolshevik Party, have convinced Russia. We have won Russia from the rich for the poor, from the exploiters for the working people. Now we must administer Russia. And the whole peculiarity of the present situation, the whole difficulty, lies in understanding the specific features of the transition from the principal task of convincing the peopIe and of suppressing the exploiters by armed force to the principal task of administration.
For the first time in human history a socialist party has managed to complete in the main the conquest of power and the suppression of the exploiters, and has managed to approach directly the task of administration. We must prove worthy executors of this most difficult (and most gratifying) task of the socialist revolution. We must fully realise that in order to administer successfully, besides being able to convince people, besides being able to win a civil war, we must be able to do practical organisational work. This is the most difficult task, because it is a matter of organising in a new way the most deep-rooted, the economic, foundations of life of scores of millions of people. And it is the most gratifying task, because only after it has been fulfilled (in the principal and main outlines) will it be possible to say that Russia has become not only a Soviet, but also a socialist, republic.  The General Slogan Of The Moment The objective situation reviewed above, which has been created by the extremely onerous and unstable peace, the terrible state of ruin, the unemployment and famine we inherited from the war and the rule of the bourgeoisie (represented by Kerensky and the Mensheviks and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries who supported him), all this has inevitably caused extreme weariness and even exhaustion of wide sections of the working people. These people insistently demand—and cannot but demand—a respite. The task of the day is to restore the productive forces destroyed by the war and by bourgeois rule; to heal the wounds inflicted by the war, by the defeat in the war, by profiteering and the attempts of the bourgeoisie to restore the overthrown rule of the exploiters; to achieve economic revival; to provide reliable protection of elementary order. It may sound paradoxical, but in fact, considering the objective conditions indicated above, it is absolutely certain that at the present moment the Soviet system can secure Russia’s transition to socialism only if these very elementary, extremely elementary problems of maintaining public life are practically solved in spite of the resistance of the bourgeoisie, the Mensheviks and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries. In view of the specific features of the present situation, and in view of the existence of Soviet power with its land socialisation law, workers’ control law, etc., the practical solution of these extremely elementary problems and the overcoming of the organisational difficulties of the first stages of progress toward socialism are now two aspects of the same picture.
Keep regular and honest accounts of money, manage economically, do not be lazy, do not steal, observe the strictest labour discipline—it is these slogans, justly scorned by the revolutionary proletariat when the bourgeoisie used them to conceal its rule as an exploiting class, that are now, since the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, becoming the immediate and the principal slogans of the moment. On the one hand, the practical application of these slogans by the mass of working people is the sole condition for the salvation of a country which has been tortured almost to death by the imperialist war and by the imperialist robbers (headed by Kerensky); on the other hand, the practical application of these slogans by the Soviet State, by its methods, on the basis of its laws, is a necessary and sufficient condition for the final victory of socialism. This is precisely what those who contemptuously brush aside the idea of putting such “hackneyed” and “trivial” slogans in the forefront fail to understand. In a small-peasant country, which overthrew tsarism only a year ago, and which liberated itself from the Kerenskys less than six months ago, there has naturally remained not a little of spontaneous anarchy, intensified by the brutality and savagery that accompany every protracted and reactionary war, and there has arisen a good deal of despair and aimless bitterness. And if we add to this the provocative policy of the lackeys of the bourgeoisie (the Mensheviks, the Right Socialist-Revolulionaries, etc.) it will become perfectly clear what prolonged and persistent efforts must be exerted by the best and the most class-conscious workers and peasants in order to bring about a complete change in the mood of the people and to bring them on to the proper path of steady and disciplined labour. Only such a transition brought about by the mass of the poor (the proletarians and semi-proletarians) can consummate the victory over the bourgeoisie and particularly over the peasant bourgeoisie, more stubborn and numerous.  The New Phase Of The Struggle Against The Bourgeoisie The bourgeoisie in our country has been conquered, but it has not yet been uprooted, not yet destroyed, and not even utterly broken. That is why we are faced with a new and higher form of struggle against the bourgeoisie, the transition from the very simple task of further expropriating the capitalists to the much more complicated and difficult task of creating conditions in which it will be impossible for the bourgeoisie to exist, or for a new bourgeoisie to arise. Clearly. this task is immeasurably more significant than the previous one; and until it is fulfilled there will be no socialism.
If we measure our revolution by the scale of West-European revolutions we shall find that at the present moment we are approximately at the level reached in 1793 and 1871. We can be legitimately proud of having risen to this level, and of having certainly, in one respect, advanced somewhat further, namely: we have decreed and introduced through out Russia the highest type of state—Soviet power. Under no circumstances, however, can we rest content with what we have achieved, because we have only just started the transition to socialism, we have not yet done the decisive thing in this respect.
The decisive thing is the organisation of the strictest and country-wide accounting and control of production and distribution of goods. And yet, we have not yet introduced accounting and control in those enterprises and in those branches and fields of economy which we have taken away from the bourgeoisie; and without this there can be no thought of achieving the second and equally essential material condition for introducing socialism, namely, raising the productivity of labour on a national scale.
That is why the present task could not be defined by the simple formula: continue the offensive against capital. Although we have certainly not finished off capital and although it is certainly necessary to continue the offensive against this enemy of the working people, such a formula would be inexact, would not be concrete, would not take into account the peculiarity of the present situation in which, in order to go on advancing successfully in the future, we must “suspend” our offensive now.
This can be explained by comparing our position in the war against capital with the position of a victorious army that has captured, say, a half or two-thirds of the enemy’s territory and is compelled to halt in order to muster its forces, to replenish its supplies of munitions, repair and reinforce the lines of communication, build new storehouses, bring up new reserves, etc. To suspend the offensive of a victorious army under such conditions is necessary precisely in order to gain the rest of the enemy’s territory, i.e., in order to achieve complete victory. Those who have failed to understand that the objective state of affairs at the present moment dictates to us precisely such a “suspension” of the offensive against capital have failed to understand anything at all about the present political situation.
It goes without saying that we can speak about the “suspension” of the offensive against capital only in quotation marks, i.e., only metaphorically. In ordinary war, a general order can be issued to stop the offensive, the advance can actually be stopped. In the war against capital, however, the advance cannot be stopped, and there can be no thought of our abandoning the further expropriation of capital. What we are discussing is the shifting of the centre of gravity of our economic and political work. Up to now measures for the direct expropriation of the expropriators were in the forefront. Now the organisation of accounting and control in those enterprises in which the capitalists have already been expropriated, and in all other enterprises, advances to the forefront.
If we decided to continue to expropriate capital at the same rate at which we have been doing it up to now, we should certainly suffer defeat, because our work of organising proletarian accounting and control has obviously— obviously to every thinking person—fallen behind the work of directly “expropriating the expropriators”. If we now concentrate all our efforts on the organisation of accounting and control, we shall be able to solve this problem, we shall be able to make up for lost time, we shall completely win our “campaign” against capital.
But is not the admission that we must make up for lost time tantamount to admission of some kind of an error? Not in the least. Take another military example. If it is possible to defeat and push back the enemy merely with detachments of light cavalry, it should be done. But if this can be done successfully only up to a certain point, then it is quite conceivable that when this point has been reached, it will be necessary to bring up heavy artillery. By admitting that it is now necessary to make up for lost time in bringing up heavy artillery, we do not admit that the successful cavalry attack was a mistake.
Frequently, the lackeys of the bourgeoisie reproached us for having launched a “Red Guard” attack on capital. The reproach is absurd and is worthy only of the lackeys of the money-bags, because at one time the “Red Guard” attack on capital was absolutely dictated by circumstances. Firstly, at that time capital put up military resistance through the medium of Kerensky and Krasnov, Savinkov and Gotz (Gegechkori is putting up such resistance even now), Dutov and Bogayevsky. Military resistance cannot be broken except by military means, and the Red Guards fought in the noble and supreme historical cause of liberating the working and exploited people from the yoke of the exploiters.
Secondly, we could not at that time put methods of administration in the forefront in place of methods of suppression, because the art of administration is not innate, but is acquired by experience. At that time we lacked this experience; now we have it. Thirdly, at that time we could not have specialists in the various fields of knowledge and technology at our disposal because those specialists were either fighting in the ranks of the Bogayevskys, or were still able to put up systematic and stubborn passive resistance by way of sabotage. Now we have broken the sabotage. The “Red Guard” attack on capital was successful, was victorious, because we broke capital’s military resistance and its resistance by sabotage.
Does that mean that a “Red Guard” attack on capital is always appropriate, under all circumstances, that we have no other means of fighting capital? It would be childish to think so. We achieved victory with the aid of light cavalry, but we also have heavy artillery. We achieved victory by methods of suppression; we shall be able to achieve victory also by methods of administration. We must know how to change our methods of fighting the enemy to suit changes in the situation. We shall not for a moment renounce “Red Guard” suppression of the Savinkovs and Gegechkoris and all other landowner and bourgeois counter-revolutionaries. We shall not be so foolish, however, as to put “Red Guard” methods in the forefront at a time when the period in which Red Guard attacks were necessary has, in the main, drawn to a close (and to a victorious close), and when the period of utilising bourgeois specialists by the proletarian state power for the purpose of reploughing the soil in order to prevent the growth of any bourgeoisie whatever is knocking at the door.
This is a peculiar epoch, or rather stage of development, and in order to defeat capital completely, we must be able to adapt the forms of our struggle to the peculiar conditions of this stage.
Without the guidance of experts in the various fields of knowledge, technology and experience, the transition to socialism will be impossible, because socialism calls for a conscious mass advance to greater productivity of labour compared with capitalism, and on the basis achieved by capitalism. Socialism must achieve this advance in its own way, by its own methods—or, to put it more concretely, by Soviet methods. And the specialists, because of the whole social environment which made them specialists, are, in the main, inevitably bourgeois. Had our proletariat, after capturing power, quickly solved the problem of accounting, control and organisation on a national scale (which was impossible owing to the war and Russia’s backwardness), then we, after breaking the sabotage, would also have completely subordinated these bourgeois experts to ourselves by means of universal accounting and control. Owing to the considerable “delay” in introducing accounting and control generally, we, although we have managed to conquer sabotage, have not yet created the conditions which would place the bourgeois specialists at our disposal. The mass of saboteurs are “going to work”, but the best organisers and the top experts can be utilised by the state either in the old way, in the bourgeois way (i.e., for high salaries), or in the new way, in the proletarian way (i.e., creating the conditions of national accounting and control from below, which would inevitably and of itself subordinate the experts and enlist them for our work).
Now we have to resort to the old bourgeois method and to agree to pay a very high price for the “services” of the top bourgeois experts. All those who are familiar with the subject appreciate this, but not all ponder over the significance of this measure being adopted by the proletarian state. Clearly, this measure is a compromise, a departure from the principles of the Paris Commune and of every proletarian power, which call for the reduction of all salaries to the level of the wages of the average worker, which urge that careerism be fought not merely in words, but in deeds.
Moreover, it is clear that this measure not only implies the cessation—in a certain field and to a certain degree—of the offensive against capital (for capital is not a sum of money, but a definite social relation); it is also a step backward on the part of our socialist Soviet state power, which from the very outset proclaimed and pursued the policy of reducing high salaries to the level of the wages of the average worker.[3]
Of course, the lackeys of the bourgeoisie, particularly the small fry, such as the Mensheviks, the Novaya Zhizn people and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, will giggle over our confession that we are taking a step backward. But we need not mind their giggling. We must study the specific features of the extremely difficult and new path to socialism without concealing our mistakes and weaknesses, and try to be prompt in doing what has been left undone. To conceal from the people the fact that the enlistment of bourgeois experts by means of extremely high salaries is a retreat from the principles of the Paris Commune would be sinking to the level of bourgeois politicians and deceiving the people. Frankly explaining how and why we took this step backward, and then publicly discussing what means are available for making up for lost time, means educating the people and learning from experience, learning together with the people how to build socialism. There is hardly a single victorious military campaign in history in which the victor did not commit certain mistakes, suffer partial reverses, temporarily yield something and in some places retreat. The “campaign” which we have undertaken against capitalism is a million times more difficult than the most difficult military campaign, and it would be silly and disgraceful to give way to despondency because of a particular and partial retreat.
We shall now discuss the question from the practical point of view. Let us assume that the Russian Soviet Republic requires one thousand first-class scientists and experts in various fields of knowledge, technology and practical experience to direct the labour of the people towards securing the speediest possible economic revival. Let us assume also that we shall have to pay these “stars of the first magnitude"—of course the majority of those who shout loudest about the corruption of the workers are themselves utterly corrupted by bourgeois morals—25,000 rubles per annum each. Let us assume that this sum (25,000,000 rubles) will have to be doubled (assuming that we have to pay bonuses for particularly successful and rapid fulfilment of the most important organisational and technical tasks), or even quadrupled (assuming that we have to enlist several hundred foreign specialists, who are more demanding). The question is, would the annual expenditure of fifty or a hundred million rubles by the Soviet Republic for the purpose of reorganising the labour of the people on modern scientific and technological lines be excessive or too heavy? Of course not. The overwhelming majority of the class-conscious workers and peasants will approve of this expenditure because they know from practical experience that our backwardness causes us to lose thousands of millions, and that we have not yet reached that degree of organisation, accounting and control which would induce all the “stars” of the bourgeois intelligentsia to participate voluntarily in our work.
It goes without saying that this question has another side to it. The corrupting influence of high salaries—both upon the Soviet authorities (especially since the revolution occurred so rapidly that it was impossible to prevent a certain number of adventurers and rogues from getting into positions of authority, and they, together with a number of inept or dishonest commissars, would not be averse to becoming “star” embezzlers of state funds) and upon the mass of the workers—is indisputable. Every thinking and honest worker and poor peasant, however, will agree with us, will admit, that we cannot immediately rid ourselves of the evil legacy of capitalism, and that we can liberate the Soviet Republic from the duty of paying an annual “tribute” of fifty million or one hundred million rubles (a tribute for our own-backwardness in organising country-wide accounting and control from below ) only by organising ourselves, by tightening up discipline in our own ranks, by purging our ranks of all those who are “preserving the legacy of capitalism”, who “follow the traditions of capitalism”, i.e., of idlers, parasites and embezzlers of statefunds (now all the land, all the factories and all the railways are the “state funds” of the Soviet Republic). If the class-conscious advanced workers and poor peasants manage with the aid of the Soviet institutions to organise, become disciplined, pull themselves together, create powerful labour discipline in the course of one year, then in a year’s time we shall throw off this “tribute”, which can be reduced even before that . . . in exact proportion to the successes we achieve in our workers’ and peasants’ labour discipline and organisation. The sooner we ourselves, workers and peasants, learn the best labour discipline and the most modern technique of labour, using the bourgeois experts to teach us, the sooner we shall liberate ourselves from any “tribute” to these specialists.
Our work of organising country-wide accounting and control of production and distribution under the supervision of the proletariat has lagged very much behind our work of directly expropriating the expropriators. This proposition is of fundamental importance for understanding the specific features of the present situation and the tasks of the Soviet government that follow from it. The centre of gravity of our struggle against the bourgeoisie is shifting to the organisation of such accounting and control. Only with this as our starting-point will it be possible to determine correctly the immediate tasks of economic and financial policy in the sphere of nationalisation of the banks, monopolisation of foreign trade, the state control of money circulation, the introduction of a property and income tax satisfactory from the proletarian point of view, and the introduction of compulsory labour service.
We have been lagging very far behind in introducing socialist reforms in these spheres (very, very important spheres), and this is because accounting and control are insufficiently organised in general. It goes without saying that this is one of the most difficult tasks, and in view of the ruin caused by the war, it can be fulfilled only over a long period of time; but we must not forget that it is precisely here that the bourgeoisie—and particularly the numerous petty and peasant bourgeoisie—are putting up the most serious fight, disrupting the control that is already being organised, disrupting the grain monopoly, for example, and gaining positions for profiteering and speculative trade. We have far from adequately carried out the things we have decreed, and the principal task of the moment is to concentrate all efforts on the businesslike, practical realisation of the principles of the reforms which have already become law (but not yet reality).
In order to proceed with the nationalisation of the banks and to go on steadfastly towards transforming the banks into nodal points of public accounting under socialism, we must first of all, and above all, achieve real success in increasing the number of branches of the People’s Bank, in attracting deposits, in simplifying the paying in and withdrawal of deposits by the public, in abolishing queues, in catching and shooting bribe-takers and rogues, etc. At first we must really carry out the simplest things, properly organise what is available, and then prepare for the more intricate things.
Consolidate and improve the state monopolies (in grain, leather, etc.) which have already been introduced, and by doing so prepare for the state monopoly of foreign trade. Without this monopoly we shall not be able to “free ourselves” from foreign capital by paying “tribute”.[4] And the possibility of building up socialism depends entirely upon whether we shall be able, by paying a certain tribute to foreign capital during a certain transitional period, to safeguard our internal economic independence.
We are also lagging very far behind in regard to the collection of taxes generally, and of the property and income tax in particular. The imposing of indemnities upon the bourgeoisie—a measure which in principle is absolutely permissible and deserves proletarian approval—shows that in this respect we are still nearer to the methods of warfare (to win Russia from the rich for the poor) than to the methods of administration. In order to become stronger, however, and in order to be able to stand firmer on our feet, we must adopt the latter methods, we must substitute for the indemnities imposed upon the bourgeoisie the constant and regular collection of a property and income tax, which will bring a greater return to the proletarian state, and which calls for better organisation on our part and better accounting and control.[5]
The fact that we are late in introducing compulsory labour service also shows that the work that is coming to the fore at the present time is precisely the preparatory organisational work that, on the one hand, will finally consolidate our gains and that, on the other, is necessary in order to prepare for the operation of “surrounding” capital and compelling it to “surrender”. We ought to begin introducing compulsory labour service immediately, but we must do so very gradually and circumspectly, testing every step by practical experience, and, of course, taking the first step by introducing compulsory labour service for the rich. The introduction of work and consumers’ budget books for every bourgeois, including every rural bourgeois, would be an important step towards completely “surrounding” the enemy and towards the creation of a truly popular accounting and control of the production and distribution of goods.  The Significance Of The Struggle For Country-Wide Accounting And Control The state, which for centuries has been an organ for oppression and robbery of the people, has left us a legacy of the people’s supreme hatred and suspicion of everything that is connected with the state. It is very difficult to overcome this, and only a Soviet government can do it. Even a Soviet government, however, will require plenty of time and enormous perseverance to accomplish it. This “legacy” is especially apparent in the problem of accounting and control—the fundamental problem facing the socialist revolution on the  morrow of the overthrow of the bourgeoisie. A certain amount of time will inevitably pass before the people, who feel free for the first time now that the landowners and the bourgeoisie have been overthrown, will understand—not from books, but from their own, Soviet experience—will understand and feel that without comprehensive state accounting and control of the production and distribution of goods, the power of the working people, the freedom of the working people, cannot be maintained, and that a return to the yoke of capitalism is inevitable.
All the habits and traditions of the bourgeoisie, and of the petty bourgeoisie in particular, also oppose state control, and uphold the inviolability of “sacred private property”, of “sacred” private enterprise. It is now particularly clear to us how correct is the Marxist thesis that anarchism and anarcho-syndicalism are bourgeois trends, how irreconcilably opposed they are to socialism, proletarian dictatorship and communism. The fight to instill into the people’s minds the idea of Soviet state control and accounting, and to carry out this idea in practice; the fight to break with the rotten past, which taught the people to regard the procurement of bread and clothes as a “private” affair, and buying and selling as a transaction “which concerns only myself"—is a great fight of world-historic significance, a fight between socialist consciousness and bourgeois-anarchist spontaneity.
We have introduced workers’ control as a law, but this law is only just beginning to operate and is only just beginning to penetrate the minds of broad sections of the proletariat. In our agitation we do not sufficiently explain that lack of accounting and control in the production and distribution of goods means the death of the rudiments of socialism, means the embezzlement of state funds (for all property belongs to the state and the state is the Soviet state in which power belongs to the majority of the working people). We do not sufficiently explain that carelessness in accounting and control is downright aiding and abetting the German and the Russian Kornilovs, who can overthrow the power of the working people only if we fail to cope with the task of accounting and control, and who, with the aid of the whole of the rural bourgeoisie, with the aid of the Constitutional-Democrats, the Mensheviks and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, are “watching” us and waiting for an opportune moment to attack us. And the advanced workers and peasants do not think and speak about this sufficiently. Until workers’ control has become a fact, until the advanced workers have organised and carried out a victorious and ruthless crusade against the violators of this control, or against those who are careless in matters of control, it will be impossible to pass from the first step (from workers’ control) to the second step towards socialism, i.e., to pass on to workers’ regulation of production.
The socialist state can arise only as a network of producers’ and consumers’ communes, which conscientiously keep account of their production and consumption, economise on labour, and steadily raise the productivity of labour, thus making it possible to reduce the working day to seven, six and even fewer hours. Nothing will be achieved unless the strictest, country-wide, comprehensive accounting and control of grain and the production of grain (and later of all other essential goods) are set going. Capitalism left us a legacy of mass organisations which can facilitate our transition to the mass accounting and control of the distribution of goods, namely, the consumers’ co-operative societies. In Russia these societies are not so well developed as in the advanced countries, nevertheless, they have over ten million members. The Decree on Consumers’ Co-operative Societies,[6] issued the other day, is an extremely significant phenomenon, which strikingly illustrates the peculiar position and the specific tasks of the Soviet Socialist Republic at the present moment.
The decree is an agreement with the bourgeois co-operative societies and the workers’ co-operative societies which still adhere to the bourgeois point of view. It is an agreement, or compromise, firstly because the representatives of the above-mentioned institutions not only took part in discussing the decree, but actually had a decisive say in the matter, for the parts of the decree which were strongly opposed by these institutions were dropped. Secondly, the essence of the compromise is that the Soviet government has abandoned the principle of admission of new members to co-operative societies without entrance fees (which is the only consistently proletarian principle); it has also abandoned the idea of uniting the whole population of a given locality in a single co-operative society. Contrary to this principle, which is the only socialist principle and which corresponds to the task of abolishing classes, the “working-class co-operative societies” (which in this case call themselves “class” societies only because they subordinate themselves to the class interests of the bourgeoisie) were given the right to continue to exist. Finally, the Soviet government’s proposal to expel the bourgeoisie entirely from the boards of the co-operative societies was also considerably modified, and only owners of private capitalist trading and industrial enterprises were forbidden to serve on the boards.
Had the proletariat, acting through the Soviet government, managed to organise accounting and control on a national scale, or at least laid the foundation for such control, it would not have been necessary to make such compromises. Through the food departments of the Soviets, through the supply organisations under the Soviets we should have organised the population into a single co-operative society under proletarian management. We should have done this without the assistance of the bourgeois co-operative societies, without making any concession to the purely bourgeois principle which prompts the workers’ co-operative societies to remain workers’ societies side by side with bourgeois societies, instead of subordinating these bourgeois co-operative societies entirely to themselves, merging the two together and taking the entire management of the society and the supervision of the consumption of the rich in their own hands.
In concluding such an agreement with the bourgeois co-operative societies, the Soviet government concretely defined its tactical aims and its peculiar methods of action in the present stage of development as follows: by directing the bourgeois elements, utilising them, making certain partial concessions to them, we create the conditions for further progress that will be slower than we at first anticipated, but surer, with the base and lines of communication better secured and with the positions which have been won better consolidated. The Soviets can (and should ) now gauge their successes in the field of socialist construction, among other things, by extremely clear, simple and practical standards, namely, in how many communities (communes or villages, or blocks of houses, etc.) co-operative societies have been organised, and to what extent their development has reached the point of embracing the whole population .
 Raising the Productivity of Labour In every socialist revolution, after the proletariat has solved the problem of capturing power, and to the extent that the task of expropriating the expropriators and suppressing their resistance has been carried out in the main, there necessarily comes to the forefront the fundamental task of creating a social system superior to capitalism, namely, raising the productivity of labour, and in this connection (and for this purpose) securing better organisation of labour. Our Soviet state is precisely in the position where, thanks to the victories over the exploiters—from Kerensky to Kornilov—it is able to approach this task directly, to tackle it in earnest. And here it becomes immediately clear that while it is possible to take over the central government in a few days, while it is possible to suppress the military resistance (and sabotage) of the exploiters even in different parts of a great country in a few weeks, the capital solution of the problem of raising the productivity of labour requires, at all events (particularly after a most terrible and devastating war), several years. The protracted nature of the work is certainly dictated by objective circumstances.
The raising of the productivity of labour first of all requires that the material basis of large-scale industry shall be assured, namely, the development of the production of fuel, iron, the engineering and chemical industries. The Russian Soviet Republic enjoys the favourable position of having at its command, even after the Brest peace, enormous reserves of ore (in the Urals), fuel in Western Siberia (coal), in the Caucasus and the South-East (oil), in Central Russia (peat), enormous timber reserves, water power, raw materials for the chemical industry (Karabugaz), etc. The development of these natural resources by methods of modern technology will provide the basis for the unprecedented progress of the productive forces.
Another condition for raising the productivity of labour is, firstly, the raising of the educational and cultural level of the mass of the population. This is now taking place extremely rapidly, a fact which those who are blinded by bourgeois routine are unable to see; they are unable to understand what an urge towards enlightenment and initiative is now developing among the “lower ranks” of the people thanks to the Soviet form of organisation. Secondly, a condition for economic revival is the raising of the working people’s discipline, their skill, the effectiveness, the intensity of labour and its better organisation.
In this respect the situation is particularly bad and even hopeless if we are to believe those who have allowed themselves to be intimidated by the bourgeoisie or by those who are serving the bourgeoisie for their own ends. These people do not understand that there has not been, nor could there be, a revolution in which the supporters of the old system did not raise a howl about chaos, anarchy, etc. naturally, among the people who have only just thrown off an unprecedentedly savage yoke there is deep and widespread seething and ferment; the working out of new principles of labour discipline by the people is a very protracted process, and this process could not even start until complete victory had been achieved over the landowners and the bourgeoisie.
We, however, without in the least yielding to the despair (it is often false despair) which is spread by the bourgeoisie and the bourgeois intellectuals (who have despaired of retaining their old privileges), must under no circumstances conceal an obvious evil. On the contrary, we shall expose it and intensify the Soviet methods of combating it, because the victory of socialism is inconceivable without the victory of proletarian conscious discipline over spontaneous petty-bourgeois anarchy, this real guarantee of a possible restoration of Kerenskyism and Kornilovism.
The more class-conscious vanguard of the Russian proletariat has already set itself the task of raising labour discipline. For example, both the Central Committee of the Metalworkers’ Union and the Central Council of Trade Unions have begun to draft the necessary measures and decrees.[7]This work must be supported and pushed ahead with all speed. We must raise the question of piece-work[8] and apply and test it in practice; we must raise the question of applying much of what is scientific and progressive in the Taylor system; we must make wages correspond to the total amount of goods turned out, or to the amount of work done by the railways, the water transport system, etc., etc.
The Russian is a bad worker compared with people in advanced countries. It could not be otherwise under the tsarist regime and in view of the persistence of the hangover from serfdom. The task that the Soviet government must set the people in all its scope is—learn to work. The Taylor system, the last word of capitalism in this respect, like all capitalist progress, is a combination of the refined brutality of bourgeois exploitation and a number of the greatest scientific achievements in the field of analysing mechanical motions during work, the elimination of superfluous and awkward motions, the elaboration of correct methods of work, the introduction of the best system of accounting and control, etc. The Soviet Republic must at all costs adopt all that is valuable in the achievements of science and technology in this field. The possibility of building socialism depends exactly upon our success in combining the Soviet power and the Soviet organisation of administration with the up-to-date achievements of capitalism. We must organise in Russia the study and teaching of the Taylor system and systematically try it out and adapt it to our own ends. At the same time, in working to raise the productivity of labour, we must take into account the specific features of the transition period from capitalism to socialism, which, on the one hand, require that the foundations be laid of the socialist organisation of competition, and, on the other hand, require the use of compulsion, so that the slogan of the dictatorship of the proletariat shall not be desecrated by the practice of a lily-livered proletarian government.

The Organisation Of Competition Among the absurdities which the bourgeoisie are fond of spreading about socialism is the allegation that socialists deny the importance of competition. In fact, it is only socialism which, by abolishing classes, and, consequently, by abolishing the enslavement of the people, for the first time opens the way for competition on a really mass scale. And it is precisely the Soviet form of organisation, by ensuring transition from the formal democracy of the bourgeois republic to real participation of the mass of working people in administration, that for the first time puts competition on a broad basis. It is much easier to organise this in the political field than in the economic field; but for the success of socialism, it is the economic field that matters.
Take, for example, a means of organising competition such as publicity. The bourgeois republic ensures publicity only formally; in practice, it subordinates the press to capital, entertains the “mob” with sensationalist political trash and conceals what takes place in the workshops, in commercial transactions, contracts, etc., behind a veil of “trade secrets”, which protect “the sacred right of property”. The Soviet government has abolished trade secrets[9]; it has taken a new path; but we have done hardly anything to utilise publicity for the purpose of encouraging economic competition. While ruthlessly suppressing the thoroughly mendacious and insolently slanderous bourgeois press, we must set to work systematically to create a press that will not entertain and fool the people with political sensation and trivialities, but which will submitthe questions of everyday economic life to the people’s judgement and assist in the serious study of these questions. Every factory, every village is a producers’ and consumers’ commune, whose right and duty it is to apply the general Soviet laws in their own way ("in their own way”, not in the sense of violating them, but in the sense that they can apply them in various forms) and in their own way to solve the problem of accounting in the production and distribution of goods. Under capitalism, this was the Ã¢“private affairÃ¢” of the individual capitalist, landowner or kulak. Under the Soviet system, it is not a private affair, but a most important affair of state.
We have scarcely yet started on the enormous, difficult but rewarding task of organising competition between communes, of introducing accounting and publicity in the process of the production of grain, clothes and other things, of transforming dry, dead, bureaucratic accounts into living examples, some repulsive, others attractive. Under the capitalist mode of production, the significance of individual example, say the example of a co-operative workshop, was inevitably very much restricted, and only those imbued with petty-bourgeois illusions could dream of "correcting” capitalisim through the example of virtuous institutions. After political power has passed to the proletariat, after the expropriators have been expropriated, the situation radically changes andeas prominent socialists have repeatedly pointed out—force of example for the first time is able to influence the people. Model communes must and will serve as educators, teachers, helping to raise the backward communes. The press must serve as an instrument of socialist construction, give publicity to the successes achieved by the model communes in all their details, must study the causes of these successes, the methods of management these communes employ, and, on the other hand, must put on the “black list” those communes which persist in the “traditions of capitalism”, i.e., anarchy, laziness, disorder and profiteering. In capitalist society, statistics were entirely a matter for “government servants”, or for narrow specialists; we must carry statistics to the people and make them popular so that the working people themselves may gradually learn to understand and see how long and in what way it is necessary to work, how much time and in what way one may rest, so that the comparison of the business results of the various communes may become a matter of general interest and study, and that the most outstanding communes may be rewarded immediately (by reducing the working day, raising remuneration, placing a larger amount of cultural or aesthetic facilities or values at their disposal, etc.).
When a new class comes on to the historical scene as the leader and guide of society, a period of violent “rocking”, shocks, struggle and storm, on the one hand, and a period of uncertain steps, experiments, wavering, hesitation in regard to the selection of new methods corresponding to new objective circumstances, On the other, are inevitable. The moribund feudal nobility avenged themselves on the bourgeoisie which vanquished them and took their place, not only by conspiracies and attempts at rebellion and restoration, but also by pouring ridicule over the lack of skill, the clumsiness and the mistakes of the “upstarts” and the “insolent” who dared to take over the “sacred helm” of state without the centuries of training which the princes, barons, nobles and dignitaries had had; in exactly the same way the Kornilovs and Kerenskys, the Gotzes and Martovs, the whole of that fraternity of heroes of bourgeois swindling or bourgeois scepticism, avenge themselves on the working class of Russia for having had the “audacity” to take power.
Of course, not weeks, but long months and years are required for a new social class, especially a class which up to now has been oppressed and crushed by poverty and ignorance, to get used to its new position, look around, organise its work and promote its own organisers. It is understandable that the Party which leads the revolutionary proletariat has not been able to acquire the experience and habits of large organisational undertakings embracing millions and tens of millions of citizens; the remoulding of the old, almost exclusively agitators’ habits is a very lengthy process. But there is nothing impossible in this, and as soon as the necessity for a change is clearly appreciated, as soon as there is firm determination to effect the change and perseverance in pursuing a great and difficult aim, we shall achieve it. There is an enormous amount of organising talent among the “people”, i.e., among the workers and the peasants who do not exploit the labour of others. Capital crushed these talented people in thousands; it killed their talent and threw them on to the scrap-heap. We are not yet able to find them, encourage them, put them on their feet, promote them. But we shall learn to do so if we set about it with all-out revolutionary enthusiasm, without which there can be no victorious revolutions.
No profound and mighty popular movement has ever occurred in history without dirty scum rising to the top, without adventurers and rogues, boasters and ranters attaching themselves to the inexperienced innovators, without absurd muddle and fuss, without individual “leaders” trying to deal with twenty matters at once and not finishing any of them. Let the lap-dogs of bourgeois society, from Belorussov to Martov, squeal and yelp about every extra chip that is sent flying in cutting down the big, old wood. What else are lap-dogs for if not to yelp at the proletarian elephant? Let them yelp. We shall go our way and try as carefully and as patiently as possible to test and discover real organisers, people with sober and practical minds, people who combine loyally to socialism with ability without fuss (and in spite of muddle and fuss) to get a large number of people working together steadily and concertedly within the framework of Soviet organisation. Only such people, after they have been tested a dozen times, by being transferred from the simplest to the more difficult tasks, should be promoted to the responsible posts of leaders of the people’s labour, leaders of administration. We have not yet learned to do this, but we shall learn.

“Harmonious Organisation” And Dictatorship The resolution adopted by the recent Moscow Congress of Soviets advanced as the primary task of the moment the establishment of a “harmonious organisation”, and the tightening of discipline.[See also Resolution On Ratification Of The Brest Treaty—Editor.] Everyone now readily “votes for” and “subscribes to” resolutions of this kind; but usually people do not think over the fact that the application of such resolutions calls for coercion—coercion precisely in the form of dictatorship. And yet it would be extremely stupid and ahsurdly utopian to assume that the transition from capitalism to socialism is possible without coercion and without dictatorship. Marx’s theory very definitely opposed this petty-bourgeois-democratic and anarchist absurdity long ago. And Russia of 1917-18 confirms the correctness of Marx’s theory in this respect so strikingly, palpably and imposingly that only those who are hopelessly dull or who have obstinately decided to turn thelr backs on the truth can be under any misapprehension concerning this. Either the dictatorship of Kornilov (if we take him as the Russian type of bourgeois Cavaignac), or the dictatorship of the proletariat—any other choice is out of the question for a country which is developing at an extremely rapid rate with extremely sharp turns and amidst desperate ruin created by one of the most horrible wars in history. Every solution that offers a middle path is either a deception of the people by the bourgeoisie—for the bourgeoisie dare not tell the truth, dare not say that they need Kornilov—or an expression of the dull-wittedness of the petty-bourgeois democrats, of the Chernovs, Tseretelis and Martovs, who chatter about the unity of democracy, the dictatorship of democracy, the general democratic front, and similar nonsense. Those whom even the progress of the Russian Revolution of 1917-18 has not taught that a middle course is impossible, must be given up for lost.  
On the other hand, it is not difficult to see that during every transition from capitalism to socialism, dictatorship is necessary for two main reasons, or along two main channels. Firstly, capitalism cannot be defeated and eradicated without the ruthless suppression of the resistance of the exploiters, who cannot at once be deprived of their wealth, of their advantages of organisation and knowledge, and consequently for a fairly long period will inevitably try to overthrow the hated rule of the poor; secondly, every great revolution, and a socialist revolution in particular, even if there is no external war, is inconceivable without internal war, i.e., civil war, which is even more devastating than external war, and involves thousands and millions of cases of wavering and desertion from one side to another, implies a state of extreme indefiniteness, lack of equilibirium and chaos. And of course, all the elements of disintegration of the old society, which are inevitably very numerous and connected mainly with the petty bourgeoisie (because it is the petty bourgeoisie that every war and every crisis ruins and destroys first), are bound to “reveal themselves” during such a profound revolution. And these elements of disintegration cannot “reveal themselves” otherwise than in an increase of crime, hooliganism, corruption, profiteering and outrages of every kind. To put these down requires time and requires an iron hand.
There has not been a single great revolution in history in which the people did not instinctively realise this and did not show salutary firmness by shooting thieves on the spot. The misfortune of previous revolutions was that the revolutionary enthusiasm of the people, which sustained them in their state of tension and gave them the strength to suppress ruthlessly the elements of disintegration, did not last long. The social, i.e., the class, reason for this instability of the revolutionary enthusiasm of the people was the weakness of the proletariat, which alone is able (if it is sufficiently numerous, class-conscious and disciplined) to win over to its side the majority of the working and exploited people (the majority of the poor, to speak more simply and popularly) and retain power sufficiently long to suppress completely all the exploiters as well as all the elements of disintegration.
It was this historical experience of all revolutions, it was this world-historic—economic and political—lesson that Marx summed up when he gave his short, sharp, concise and expressive formula: dictatorship of the proletariat. And the fact that the Russian revolution has been correct in its approach to this world-historic task has been proved by the victorious progress of the Soviet form of organisation among all the peoples and tongues of Russia. For Soviet power is nothing but an organisational form of the dictatorship of the proletariat, the dictatorship of the advanced class, which raises to a new democracy and to independent participation in the administration of the state tens upon tens of millions of working and exploited peoples who by their own experience learn to regard the disciplined and class-conscious vanguard of the proletariat as their most reliable leader.
Dictatorship, however, is a big word, and big words should not be thrown about carelessly. Dictatorship is iron rule, government that is revolutionarily bold, swift and ruthless in suppressing both exploiters and hooligans. But our government is excessively mild, very often it resembles jelly more than iron. We must not forget for a moment that the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois element is fighting against the Soviet system in two ways; on the one hand, it is operating from without, by the methods of the Savinkovs, Gotzes, Gegechkoris and Kornilovs, by conspiracies and rebellions, and by their filthy “ideological” reflection, the flood of lies and slander in the Constitutional-Democratic, Right Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik press; on the other hand, this element operates from within and takes advantage of every manifestation of disintegration, of every weakness, in order to bribe, to increase indiscipline, laxity and chaos. The nearer we approach the complete military suppression of the bourgeoisie, the more dangerous does the element of petty-bourgeois anarchy become. And the fight against this element cannot be waged solely with the aid of propaganda and agitation, solely by organising competition and by selecting organisers. The struggle must also be waged by means of coercion.
As the fundamental task of the government becomes, not military suppression, but administration, the typical manifestation of suppression and compulsion will be, not shooting on the spot, but trial by court. In this respect also the revolutionary people after October 25, 1917 took the right path and demonstrated the viability of the revolution by setting up their own workers’ and peasants’ courts, even before the decrees dissolving the bourgeois bureaucratic judiciary were passed. But our revolutionary and people’s courts are extremely, incredibly weak. One feels that we have not yet done away with the people’s attitude towards the courts as towards something official and alien, an attitude inherited from the yoke of the landowners and of the bourgeoisie. It is not yet sufficiently realised that the courts are an organ which enlists precisely the poor, every one of them, in the work of state administration (for the work of the courts is one of the functions of state administration), that the courts are an organ of the power of the proletariat and of the poor peasants, that the courts are an instrument for inculcating discipline. There is not yet sufficient appreciation of the simple and obvious fact that if the principal misfortunes of Russia at the present time are hunger and unemployment, these misfortunes cannot be overcome by spurts, but only by comprehensive, all-embracing, country-wide organisation and discipline in order to increase the output of bread for the people and bread for industry (fuel), to transport these in good time to the places where they are required, and to distribute them properly; and it is not fully appreciated that, consequently, it is those who violate labour discipline at any factory, in any undertaking, in any matter, who are responsible for the sufferings caused by the famine and unemployment, that we must know how to find the guilty ones, to bring them to trial and ruthlessly punish them. Where the petty-bourgeois anarchy against which we must now wage a most persistent struggle makes itself felt is in the failure to appreciate the economic and political connection between famine and unemployment, on the one hand, and general laxity in matters of organisation and discipline, on the other—in the tenacity of the small-proprietor outlook, namely, I’ll grab all I can for myself; the rest can go hang.
In the rail transport service, which perhaps most strikingly embodies the economic ties of an organism created by large-scale capitalism, the struggle between the element of petty-bourgeois laxity and proletarian organisation is particularly evident. The “administrative” elements provide a host of saboteurs and bribe-takers; the best part of the proletarian elements fight for discipline; but among both elements there are, of course, many waverers and “weak” characters who are unable to withstand the “temptation” of profiteering, bribery, personal gain obtained by spoiling the whole apparatus, upon the proper working of which the victory over famine and unemployment depends.
The struggle that has been developing around the recent decree on the management of the railways, the decree which grants individual executives dictatorial powers (or “unlimited” powers),[10] is characteristic. The conscious (and to a large extent, probably, unconscious) representatives of petty bourgeois laxity would like to see in this granting of “unlimited” (i.e., dictatorial) powers to individuals a departure from the collegiate principle, from democracy and from the principles of Soviet government. Here and there, among Left Socialist-RevoIutionaries, a positively hooligan agitation, i.e., agitation appealing to the base instincts and to the small proprietor’s urge to “grab all he can”, has been developed against the dictatorship decree. The question has become one of really enormous significance. Firstly, the question of principle, namely, is the appointment of individuals, dictators with unlimited powers, in general compatible with the fundamental principles of Soviet government? Secondly, what relation has this case—this precedent, if you will—to the special tasks of government in the present concrete situation? We must deal very thoroughly with both these questions.
That in the history of revolutionary movements the dictatorship of individuals was very often the expression, the vehicle, the channel of the dictatorship of the revolutionary classes has been shown by the irrefutable experience of history. Undoubtedly, the dictatorship of individuals was compatible with bourgeois democracy. On this point, how ever, the bourgeois denigrators of the Soviet system, as well as their petty-bourgeois henchmen, always display sleight of hand: on the one hand, they declare the Soviet system to be something absurd, anarchistic and savage, and carefully pass over in silence all our historical examples and theoretical arguments which prove that the Soviets are a higher form of democracy, and what is more, the beginning of a socialist form of democracy; on the other hand, they demand of us a higher democracy than bourgeois democracy and say: personal dictatorship is absolutely incompatible with your, Bolshevik (i.e., not bourgeois, but socialist ), Soviet democracy.
These are exceedingly poor arguments. If we are not anarchists, we must admit that the state, that is, coercion, is necessary for the transition from capitalism to socialism. The form of coercion is determined by the degree of development of the given revolutionary class, and also by special circumstances, such as, for example, the legacy of a long and reactionary war and the forms of resistance put up by the bourgeoisie and the petty bourgeoisie. There is, therefore, absolutely no contradiction in principle between Soviet (that is, socialist) democracy and the exercise of dictatorial powers by individuals. The difference between proletarian dictatorship and bourgeois dictatorship is that the former strikes at the exploiting minority in the interests of the exploited majority, and that it is exercised—also through individuals—not only by the working and exploited people, but also by organisations which are built in such a way as to rouse these people to history-making activity. (The Soviet organisations are organisations of this kind.)
In regard to the second question, concerning the significance of individual dictatorial powers from the point of view of the specific tasks of the present moment, it must be said that large-scale machine industry—which is precisely the material source, the productive source, the foundation of socialism—calls for absolute and strict unity of will, which directs the joint labours of hundreds, thousands and tens of thousands of people. The technical, economic and historical necessity of this is obvious, and all those who have thought about socialism have always regarded it as one of the conditions of socialism. But how can strict unity of will be ensured? By thousands subordinating their will to the will of one.
Given ideal class-consciousness and discipline on the part of those participating in the common work, this subordination would be something like the mild leadership of a conductor of an orchestra. It may assume the sharp forms of a dictatorship if ideal discipline and class-consciousness are lacking. But be that as it may, unquestioning subordination to a single will is absolutely necessary for the success of processes organised on the pattern of large-scale machine industry. On the railways it is twice and three times as necessary. In this transition from one political task to another, which on the surface is totally dissimilar to the first, lies the whole originality of the present situation. The revolution has only just smashed the oldest, strongest and heaviest of fetters, to which the people submitted under duress. That was yesterday. Today, however, the same revolution demands—precisely in the interests of its development and consolidation, precisely in the interests of socialism—that the people unquestioningly obey the single will of the leaders of labour. Of course, such a transition cannot be made at one step. Clearly, it can be achieved only as a result of tremendous jolts, shocks, reversions to old ways, the enormous exertion of effort on the part of the proletarian vanguard, which is leading the people to the new ways. Those who drop into the philistine hysterics of Novaya Zhizn or Vperyod,[11] Dyelo Naroda or [12] do not stop to think about this.
Take the psychology of the average, ordinary representative of the toiling and exploited masses, compare it with the objective, material conditions of his life in society. Before the October Revolution he did not see a single instance of the propertied, exploiting classes making any real sacrifice for him, giving up anything for his benefit. He did not see them giving him the land and liberty that had been repeatedly promised him, giving him peace, sacrificing “Great Power” interests and the interests of Great Power secret treaties, sacrificing capital and profits. He saw this only after October 25, 1917, when he took it himself by force, and had to defend by force what he had taken, against the Kerenskys, Gotzes, Gegechkoris, Dutovs and Kornilovs. Naturally, for a certain time, all his attention, all his thoughts, all his spiritual strength, were concentrated on taking a breath, on unbending his back, on straightening his shoulders, on taking the blessings of life that were there for the taking, and that had always been denied him by the now overthrown exploiters. Of course, a certain amount of time is required to enable the ordinary working man not only to see for himself, not only to become convinced, but also to feel that he cannot simply “take”, snatch, grab things, that this leads to increased disruption, to ruin, to the return of the Kornilovs. The corresponding change in the conditions of life (and consequently in the psychology) of the ordinary working men is only just beginning. And our whole task, the task of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks), which is the class-conscious spokesman for the strivings of the exploited for emancipation, is to appreciate this change, to understand that it is necessary, to stand at the head of the exhausted people who are wearily seeking a way out and lead them along the true path, along the path of labour discipline, along the path of co-ordinating the task of arguing at mass meetings about the conditions of work with the task of unquestioningly obeying the will of the Soviet leader, of the dictator, during the work.
The “mania for meetings” is an object of the ridicule, and still more often of the spiteful hissing of the bourgeoisie, the Mensheviks, the Novaya Zhizn people, who see only the chaos, the confusion and the outbursts of small-proprietor egoism. But without the discussions at public meetings the mass of the oppressed could never have changed from the discipline forced upon them by the exploiters to conscious, voluntary discipline. The airing of questions at public meetings is the genuine democracy of the working people, their way of unbending their backs, their awakening to a new life, their first steps along the road which they themselves have cleared of vipers (the exploiters, the imperialists, the landowners and capitalists) and which they want to learn to build themselves, in their own way, for themselves, on the principles of their own Soviet, and not alien, not aristocratic, not bourgeois rule. It required precisely the October victory of the working people over the exploiters, it required a whole historical period in wllich the workillg people themselves could first of all discuss the new conditions of life and the new tasks, in order to make possible the durable transition to superior forms of labour discipline, to the conscious appreciation of the necessity for the dictatorship of the proletariat, to unquestioning obedience to the orders of individual representatives of the Soviet government during the work.
This transition has now begun.
We have successfully fulfilled the first task of the revolution; we have seen how the mass of working people evolved in themselves the fundamental condition for its success: they united their efforts against the exploiters in order to overthrow them. Stages like that of October 1905, February and October 1917 are of world-historic significance.
We have successfully fulfilled the second task of the revolution: to awaken, to raise those very “lower ranks” of society whom the exploiters had pushed down, and who only after October 25, 1917 obtained complete freedom to overthrow the exploiters and to begin to take stock of things and arrange life in their own way. The airing of questions at public meetings by the most oppressed and downtrodden, by the least educated mass of working people, their coming over to the side of the Bolsheviks, their setting up every where of their own Soviet organisations—this was the second great stage of the revolution.
The third stage is now beginning. We must consolidate what we ourselves have won, what we ourselves have decreed, made law, discussed, planned—consolidate all this in stable forms of everyday labour discipline. This is the most difficult, but the most gratifying task, because only its fulfilment will give us a socialist system. We must learn to combine the “public meeting” democracy of the working people—turbulent, surging, overflowing its banks like a spring flood—with iron discipline while at work, with unquestioning obedience to the will of a single person, the Soviet leader, while at work.
We have not yet learned to do this.
We shall learn it.
Yesterday we were mennced by the restoration of bourgeois exploitation, personified by the Kornilovs, Gotzes, Dutovs, Gegechkoris and Bogayevskys. We conquered them. This restoration, this very same restoration menaces us today in another form, in the form of the element of petty-bourgeois laxity and anarchism, or small-proprietor “it’s not my business” psychology, in the form of the daily, petty, but numerous sorties and attacks of this element against proletarian discipline. We must, and we shall, vanquish this element of petty-bourgeois anarchy.
 The Development Of Soviet Organisation The socialist character of Soviet, i.e., proletarian, democracy, as concretely applied today, lies first in the fact that the electors are the working and exploited people; the bourgeoisie is excluded. Secondly, it lies in the fact that all bureaucratic formalities and restrictions of elections are abolished; the people themselves determine the order and time of elections, and are completely free to recall any elected person. Thirdly, it lies in the creation of the best mass organisation of the vanguard of the working people, i.e., the proletariat engaged in large-scale industry, which enables it to lead the vast mass of the exploited, to draw them into independent political life, to educate them politically by their own experience; therefore for the first time a start is made by the entire population in learning the art of administration, and in beginning to administer.
These are the principal distinguishing features of the democracy now applied in Russia, which is a higher type of democracy, a break with the bourgeois distortion of democracy, transition to socialist democracy and to the conditions in which the state can begin to wither away.
It goes without saying that the element of petty-bourgeois disorganisation (which must inevitably be apparent to some extent in every proletarian revolution, and which is especially apparent in our revolution, owing to the petty-bourgeois character of our country, its backwardness and the consequences of a reactionary war) cannot but leave its impress upon the Soviets as well.
We must work unremittingly to develop the organisation of the Soviets and of the Soviet government. There is a petty-bourgeois tendency to transform the members of the Soviets into “parliamentarians”, or else into bureaucrats. We must combat this by drawing all the members of the Soviets into the practical work of administration. In many places the departments of the Soviets are gradually merging with the Commissariats. Our aim is to draw the whole of the poor into the practical work of administration, and all steps that are taken in this direction—the more varied they are, the better—should be carefully recorded, studied, systematised, tested by wider experience and embodied in law. Our aim is to ensure that every toiler, having finished his eight hours’ “task” in productive labour, shall perform state duties without pay; the transition to this is particularly difficult, but this transition alone can guarantee the final consolidation of socialism. Naturally, the novelty and difficulty of the change lead to an abundance of steps being taken, as it were, gropingly, to an abundance of mistakes, vacillation—without this, any marked progress is impossible. The reason why the present position seems peculiar to many of those who would like to be regarded as socialists is that they have been accustomed to contrasting capitalism with socialism abstractly, and that they profoundly put between the two the word “leap” (some of them; recalling fragments of what they have read of Engels’s writings, still more profoundly add the phrase “leap from the realm of necessity into the realm of freedom”[13]. The majority of these so-called socialists, who have “read in books” about socialism but who have never seriously thought over the matter, are unable to consider that by “leap” the teachers of socialism meant turning-points on a world historical scale, and that leaps of this kind extend over decades and even longer periods. Naturally, in such times, the notorious “intelligentsia” provides an infinite number of mourners of the dead. Some mourn over the Constituent Assembly, others mourn over bourgeois discipline, others again mourn over the capitalist system, still others mourn over the cultured landowner, and still others again mourn over imperialist Great Power policy, etc., etc.
The real interest of the epoch of great leaps lies in the fact that the abundance of fragments of the old, which sometimes accumulate more rapidly than the rudiments (not always immediately discernible) of the new, calls for the ability to discern what is most important in the line or chain of development. History knows moments when the most important thing for the success of the revolution is to heap up as large a quantity of the fragments as possible, i.e., to blow up as many of the old institutions as possible; moments arise when enough has been blown up and the next task is to perform the “prosaic” (for the petty-bourgeois revolutionary, the “boring”) task of clearing away the fragments; and moments arise when the careful nursing of the rudiments of the new system, which are growing amidst the wreckage on a soil which as yet has been badly cleared of rubble, is the most important thing.
It is not enough to be a revolutionary and an adherent of socialism or a Communist in general. You must be able at each particular moment to find the particular link in the chain which you must grasp with all your might in order to hold the whole chain and to prepare firmly for the transition to the next link; the order of the links, their form, the manner in which they are linked together, the way they differ from each other in the historical chain of events, are not as simple and not as meaningless as those in an ordinary chain made by a smith.
The fight against the bureaucratic distortion of the Soviet form of organisation is assured by the firmness of the connection between the Soviets and the “people”, meaning by that the working and exploited people, and by the flexibility and elasticity of this connection. Even in the most democratic capitalist republics in the world, the poor never regard the bourgeois parliament as “their” institution. But the Soviets are “theirs” and not alien institutions to the mass of workers and peasants. The modern “Social-Democrats” of the Scheidemann or, what is almost the same thing, of the Martov type are repelled by the Soviets, and they are drawn towards the respectable bourgeois parliament, or to the Constituent Assembly, in the same way as Turgenev, sixty years ago, was drawn towards a moderate monarchist and noblemen’s Constitution and was repelled by the peasant democracy of Dobrolyubov and Chernyshevsky.[14]
It is the closeness of the Soviets to the “people”, to the working people, that creates the special forms of recall and other means of control from below which must be most zealously developed now. For example, the Councils of Public Education, as periodical conferences of Soviet electors and their delegates called to discuss and control the activities of the Soviet authorities in this field, deserve full sympathy and support. Nothing could be sillier than to transform the Soviets into something congealed and self-contained. The more resolutely we now have to stand for a ruthlessly firm government, for the dictatorship of individuals in definite processes of work, in definite aspects of purely executive functions, the more varied must be the forms and methods of control from below in order to counteract every shadow of a possibility of distorting the principles of Soviet government, in order repeatedly and tirelessly to weed out bureaucracy.
 Conclusion An extraordinarily difficult, complex and dangerous situation in international affairs; the necessity of manoeuvring and retreating; a period of waiting for new outbreaks of the revolution which is maturing in the West at a painfully slow pace; within the country a period of slow construction and ruthless “tightening up”, of prolonged and persistent struggle waged by stern, proletarian discipline against the menacing element of petty-bourgeois laxity and anarchy—these in brief are the distinguishing features of the special stage of the socialist revolution in which we are now living. This is the link in the historical chain of events which we must at present grasp with all our might in order to prove equal to the tasks that confront us before passing to the next link to which we are drawn by a special brightness, the brightness of the victories of the international proletarian revolution.
Try to compare with the ordinary everyday concept “revolutionary” the slogans that follow from the specific conditions of the present stage, namely, manoeuvre, retreat, wait, build slowly, ruthlessly tighten up, rigorously discipline, smash laxity. . . . Is it surprising that when certain “revolutionaries” hear this they are seized with noble indignation and begin to “thunder” abuse at us for forgetting the traditions of the October Revolution, for compromising with the bourgeois experts, for compromising with the bourgeoisie, for being petty bourgeois, reformists, and so on and so forth?
The misfortune of these sorry “revolutionaries” is that even those of them who are prompted by the best motives in the world and are absolutely loyal to the cause of socialism fail to understand the particular, and particularly “unpleasant”, condition that a backward country, which has been lacerated by a reactionary and disastrous war and which began the socialist revolution long before the more advanced countries, inevitably has to pass through; they lack stamina in the difficult moments of a difficult transition. Naturally, it is the “Left Socialist-Revolutionaries” who are acting as an “official” opposition of this kind against our Party. Of course, there are and always will be individual exceptions from group and class types. But social types remain. In the land in which the small-proprietor population greatly predominates over the purely proletarian population, the difference between the proletarian revolutionary and petty-bourgeois revolutionary will inevitably make itself felt, and from time to time will make itself felt very sharply. The petty-bourgeois revolutionary wavers and vacillates at every turn of events; he is an ardent revolutionary in March 1917 and praises “coalition” in May, hates the Bolsheviks (or laments over their “adventurism”) in July and apprehensively turns away from them at the end of October, supports them in December, and, finally, in March and April 1918 such types, more often than not, turn up their noses contemptuously and say: “I am not one of those who sing hymns to ’organic’ work, to practicalness and gradualism.”
The social origin of such types is the small proprietor, who has been driven to frenzy by the horrors of war, by sudden ruin, by unprecedented torments of famine and devastation, who hysterically rushes about seeking a way out, seeking salvation, places his confidence in the proletariat and supports it one moment and the next gives way to fits of despair. We must clearly understand and firmly remember the fact that socialism cannot be built on such a social basis. The only class that can lead the working and exploited people is the class that unswervingly follows its path without losing courage and without giving way to despair even at the most difficult, arduous and dangerous stages. Hysterical impulses are of no use to us. What we need is the steady advance of the iron battalions of the proletariat.
 
Endnotes
[1] In the manuscript, Lenin’s work The Immediate rasks of the Soviet Gouernment was headed “Theses on the Tasks of the Soviet Government in the Present Situation”. Lenin’s theses were discussed at a meeting of the Party Central Committee on April 26, 1918.
The Central Committee unanimously approved them and passed a decision to have them published as an article in Pravda and Izvestia, and also as a separate pamphlet. In 1918 the pamphlet went through more than ten editions, in Moscow, Petrograd, Saratov, Kazan, Tambov and other cities of Russia. It was published in the same year in English in New York, and in French in Geneva; an abridged version in German, edited by F. Platten, appeared in Zurich under the title Am Tage nach der Revolution.
The Central Committee instructed Lenin to give a report on the immediate tasks of the Soviet government at a meeting of the All-Russia C.E.C. and to formulate the Theses briefly as a resolution (see this volume, pp. 314-17).
[2] Bogayevsky, M. P. (1881-1918)—counter-revolutionary leader and organiser of the civil war against Soviet power on the Don. He was defeated and surrendered in the spring of 1918.
[3] On November 18 (December 1), 1917 the Council of People’s Commissars, acting on a proposal made by Lenin, passed a decision “On the Remuneration of People’s Commissars and Senior Government Employees and Officials” (published on November 23 [December 6], 1917 in No. 16 of the Newspaper of the Provisional Workers’ and Peasants’ Government ). Drafted by Lenin it fixed the maximum monthly salary of a People’s Commissar at 500 rubles with an additional 100 rubles for every member of his family unable to work. This corresponded roughly to the worker’s average monthly wage. On January 2 (15),1918, in answer to an inquiry from the People’s Commissar for Labour A. G Shlyapnikov, the Council of People’s Commissars issued a decision written by Lenin explaining that the Decree of November 18 (December 1), 1917 fixed no limit for the payment of experts and thus sanctioned higher remuneration for scientific and technical experts.
[4] Control over foreign trade was initiated in the early days of Soviet power. At first this was handled by the Petrograd Revolutionary Military Committee, which considered applications for the import and export of goods and supervised the work of the customs. By a decree of the Council of People’s Commissars of December 29 1917 (January 11, 1918) foreign trade was placed under the control of the People’s Commissariat for Trade and Industry. This kind of control and customs inspection, however, was not enough to protect the Soviet economy from foreign capital. Lenin emphasised later that the working class of Soviet Russia “would be totally unable to build up its own industry and make Russia an industrial country without the protection, not of tariffs, but of the monopoly of foreign trade” (see V. I. Lenin, On the Foreign Policy of the Soviet State, Moscow, p. 424). In December 1917 Lenin proposed introducing a state monopoly on foreign trade, a decree on which was passed by the Council of People’s Commissars on April 22, 1918 (see Decrees of the Soviet Government, Russ. ed., Vol. 2, 1959, pp. 158-60).
[5] In the first months of Soviet power indemnities and special taxes were one of the principal sources of revenue, particularly in the provinces. When Soviet power became more firmly establisiled the question arose of how to devise a regular system of taxation based primarily on a progressive income tax and a property tax which would make it possible to place the main burden of taxation on the well-to-do sections of the population. At the First All-Russia Congress of Representatives of the Financial Departments of the Soviets, Lenin pointed out: “We have many plans in this sphere and have cleared the ground on which to build the foundation, but the actual foundation of that building has not yet been built. The time for this has now come” (see this volume, pp. 384-85). The Congress accepted Lenin’s proposal on the need to introduce an income tax and property tax and elected a special commission to draw up the requisite Statute on the basis of Lenin’s theses.
On June 17,1918 the Council of People’s Commissars approved the Decree on the Amendment of the Decree of November 24, 1917 on the Levying of Direct Taxes, which laid down a strict system of income and property taxation (see Decrees of the Soviet Government, Russ. ed., Vol. 2, 1959, pp. 441-43).
[6] Decree on Consumers’ Co-operative Societies was passed by the Council of People’s Commissars on April 10, 1918, approved at a meeting of the All-Russia C.E.C. on April 11, and published over Lenin’s signature in Pravda No. 71 of April 13 and Izvestia VTsIK No. 75 of April 16.
The first draft of the decree, written by Lenin, was worked out in detail by the People’s Commissariat for Food and published on January 19 (February 1) in Izvestia TsIK No. 14. The draft decree was bitterly opposed by bourgeois co-operators, who insisted that co-operative societies should be independent of the organs of Soviet power. In order to use the existillg co-operative apparatus for accounting and control of the distribntion of foodstuffs the Council of People’s Commissars made several concessions during its negotiations with bourgeois co-operators (March to the beginning of April 1918). On April 9 and 10 the C.P.C. discussed the draft decree proposed by the co-operators. Lenin revised the draft considerably (he rewrote points 11, 12 and 13), and the decree with his amendments was passed by the Council of People’s Commissars, and then by the All-Russia C.E.C.
[7] The organisation of social production on socialist principles made it necessary to draw up new internal regulations for the nationalised enterprises, and new regulations on labour discipline and on enrolling all able-bodied persons for socially useful work. These questions acquired special importance in the period of the peaceful breathing-space in the spring of 1918.
The first regulations concerning labour discipline were worked out by the Soviet trade unions in conjunction with managerial bodies. They were discussed at a number of meetings of the Presidium of the Supreme Economic Council with representatives of the central organs of the trade unions taking part. On March 27 the Presidium of the Supreme Economic Council after a debate in which Lenin participated passed a decision charging the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions with the task of drawing up a general statute on labour discipline. On April 1, with Lenin taking part, the Presidium examined the draft resolution on labour discipline drawn up by the A.C.C.T.U. and proposed that it should be re-worded as a decree, taking into account Lenin’s remarks and suggestions. The re-worded Statute on Labour Discipline passed by the A.C.C.T.U. on April 3 was published in the magazine Narodnoye Khozyaistvo No. 2, for April 1918. In this statute the A.C.C.T.U. stated that strict regulations regarding internal management should be introduced at all state-owned enterprises, that output quotas and account of labour productivity should be established, that piece-work and a system of bonuses for exceeding output quotas should be introduced, and that stern action should be taken against those who violated labour discipline. On the basis of the Statute speciflc internal regulations were drawn up at factories and these played an important part in the organisation of socialist industry. The Central Committee of the Metalworkers’ Union was one of the first to carry out Lenin’s instructions on raising labour productivity by introducing a system of piece-work and bonuses. When the question of improving labour discipline was discussed by the A.C.C.T.U. representatives of the Central Committee of the Metalworkers’ Union got the thesis on the need for piece rates included in the resolution submitted on April 1 for consideration by the Presidium of the Supremc Economic Council. In April, on the basis of the decisions taken by the A.C.C.T.U. the Central Committee of the Metalworkers’ Union instructed all the lower organisations of the union to adopt piece-work and the bonus system in the metal industry.
[8] After the October Revolution piece-work was almost everywhere superseded by a time system of payment, which had an adverse effect on labour productivity and labour discipline.
The introduction of piece-work, which came closest to the socialist principle of “to each according to his work”, began at the first nationalised enterprises. During the period of respite, piece work was widely adopted in industry. By July 1918, for instance, a quarter of the workers of Petrograd went over to piece-work. The principle of payment according to the piece was finally endorsed by the pubucation in December 1918 of the Soviet Labour Code.
[9] This refers to the right protected by bourgeois law to keep secret all production, trade and financial operations and also all the relevant documents at private capitalist enterprises.
In his work The Impending Catastrophe and How to Combat It Lenin showed that commercial secrecy in the hands of the bourgeoisie was “an instrument for concealing financial swindles and the fantastically high profits of big capital” (see present edition, Vol. 25, p. 339), and showed why commercial secrecy should be abolished. The resolution of the Sixth Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) “On the Economic Situation” demanded the abolition of commercial secrecy as an essential measure for making workers’ control effective (see The C.P.S.U. in the Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenums of the Central Committee, Part 1, Russ. ed., 1954, p. 378). After the October Revolution commercial secrecy was abolished by the Statute on Workers’ Control passed by the All-Russia C.E.C. and the Council of People’s Commissars on November 14 (27), 1917.
[10] The reference is to the decree of the Council of People’s Commissars “On Centralisation of Management, Protection of Roads and the Improvement of Their Carrying Capacity” (see Decrees of the Soviet Government, Vol. 2 Russ. ed., 1959, pp. 18-20). Having considered on March 18, 1918 the draft decree proposed by the People’s Commissariat for Ways of Communication on non-interference by various institutions in the affairs of the Railway Department, the Council of People’s Commissars instructed a special commission to revise the decree on the basis of the following theses put forward by Lenin: (1) Considerable centralisation. (2) Appointment of responsible executives at every local centre as elected by the railway organisations. (3) Unquestioning obedience to their orders. (4) Dictatorial rights to be given to the military detachments for maintaining order. (5) Steps to be taken immediately to take account of rolling stock and its whereabouts. (6) Steps to be taken to set up a technical department. (7) Fuel.
Lenin made several important amendments to the draft, which was submitted by the commission and considered at a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars on March 21, before being approved by the government. In view of the hostilily with which the decree was greeted by the All-Russia Executive Committee of Railwaymen (Vikzhedor), which was strongly influenced by the Mensheviks and the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, the People’s Commissariat for Ways of Communication on March 23 proposed amending the decree at a meeting of the Council of People’s Commissars. The representatives of Vikzhedor who attended the meeting attacked the decree on the grounds that it meant the “destruction of the role of Vikzhedor and its replacement by the individual authority of a Commissar”. Arguing against the opponents of the decree, Lenin explained the need for taking the very firmest measures to eliminate sabotage and inefficiency on the railways and introduced amendments making the decree even more categorical. With these amendments the decree was finally approved by the government on March 23 and published over Lenin’s signature on March 26 in No. 57 of Izvestia VTsIK.
[11] Vperyod (Forward )—a Menshevik daily newspaper, which began to appear in March 1917 in Moscow as the organ of the Moscow organisation of Mensheviks, and subsequently as the organ of the committees of the R.S.D.L.P. (Mensheviks) of the Moscow organisation and the Central Region On April 2, 1918 the newspaper became the organ of the Mensheviks’ Central Committee as well, and L. Martov, F. I. Dan and A. S. Martynov joined its editorial board, It was banned for its counter-revolutionary activities in February 1919 by decision of the All-Russia C.E.C.
[12] Nash Vek (Our Age )—one of the names of the newspaper Rech, the central organ of the counter-revolutionary party of the Constitutional-Democrats. After it had been banned by a decision of the Petrograd Revolutionary Military Committee of October 26 (November 8), 1917, the newspaper continued to appear until August 1918 under various names: Nasha Rech (Our Speech ), Svobodnaya Rech (Free Speech ), Vek (Age ), Novaya Rech (New Speech ) and Nash Vek.
[13] Lenin is referring to and quoting from Anti-Dühring by F. Engels, Section Three. Socialism. Chapter II. Theoretical.
[14] Chernyshevsky describes Turgenev’s attitude to Dobrolyubov and himself in an account of a conversation he had with Turgenev in the early sixties of the last century (see the article “An Expression of Gratitude” in Complete Collected Works by N. G. Chernyshevsky, Vol. 10, Russ. ed., Moscow, 1951, pp. 122-23).

Collected Works Volume 27 Collected Works Table of Contents Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## The Soviets At Work










The Soviets At Work, By Nikolai Lenin



Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The Soviets At Work,
By Nikolai Lenin

Written: March-April, 1918.
Source: Google Books: The Soviets at Work, 
  Fifth Edition, 1919.
Publisher: The Rand School of Social Science, New York.
First Published: Published on April 28, 1918 in Pravda
  No. 83 and Izvestia VTsIK No.85.
Translated: Dr. Dubrovsky.
Original Transcription: Roland Sheppard. Download version.
HTML Mark up by: K. Goins (2008).
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2008). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.

This translation (from 1919) predates the version published by Progress Publishers (in 1963), entitled “The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government,” which 
differs in content.  Mr. Roland Sheppard has prepared a “side-by-side” version
(available for download here)
which compares the differences of the two translations.

 
 
Introduction
By
  Roland Sheppard


In 1962 to 1963, I read an old and rare pamphlet, titled, The Soviets at Work, 
by Nikolai Lenin, published by The Rand School of Social Science in 
1919.


At that time I was a member of the Socialist Workers Party (SWP) and I attended 
Trotsky School to study Marxism, Lenin, Trotsky, the history of socialism, 
and the history of all struggles for freedom and emancipation. 


This pamphlet had been in the Trotsky School library; it was initially in the 
founding library of the SWP headquarters at 166 University Place. When the school 
closed in 1963, there was an auction for all of the books. One of the books was 
The Soviets at Work, and I bid for it and won the book.


I had not read the book since 1963, but recently I read a translation online at 
[The Marxists Internet Archive], that is 
contained in Volume 2 of Lenin’s Selected Works under a different title, The 
Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government. The pamphlet, Soviets at Work 
that was translated by the Rand School in 1919 is completely different. I think 
this marks the start of the Stalin 
School of Falsification!


In the Rand School’s forward they state that:

 
“The Soviets at Work is one of the most important documents which 
the Revolution in Russia produced. It stands out not only for its incisive clearness 
but also because of its calm tone. While it is a piece of polemic literature, it 
is free from invective that marks most controversial writing.


The present, the fifth edition, has been extensively revised with the help of Dr. 
Dubrovsky, and the resultant work is a much-improved translation. While there are 
deviations from the texts as published in the first four editions, these are in 
no way modifications of Lenin’s texts. They are in fact truer and clearer 
versions of the texts as originally published in Pravda.”



Since they were supporters of the Russian Revolution at that time and did the 
translation in 1919, I think their translation is accurate. 


In fact, the difference in translations is so great I have just scanned the 
document and I am sending it far and wide, in Word form. Lenin’s writing, 
in this pamphlet, confirms all of the positions taken by Trotsky and the platform 
of the Left Opposition to Stalin ten years later, 
when Stalin accused Trotsky of “Anti-Leninism”. 


I think that this historic document, would very useful in Latin America today. 
It retains the Democratic flavor of the socialism of Eugene V, Debs, when 
socialism was viewed as synonymous with democracy, the extension of democracy 
into the workplace and the most democratic of all societies. (This was always 
the case until Stalin came to power in the Soviet Union.) With the current 
discussions going on in Cuba and Venezuela, I think that it very important to have 
Lenin’s views on the Soviets and what he thought should be their role in a 
democratic Soviet society. It is how the working class majority should 
rule in all organizations of the working class and of the oppressed minorities.

 

 
 
 
The
SOVIETS AT WORK
The International position of the Russian Soviet
Republic
and the Fundamental Problems of the Socialist Revolution
By

NIKOLAI LENIN
PREMIER, RUSSIAN SOVIET REPUBLIC
FIFTH EDITION
Published by THE RAND SCHOOL 0F SOCIAL SCIENCE
7 East 15th Street. New York
1919
 
 

FOREWORD

The “Soviets at Work” is one of the most important documents which the 
Revolution in Russia has produced. It stands out not only for its incisive clearness 
but also because of its calm tone. While it is a piece of polemic literature, it 
is free from invective that marks most controversial writing. 


The present, the fifth edition, has been extensively revised with the help of Dr. 
Dubrovsky, and the resultant work is a much-improved translation. While there are 
deviations from the texts as published in the first four editions, these are in 
no way modifications of Lenin’s texts. They are in fact truer and clearer 
versions of the texts as originally published in Pravda.


THE RAND SCHOOL OF SOCIAL SCIENCE

 
 

THE SOVIETS AT WORK
The Problems of the Soviet Government

Thanks to the peace obtained—in spite of its oppressiveness and all its 
insecurity—the Russian Soviet Republic is enabled for a certain time to 
concentrate its efforts on the most important and most difficult side of the Socialist 
revolution, the problem of organization. 


This problem is presented clearly and precisely to the masses in the fourth section 
of the resolution adopted at the extraordinary Congress of the Soviets held at Moscow 
on March 16, 1916, the section which urges self-discipline of the workers and a 
merciless struggle against chaos and disorganization.

 
The insecurity of the peace obtained by the Russian Soviet Republic is not determined, 
of course, by the fact that it is now considering the renewal of military activity. 
With the exception of the bourgeois counter-revolutionists and their aids (the Mensheviks, 
etc.) no sensible statesman thinks of such a renewal. The insecurity of the peace 
is determined by the fact that in the imperialistic nations bordering on the West 
and on the East of Russia and possessing enormous military power, the upper hand 
may at any moment be gained by the military party, which is tempted by the temporary 
weakness of Russia and incited by the anti-Socialist capitalists.


Under such conditions our real, and not assumed, guaranty of peace lies exclusively 
in the antagonisms among the various great powers. It is obvious that, in view of 
the weakness of such guaranty, our Socialist Soviet Republic is in an extremely 
precarious, undoubtedly critical international position. We must strain all our 
strength in order to utilize the respite granted to us by this situation to overcome 
the serious setbacks received by the whole social organism of Russia from the war, 
and to rehabilitate the economic resources of the country. Without such rehabilitation 
there can be no serious improvement in our ability to offer any kind of resistance. 


It is also obvious that we will give valuable aid to a Socialist revolution in the 
West, delayed by a number of causes, only to the extent of our success in solving 
the organization problems confronting us. 


A fundamental condition for the successful solution of our most urgent problems 
of organization is the complete comprehension by the political leaders of the people; 
i. e., by the members of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks)[1] and then by all true representatives of the toiling 
masses, of the basic difference between the earlier bourgeois and the present Socialist 
revolution with respect to the problem under consideration. 

Bourgeois and Socialist Revolutions Contrasted

The main task of the toiling masses in the bourgeois revolutions consisted in performing
the negative, destructive work—the destruction of feudalism and the monarchy. The 
positive, constructive work of organizing a new society was the function of the 
propertied bourgeois minority of the population. And they accomplished this task, 
in spite of the resistance of the workers and the poorest peasants, with comparative 
ease, not only because the resistance of the exploited masses was then extremely 
weak on account of their unorganized state and their ignorance, but also because 
the fundamental organizing force of the anarchic capitalistic society is provided 
by the natural, extensive and intensive growth of the national and international 
market.

 
In every Socialist revolution, however, the main task of the proletariat, and of 
the poorest peasantry led by it—and, hence, also in the socialist revolution in 
Russia inaugurated by us on November 7, 1917[2]—consists in the positive and constructive 
work of establishing an extremely complex and delicate net of newly organized 
relationships covering the systematic production and distribution of products which 
are necessary for the existence of tens of millions of people. The successful 
realization of such a revolution depends on the original historical creative work 
of the majority of the population, and first of all, of the majority of the toilers. 
The victory of the Socialist revolution will not be assured, unless the proletariat 
and the poorest peasantry manifests sufficient consciousness, idealism, self-sacrifice 
and persistence. With the creation of a new type of state, the Soviet, offering to 
the oppressed toiling masses the opportunity to participate actively in the free 
construction of a new society, we have solved only a small part of the difficult 
task. The main difficulty is in the economic domain: to raise the productivity of 
labor, to establish strict and uniform state accounting and control of production 
and distribution, and actually to socialize production.

The Evolution of Bolshevism

The evolution of the Bolshevik party, which is today the governing party of Russia, 
shows with great clearness the nature of the crisis, which characterizes the present 
political situation and demands a new orientation by the Soviet authority; i. e., 
new methods applied to new problems. 


The first problem of any rising party consists in convincing the majority of the 
population that its program and policies are correct. This was the most important 
problem during czarism and during the period of compromises of the Tchernovs and 
Zeretellis, with Kerensky and Koshkin.[3] At present this problem, which is, of course, 
far from solved, is, in the main, settled for the majority of the workers and 
peasants of Russia, who definitely side with the Bolsheviks, as was shown beyond 
doubt by the last Congress of the Soviets in Moscow. 


The second problem of our party was the conquest of political power and the suppression 
of the resistance of the exploiters. This problem is not yet settled, and we cannot 
ignore that fact, for the Monarchists and Cadets[4] on one hand, and the Mensheviks[5] and Socialist-Revolutionists[6] of the right—who echo and follow them on 
the other hand, continue their attempts to unite for the overthrow of the Soviet 
power. But, in the main, the problem created by the resistance of the exploiters 
was already solved in the period between November 7, 1917, and (approximately) 
February 1918—the time of the surrender of Bogajevsky.[7]

The Problems of Management

We are now confronted by the third problem, which is the most urgent and which characterizes 
the present period—the industrial organization of Russia. We had to deal with it and 
have been solving it ever since November 7, 1917. But heretofore, as long as the resistance 
of the exploiters manifested itself in open civil warfare, the problem of management could 
not become the principal, the central problem.

 
At present it has become the central problem. We, the Bolshevik party, have convinced 
Russia. We have won Russia from the rich for the poor, from the exploiters for the 
toilers. And now it is our task to manage Russia. The special difficulty of the present 
period consists in understanding the peculiarities of the transition from the problem 
of convincing the people and suppressing the exploiters by force, to the problem of management.


For the first time in the history of the world, the Socialist party has succeeded in 
completing, essentially, the task of winning power and suppressing the exploiters, 
and in approaching to the problem of management. We must prove worthy of this, the 
most difficult (and the most promising) problem of the Socialist revolution. We must 
not fail to see that, besides the ability to convince the masses and to win in civil 
war, our success depends on our ability to organize. This is the most difficult problem. 
It means the organization of the economic foundations of life for millions of people 
on a new basis. And it is the most promising problem, for only after its solution 
shall we be able to say that Russia has become not only a Soviet, but a Socialist 
republic.

 
The objective situation described above, which was created by the extremely oppressive 
and insecure peace, by the terrible disorganization, unemployment and starvation, 
which we have inherited from the war and from the rule of the bourgeoisie 
(represented by Kerensky and his supporters—the Mensheviks and Social-Revolutionists 
of the Right), has inevitably produced an extreme weariness in and even exhaustion 
of the toiling masses. It is but natural that they insistently demand some rest. 
The restoration of the productive forces destroyed by the war and by the management 
of the bourgeoisie; the curing of wounds received from the war, speculation and 
the attempts of the bourgeoisie to re-establish the overthrown power of the exploiters; 
the economic rehabilitation of the country; the maintenance of elementary order—these 
are the urgent problems to which we must turn. It may seem paradoxical, but the fact 
is that in view of the above-mentioned objective conditions there can be no doubt 
that at the present moment the Soviet power cannot make secure the transformation 
of Russia toward Socialism, unless it can solve in a practical way these most elementary 
problems of social life—in spite of the resistance of the bourgeoisie, the 
Mensheviks and the Social-Revolutionists of the Right. In view of the concrete peculiarities 
of the present situation and in view of the existence of the Soviet power with its 
laws on socialization of the land, on labor control, etc., the practical solution 
of these elementary problems would mean that we will have overcome the organization 
difficulties of the first steps toward Socialism. 


“Keep accurate and conscientious accounts; conduct business economically; 
do not loaf; do not steal; maintain strict discipline at work.” These slogans, 
which were justly ridiculed by revolutionary proletarians when they were used by 
the bourgeoisie to cover its domination as a class of exploiters, have now, after 
the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, become our urgent and principal slogans. And 
the practical realization of these slogans by the toiling masses is, on the one hand, 
the sole condition for the salvation of the country, which has been shattered by 
the imperialistic war and by the imperialists (headed by Kerensky), and on the 
other hand, the practical realization of these slogans by the Soviet power, with 
its methods, and on the basis of its laws, is necessary and sufficient for the 
final victory of Socialism. This, however, is not comprehended by those who contemptuously 
refuse to urge such “common” and “trivial” slogans. In our 
agricultural country, which only a year ago overthrew czarism and less than half 
a year ago freed itself from the Kerenskys, there remained, naturally, a good deal 
of unconscious anarchism, which is increased by the bestiality and barbarity accompanying 
every prolonged and reactionary war, and a good deal of despair and aimless anger 
has accumulated. If we should add to this the treasonable policy of the servants 
of the bourgeoisie, the Mensheviks, the Social-Revolutionists of the Right, etc., 
it will become clear that energetic and persistent efforts must be exerted by the 
best and most conscious workers and peasants to effect a complete change in the 
mood of the masses and to turn them to a regular, uninterrupted and disciplined 
labor. Only such a change accomplished by the masses of proletarians and near-proletarians 
can complete the victory over the bourgeoisie, and especially over the more persistent 
and numerous peasant bourgeoisie. 

A New Phase in the Struggle with Capitalism

We have defeated the bourgeoisie, but it is not yet destroyed and not even completely 
conquered. We must therefore resort to a new and higher form of the struggle with 
the bourgeoisie; we must turn from the very simple problem of continuing the 
expropriation of the capitalists to the more complex and difficult problem—the 
problem of creating conditions under which the bourgeoisie could neither exist nor 
come anew into existence. It is clear that this problem is infinitely more complicated 
and that we can have no Socialism until it is solved. 


Comparing our revolution with the revolutions of Western Europe, we are now approximately 
at the point which was reached in France in 1793 and 1871. We have a right to be 
proud of the fact that we have reached this point and that in one respect we have, 
undoubtedly, gone somewhat further; i. e.: we have decreed and established throughout 
Russia a higher type of state—the Soviet rule. But we cannot possibly rest 
satisfied with these achievements, for we have only begun the transformation toward 
Socialism, and in this respect we have not yet accomplished anything decisive.


Of decisive importance is the organization of strict and uniform accounting and 
control of production and distribution. But, we have not yet effected accounting 
and control in those enterprises and in those branches and departments of economic 
effort which we have taken away from the bourgeoisie. Without this there can be no 
question of the second condition, just as essential to the establishment of Socialism, 
i. e.: the increase of the productivity of labor on a national scale. 


It would therefore be impossible to define the problem of the present period by the
simple formula: “to continue the offensive against capitalism.” In view 
of the fact that we have, undoubtedly, not conquered capitalism, and that it is 
absolutely necessary to continue the attack on this enemy of the workers, such a 
definition would be vague and it would not indicate the peculiarity of the present 
period, when in the interests of a successful final offensive it is necessary to “halt”
the offensive for the present. 


This can be explained by comparing our position in the war against capitalism with 
the position of a victorious army which has captured, let us say, half or two-thirds
of the enemy’s territory and is compelled to halt the offensive in order to 
recuperate, to increase the supply of ammunition, to repair and to strengthen the 
communication lines, to build new store-houses, to bring up new reserves, etc. A 
halt in the offensive of the victorious army under such conditions is necessary 
in order to win the remaining territory from the enemy; i. e., in the interests 
of complete victory. Whoever fails to understand that just such a “halt”
in the offensive against capitalism is dictated to us by the objective situation 
of the present period, does not understand anything in the present situation.

 
Of course, we can speak only metaphorically of a “halt” in the offensive 
against capitalism. In an ordinary war it is possible to issue a general order to
halt the offensive; it is possible actually to stop the movement forward. In the 
war against capitalism the movement forward cannot be stopped, and there can be 
no question of our renouncing any further expropriation of capital. We are considering 
here the question of changing the basis of our economic and political structure. 
Heretofore, measures for the immediate expropriation of the expropriators were 
preeminent. At present preeminence must be given to the organization of accounting 
and control in those enterprises in which the capitalists have already been expropriated. 


Were we to attempt now to continue the expropriation of capital at the same rate 
as heretofore, we would surely be defeated. It is clear to every thinking person 
that our work of organizing proletarian accounting and control has not kept pace 
with the work of the direct “expropriation of the expropriators.” If 
we now turn all our efforts to organizing accounting and control, we shall be able 
to solve this problem; we shall overcome our shortcomings and win our “campaign” 
against capitalism. 


But is not the admission that we have difficulties to overcome equivalent to an 
admission that some mistakes have been made? Not at all. We will again use a military 
example. If the enemy can be defeated and forced back by the use of light cavalry 
only, this should be done. And if this can be done successfully only up to a certain 
line, it is quite conceivable that beyond this line it becomes necessary to bring up 
the heavy artillery. Admitting that it is now necessary to overcome our difficulties 
by bringing up the heavy artillery, we do not admit that the victorious cavalry attack 
was a mistake. 


We have been frequently reproached by the servants of the bourgeois for conducting 
a “Red Guard” attack on capitalism. An absurd reproach, worthy indeed 
of servants of the money pouch! The “Red Guard” attack on capitalism 
was at that time absolutely dictated by the circumstances: first, capitalists were 
offering military resistance through Kerensky and Kransnov, Savinkov and Gotz 
(Gegechkori is even now offering such resistance), Dutov and Bogajevsky.[8] Military resistance can be crushed only by 
military means, and the Red Guards were contributing to the noblest and greatest 
cause in history, the cause of emancipation of the exploited toilers from the oppression
of the exploiters. 


Secondly, we could not then give preeminence to the method of management instead 
of, the methods of suppression because the art of management is not inherent in 
people, but is gained through experience. At that time we did not have this experience. 
We have it now! 


Thirdly, then we could not have at our disposal specialists in different branches 
of science, for they were either fighting in the ranks of the Bogajevskys, or were 
still in a position to offer systematic and persistent passive resistance through 
sabotage. 


Does this mean that the “Red Guard” attack on Capital is the right 
method always in all circumstances, and that we have no other methods of combating 
capitalism? To think so would be too naive. We have won with light cavalry, but 
we also have heavy artillery at our disposal. We have been winning by methods of 
suppression. We will be able to win also by methods of management. We should be 
able to change the methods of fighting with the change of circumstances. We do 
not for a moment reject the “Red Guard” suppression of the Savinkovs 
and Gegechkoris as well as of any other bourgeois counter-revolutionist. But we 
will not be so stupid as to give preeminence to the  “Red Guard” methods.  

The Need of Specialists

At present, when the epoch of “Red Guard” attacks is in the main completed 
(and completed victoriously), it is becoming urgent for the proletarian state authority 
to make use of the bourgeois specialists for the purpose of replowing the soil so 
that no bourgeoisie can grow on it.

 
This is a peculiar stage of development, and in order definitely to defeat capitalism, 
we should be able to adapt the forms of our struggle to the peculiar conditions of 
such a period. 


Without the direction of specialists in different branches of science, such as technical 
men, the transformation toward Socialism is impossible, for Socialism demands a 
conscious mass movement toward a comparatively higher productivity of labor on the 
basis which has been attained by capitalism. Socialism must accomplish this movement 
forward in its own way, by its own methods—to make it more definite—by 
Soviet methods. But the specialists are inevitably bourgeois, on account of the 
whole environment of social life which made them specialists. If our proletariat, 
having obtained power, had rapidly solved the problem of accounting, control and 
organization on a national scale (this was impossible on account of the war and the
backwardness of Russia), then having crushed the sabotage of the capitalists, we 
would have obtained, through uniform accounting and control the complete submission 
of the bourgeois specialists. In view of the considerable delay in establishing 
accounting and control, although we have succeeded in defeating sabotage, we have
not yet created an environment which would put at our disposal the bourgeois specialists.  
Many saboteurs are coming into our service, but the best organizers
and the biggest specialists can be used by the state either in the old bourgeois 
way (that is, for a higher salary) or in the new proletarian way (that is, by creating 
such an environment of uniform accounting and control which would inevitably and 
naturally attract and gain the submission of specialists). We were forced now to 
make use of the old bourgeois method and to agree to a very high remuneration for 
the services of the biggest of the bourgeois specialists. All those who are acquainted 
with the facts understand this, but not to give sufficient thought to the significance 
of such a measure on the part of the Proletarian State. It is clear that such a measure 
is a compromise, that it is a defection from the principles of the Paris Commune 
and of any proletarian rule, which demand the reduction of salaries to the standard 
of remuneration of the average workers-principles which demand that “career hunting”
be fought by deed, not by words.

 
Furthermore, it is clear that such a measure is not merely a halt in a certain part 
and to a certain degree, of the offensive against capitalism (for capitalism is not 
a quantity of money but a definite social relationship), but also a step backward 
by our Socialist Soviet state which has from the very beginning proclaimed and carried 
on a policy of reducing high salaries to the standard of wages of the average worker. 


Of course, the lackeys of the bourgeoisie, particularly of the petty kind, like the 
Mensheviks and the Social-Revolutionists of the Right, will sneer at our admission
that we are taking a step backward. But we should pay no attention to sneers. We 
must study the peculiarities of the highly difficult and new road to Socialism without 
concealing our mistakes and weaknesses. We must try to overcome our deficiencies 
in time. To conceal from the masses that attracting bourgeois specialists by extremely 
high salaries is a defection from the principles of the Commune, would mean that 
we had lowered ourselves to the level of bourgeois politicians who rule by practicing 
deception. To explain openly how and why we have taken a step backward and then to 
discuss publicly ways and means overcome our deficiencies, is to educate the masses 
and to learn from experience, to learn together with them how to build Socialism. 
There has hardly been a single military campaign in history in which the victor has 
not made mistakes, suffered partial defeats, and temporarily retreated at some time. 
And the “campaign” against capitalism, which we have undertaken, is 
a million times more difficult than the most difficult military campaign, and it 
would be foolish and disgraceful to become dejected on account of a temporary and 
partial retreat. 

The Reward of Specialists

Let us take up the question from the practical side. Let us assume that the Russian 
Soviet Republic must have a thousand first-class scientists and specialists of recognized 
skill and with practical experience in different departments of science, to direct 
the work of the people in order to accomplish most quickly the economic rehabilitation 
of the country. Let us assume that these great “stars” must be paid 25,000 
rubles each per annum. Let us assume that this sum must be doubled (supposing premiums 
to be granted for particularly successful and rapid accomplishment of the most important 
tasks of organization and technique) or even made four times as large (supposing that 
we must get several hundred better paid foreign specialists). Well then, can this 
expenditure of 50,000,000 or 100,000,000 rubles a year for the reorganization of 
the work of the people along the lines of the latest scientific developments be 
considered excessive or unbearable for the Soviet Republic? Of course not. The vast 
majority of the enlightened workers and peasants will approve such an expenditure, 
knowing from practical life that our backwardness compels us 
to lose billions, and that we have not yet attained such a high degree of organization, 
accounting and control which would cause the universal and voluntary participation 
of these “stars” of the bourgeois intelligentsia[9] in our work. 


Of course, there is another side to this question. The corrupting influence of high 
salaries is beyond dispute—both on the Soviets (the more so since the swiftness 
of the revolution made it possible for a certain number of adventurers and thieves 
to join the Soviets, who together with the incapable and dishonest among certain 
commissaries would not object to becoming “star grafters”) and on the 
mass of workers. But all thinking and honest workers and peasants will agree with
us and will admit that we are unable to get rid at once of the evil heritage of 
capitalism that the Soviet Republic can be freed from “tribute” of 
50,000,000 or a 100,000,000 rubles (a tribute for our own backwardness in the 
organization of accounting and control from the bottom up) only by organization 
by increasing discipline among ourselves, by getting rid of all those who “keep
the traditions of capitalism” i. e., the loafers, parasites, and grafters. 
If the enlightened and advanced workers and peasants succeed, with the help of 
the Soviet institutions, in organizing and disciplining themselves, and in creating 
a powerful labor discipline in one year, then we will in one year do away with this 
“tribute” (which may be reduced even earlier) depending on the measure 
of success attained in creating labor discipline and organization among the workers 
and peasants. The sooner we ourselves, workers and peasants, learn better labor 
discipline and a higher technique of toil, making use of the bourgeois specialists 
for this purpose, the sooner we will get rid of the need of paying tribute to these 
specialists. 

Workers Must Learn Problems of Management

Our work of organization, under the direction of the proletariat, of state accounting 
and control of production and distribution, is considerably behind our work of direct 
expropriation of the expropriators. We understand this is fundamentally necessary for 
understanding the peculiarities of the present period and of the problems dictated 
by these to the Soviets. The centre of gravity of the struggle with the bourgeoisie 
is shifted to the organization of accounting and control. This must be taken into
account in order to determine correctly the urgent economic and financial problems 
concerning the nationalization of banks, monopolization of foreign trade, state 
control of currency, the introduction of a satisfactory wealth and income tax from 
the proletarian standpoint, and the introduction of obligatory labor service. 


We are extremely backward in regard to Socialist reforms in these fields (and they 
are very important fields), and we. are backward for no other reason than  this—that 
accounting and control, in general, are not sufficiently organized. Of course, 
this problem is most difficult, and with the economic disorganization produced by 
the war, its solution must take a long time, and it shoud not be overlooked that 
just here the bourgeoisie—and especially the numerous petty and peasant bourgeoisie—give 
us a good deal of trouble, disturbing the establishment of control; disturbing, for 
instance, the grain monopoly, granting opportunities for speculation and speculative 
trade. What we have already decreed is yet far from adequate realization, and the 
main problem of today consists precisely in concentrating all efforts upon the actual, 
practical realization of the reforms which have already become the law, but have 
not yet become a reality. 


In order to continue further the nationalization of the banks and to move steadily 
toward the transformation of the banks into centres of social bookkeeping under 
Socialism, we must first of all be successful in increasing the number of branches 
of the People’s Bank, in attracting deposits, in making it easier for the 
public to deposit and withdraw money, in removing the possibility of panics, in 
discovering and executing the grafters and crooks, etc. We must first actually 
accomplish the simplest tasks, organize well what is already in our possession—and 
only then prepare for the more complex.


We must improve and regulate the state monopolies in grain, leather, etc., which 
we have already established and thereby prepare for the state monopolization of 
the foreign trade; without such a monopoly we will not be able to “get rid of” 
foreign capital except by the payment of a “tribute.” Whatever possibility 
of Socialist construction exists, depends on whether we shall able to protect our 
internal economic independence during the transition period by paying some “tribute” 
to foreign capital.


We are also extremely backward in the collection of taxes in general, and of wealth 
and income taxes in particular. The levying of contributions on the bourgeoisie—a 
measure which in principle is undoubtedly acceptable, and deserving of proletarian 
approval—shows that we are in this respect still nearer to the methods of 
conquest (of Russia) from the rich for the poor, than to the methods of management. 
But, to become stronger and to make our position firm, we must adopt the last named methods; 
we must substitute for the contributions exacted from the bourgeoisie, steadily and 
regularly collected wealth and income taxes, which will give more to the proletarian 
state and which requires of us greater organization and better regulated accounting 
and control. 


The delay in introducing obligatory labor service is another proof that the most 
urgent problem is precisely the preparatory organization work which, on one hand, 
should definitely secure our gains, and which, on the other hand, is necessary to 
prepare the campaign to “surround capital” and to “compel its 
surrender.” The introduction of obligatory labor service should be started 
immediately, but it should be introduced gradually and with great caution, testing 
every step by practical experience, and, of course, introducing first of all obligatory 
labor service for the rich. The introduction of a labor record book and a consumption-budget 
record book for every bourgeois, including the village bourgeois, would be a long step forward 
toward a complete “siege” of the enemy and toward the creation of a really 
universal accounting and control over production and distribution. 

The Significance of the Struggle for State Accounting and Control

The state, an organ of oppression and robbery of the people, left us as a heritage 
on the part of the people a great hatred for and distrust of everything connected 
with the state. To overcome this is a very difficult task, which only the Soviets 
can master, but which requires even from them considerable time and tremendous perseverance. 
This “heritage” has a particularly painful effect on the question of 
accounting and control—the fundamental question for a Socialist revolution 
after the overthrow of the bourgeoisie. It will inevitably take some time before 
the masses begin to feel themselves free after the overthrow of the land owners 
and the bourgeoisie, and before they comprehend—not from books, but from their 
own experience through the Soviets—that without thorough state accounting and 
control of production and distribution the authority of the toilers, and their freedom, 
cannot last, and a return to the yoke of capitalism is inevitable. 


All the habits and traditions of the bourgeoisie, and especially of the petty bourgeoisie, 
are also opposed to state control, and are for the inviolability of “sacred 
private property” and of “sacred” private enterprise.

 
It is especially clear to us now how correct is the Marxian proposition that Anarchism 
and Anarcho-Syndicalism are bourgeois tendencies, irreconcilable with Socialism, 
with a proletarian dictatorship and with Communism. The present struggle is for 
the purpose of instilling into the masses the idea of Soviet state control and 
accounting, for the realization of this idea, for a break with the accursed past, 
which accustomed the people to look upon the work of getting food and clothing as 
a “private” affair and on purchase and sale as something that “concerns 
only myself.” This is a most momentous struggle, of universal historical significance, 
a struggle of Socialist consciousness against bourgeois-anarchistic “freedom.” 
We have introduced labor control as a law, but it is barely beginning to be realized 
or even to penetrate the consciousness of the proletarian masses. That unaccountability 
in production an distribution is fatal for the first steps toward Socialism that it 
means corruption, that carelessness in accounting and control is a direct assistance 
to the German and Russian Kornilovs, who can overthrow the authority of the toilers
only in case we do not solve the problem of accounting and control, and who with 
the aid of the peasant bourgeoisie, the cadets, the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionists 
of the Right are watching us, waiting for their opportunity—this is not adequately 
emphasized in our agitation, and is not given sufficient thought and is not sufficiently 
discussed by the advanced workers and peasants. And as long as labor control has not 
become a fact, as long as the advanced workers have not carried out a successful 
and merciless campaign against those who violate this control or who are careless 
with regard to control—we cannot move from the first step (from labor control) 
to the second step toward Socialism; i. e., to the regulation of production by the 
workers. 


A Socialist state can come into existence only as a net of production and consumption 
communes, which keep conscientious accounts of their production and consumption, 
economize labor, at the same time steadily increasing its productivity and thus 
making it possible to lower the workday to seven, six or even less hours. Anything 
less than rigorous, universal, thorough accounting and control of grain and of the 
production of grain, and later also on all other necessary products, will not do. 
We have inherited from capitalism mass organizations, which can facilitate the transition 
to mass accounting and control of distribution—the consumers’ cooperatives. 
They are developed in Russia less than in the more advanced countries, but they 
comprise more than 10,000,000 members. The decree on consumers’ associations, 
which was recently issued is extremely significant, showing clearly the peculiarity 
of the position and of the problem of the Socialist Soviet Republic at the present 
time.


The decree is an agreement with the bourgeois co-operatives and with the workmen’s 
co-operatives adhering to the bourgeois standpoint. It is noteworthy, in the first place, 
that representatives of these institutions not only participated in the deliberations 
on this decree, but had practically a determining voice, for parts of the decree 
which met determined opposition from these institutions were rejected. Secondly 
and essentially, the compromise consists in the rejection by the Soviet authority 
of the principles of free admission to the co-operatives (the only consistent principle 
from the proletarian standpoint) and that the whole population of a given locality 
should be united in a single co-operative. The defection from this, the only Socialist 
principles, which are in accord with the problem of doing away with classes, allows 
the existence of “working class co-operatives” (which, in this case, 
call themselves “class” co-operatives only because they submit to the 
class interests of the bourgeoisie.) Lastly, the proposition of the Soviet government 
completely to exclude the bourgeoisie from the administration of the co-operatives 
was also considerably weakened, and only owners of capitalistic commercial and industrial 
enterprises are excluded from the administration. 


If the proletariat, acting through the Soviets, should successfully establish accounting 
and control on a national scale, there would be no need for such compromise. Through 
the Food Departments of the Soviets, through their organs of supply, we would unite 
the population in one cooperative directed by the proletariat, without the assistance 
from bourgeois co-operatives, without concessions to the purely bourgeois principle 
which compels the labor co-operatives to remain side by side with the bourgeois co-operatives 
instead of wholly subjecting these bourgeois co-operatives, fusing both.  


Entering into such an agreement with the bourgeois co-operatives, the Soviet authority 
has concretely defined its tactical problems and characteristic methods of action 
for the present stage of development; i. e.: directing the bourgeois elements, using 
them, making certain individual concessions to them, we are creating conditions for 
a movement forward which will be slower than we at first supposed, but at the same 
time more steadfast, with a more solidly protected base and communication line, and 
with better fortifications of the conquered positions, The Soviets can (and should) 
now measure their successes in the work of Socialist construction, by very simple 
and practical tests: “In exactly what number of communities (communes, or 
villages, blocks, etc.) and to what extent does the development of the co-operatives 
approach the state when they will compromise the whole population?”

Higher Productivity of Labor

In every Socialist revolution—after the proletariat has solved the problem 
of winning power, and to the extent to which the problem of expropriating the expropriators 
and of suppressing their resistance is solved—it becomes necessary to turn 
first of all to the fundamental problem of the creation of a higher social system 
than capitalism; namely, to raise the productivity of labor, and in connection with 
this (and for this), to improve its organization. Our Soviet power is just in such a 
position when, thanks to the victories over the exploiters, from Kerensky to Kornilov, 
it has become possible for it to approach this problem directly and to take hold of 
it. And here it becomes at once clear that though it is possible to seize the central 
state power in a few days, though it is possible to suppress the military resistance 
and the sabotage of the exploiters even in the distant corners of a large country in 
several weeks, a sound solution of the problem of increasing the productivity of 
labor requires at least (especially after a most distressing and destructive war) 
several years. The decisive character of this work is determined by purely objective 
circumstances. 


To increase the productivity of labor we must first of all secure the material basis 
of a large industry: the development of the production of fuel, iron, machinery, and 
of the chemical industry. The Russian Soviet Republic is in such an advantageous 
position that it possesses, even after the Brest-Litovsk peace, colossal stores of 
ore (on the Ural), of fuel in western Siberia (hard coal), in Caucasia and in the 
southeast (petroleum), in central Russia (turf), vast resources of lumber, water-power 
and raw material for the chemical industry (Karabugaz) and so on. The exploitation 
of these natural resources by the latest technical methods will furnish a basis for 
an unprecedented development of production. 


Higher productivity of labor depends, firstly, on the improvement of the educational 
and cultural state of the masses of the population. This improvement is now taking 
place with unusual swiftness, but is not perceived by those who are blinded by the 
bourgeois routine and are unable to comprehend what a longing for light and initiative 
is now pervading the masses of the people, thanks to the Soviet organizations. Secondly, 
economic improvement depends on higher discipline of the toilers, on higher skill, 
efficiency and intensity of labor and its better organization.  


In this respect our situation is especially bad and even hopeless—if we should 
take the word of those who are frightened by the bourgeoisie or who are paid to 
serve it. These people do not understand that there has never been nor can ever 
be a revolution in which the adherents of the old regime have not wailed about 
disorganization, anarchy, etc. It is natural that among the masses who have just 
overthrown an incredibly barbarous oppression, there is profound and widespread 
unrest and ferment, that the development of a new basis of labor discipline is a 
very long process; that before the landowners and the bourgeoisie had been overcome; 
such development could not even begin. 


But without being affected by this, often false, despair  which is spread by the 
bourgeoisie and the bourgeois intellectuals (who have given up hope of retaining 
their old privileges), we should by no means conceal any manifest evils. On the 
contrary, we will expose them and we will improve the Soviet methods of combating 
them, for the success of Socialism is inconceivable without the victory of proletarian 
conscious discipline over the instinctive petty bourgeois anarchy, the real guaranty 
of a possible restoration of Kerenskyism and Kornilovism. 


The most conscious vanguard of the Russian proletariat has already turned to the 
problem of increasing labor discipline. For instance, the central committee of the 
Metallurgical Union and the Central Council of the Trade Unions have begun work on 
respective measures and drafts of decrees This work should be supported and advanced 
by all means. We should immediately introduce piece work and try it out in practice. 
We should tryout every scientific and progressive suggestion of the Taylor system; 
we should compare the earnings with the general total of production or the exploitation 
results of railroad and water transportation and so on. 


The Russian is a poor worker in comparison with the workers of the advanced nations, 
and this could not be otherwise under the regime of the czar and other remnants of feudalism. 
To learn how to work—this problem the Soviet authority should present to the people 
in all its comprehensiveness. The last word of capitalism in this respect, the Taylor 
system—as well as all progressive measures of capitalism—combine the 
refined cruelty of bourgeois exploitation and a number of most valuable scientific 
attainments in the analysis of mechanical motions during work, in dismissing superfluous 
and useless motions, in determining the most correct methods of the work, the best 
systems of accounting and control, etc. The Soviet Republic must adopt valuable 
scientific and technical advances in this field. The possibility of Socialism will 
be determined by our success in combining the Soviet rule and the Soviet organization 
of management with the latest progressive measures of capitalism. We must introduce 
in Russia the study and the teaching of the Taylor system and its systematic trial 
and adaptation. While working to increase the productivity of labor, we must at the
same time take into account the peculiarities of the transition period from capitalism 
to Socialism, which require, on one hand, that we lay the foundation for the Socialist 
organization of emulation, and, on the other hand, require the use of compulsion 
so that the slogan of the dictatorship of the proletariat should not be weakened by 
the practice of a too mild proletarian government. 

Socialism and Emulation

Among the absurd falsehoods which the bourgeois likes to spread about Socialism, 
is the one that Socialists deny the value of emulation. In reality only 
Socialism, destroying classes and, hence, the enslavement of the masses, for the 
first time opens up opportunities for emulation on a mass scale. And only 
the Soviet organization, passing from the formal democracy of a bourgeois republic 
to the actual participation in management of the toiling masses, for the first time 
puts emulation on a broad basis. This is much easier to accomplish on the political 
than on the economic field, but for the success of Socialism the latter is the more 
important. 


Let us take publicity as a means for stimulating emulation. A bourgeois 
republic establishes this only formally, actually subjecting the press to capital, 
amusing the “mob” with spicy political trifles, concealing occurrences 
in the factories, commercial transactions, etc., as a “business secret,” 
protecting “sacred property.” The Soviets abolished commercial secrecy 
and entered on a new road, but have done almost nothing to make use of publicity 
in the interests of economic emulation. We must systematically endeavor 
that—along with the merciless suppression of the thoroughly dishonest and 
insolently slanderous bourgeois press—work shall be carried on to create a 
press which will not amuse and fool the masses with spicy political trifles, but 
which will bring to the attention of the masses, and will help them to study seriously, 
the questions of everyday economics. Every factory, every village, is a production 
and consumption commune having the right and duty to apply the general Soviet regulations 
in its own way (not in the sense of violating the regulations, but in the sense of a 
diversity of forms in carrying them out), to solve in its own way the problem of 
accounting in production and distribution. Under capitalism, this was the “private 
affair” of the individual capitalist or landowner. Under the Soviets, this 
is not a private affair, but the most important national affair.

 
And we have hardly begun the immense and difficult, but also promising and important 
work of stimulating emulation between the communes, to introduce reports 
and publicity in the process of the production of bread, clothing, etc., to transform 
the dry, dead bureaucratic reports into live examples—either repulsive or attractive. 
Under the capitalistic system of production the significance of an individual example, 
say, of some group of producers was inevitably extremely limited, and it was only 
a petty bourgeois illusion to dream that capitalism could be “reformed” 
by the influence of models of virtuous establishments. After the political power 
has passed into the hands of the proletariat and after the expropriation of the 
expropriators has been accomplished, the situation is radically changed, and—as 
has been many times pointed out by the most eminent Socialists—the force of 
an example can for the first time exert a mass effect. Model communes should and 
will serve the purpose of training, teaching and stimulating the backward communes. 
The press should serve as a weapon of Socialist construction, giving publicity in 
all details to the successes of the model communes, studying the principles of their 
success, their methods of economy, and, on the other hand, “blacklisting” 
those communes which persist in keeping the “traditions of capitalism” 
i. e., anarchy, loafing, disorder and speculation. Statistics under capitalism were 
exclusively in the hands of government employees or narrow specialists—we 
must bring them to the masses, we must popularize them so that the toilers gradually 
learn to understand and to see for themselves what work and how much work is needed 
and how much rest they can have. In this way a comparison between the results of 
the enterprise of different communes will become a subject of general interest and 
study ithe foremost communes will be immediately rewarded (by reducing the workday 
for a certain period, by raising the wages, offering them a greater quantity of 
cultural or historical advantages and treasures, etc.).  

Counter-Revolutions Are Inevitable

The appearance on the historical stage of a new class in the role of a leader of 
society never occurs on the one hand without a period of upheavals, struggles and 
storms, on the other hand, without a period of false steps, experiments, wavering 
and hesitation with regard to the choice—of new methods that will fit the new objective 
circumstances. The perishing feudal nobility took revenge on the bourgeoisie, which 
was conquering and displacing it, not only by conspiracies, attempts at insurrections 
and restoration, but also by torrents of ridicule at the inability, clumsiness and 
blunders of the “insolent upstarts” who dared to take hold of the “sacred 
helm” of the state without the ancient training of the princes, barons, nobility 
and aristocracy for this work—quite like the revenge of the Kornilovs and Kerenskys; 
Gotz and Martovs,[10] and 
other heroes of bourgeois morality or bourgeois skepticism, on the working class 
of Russia for its “insolent” attempt to seize power. 


Of course, many months and years must pass before the new social class, a class 
heretofore oppressed and crushed by want and ignorance, can get accustomed to the 
new situation, can take account of everything, regulate its work and produce its 
own organizers. It is self-evident that the party, which leads the revolutionary 
proletariat, could not have gained experience in organizing large enterprises including 
millions and tens of millions of citizens; that to change the old habits of agitation 
must take a good deal of time. But it is not impossible, and—provided we have 
a clear understanding of the necessity of the change, a firm determination to accomplish 
it, and persistence in pursuing a great and difficult end—we will attain it. 
There is a great deal of organizing talent in the “people”; i. e., among 
the workers and among the peasants who are not exploiters; they have been oppressed, 
ruined and discarded in thousands by capitalism; we do not as yet know how to find 
them, how to encourage, assist them and give them prominence. But we will learn how, 
provided we start learning this with all the revolutionary zeal, without which no 
revolution can be victorious.

 
No profound and powerful popular movement in history ever escaped paying a price 
to the scum; the inexperienced, innovators have been preyed upon by adventurers 
and crooks, boasters and shouters; there have been stupid confusion, unnecessary 
bustle. Individual “leaders” would undertake twenty tasks at once, 
completing none of them. Let the poodles of bourgeois society from Bielorussoff 
to Martov yelp and bark on account of every additional splinter going to waste 
while the big old forest is cut down. Let them bark. That is what poodles are 
there for. We will go ahead, trying very cautiously and patiently to test and 
discover real organizers, people with sober minds and practical sense, who combine 
loyalty to Socialism with the ability to organize quietly (and in spite of confusion 
and noise) efficient and harmonious joint work of a large number of people—under 
the Soviet organization. Only such persons should, after many trials, advancing them 
from the simplest to the most difficult tasks, be promoted to responsible posts to 
direct the work of the people, to direct the management. We have not yet learned 
this. We will learn this. 

Efficiency and Proletarian Dictatorship

The resolution of the last (Moscow) Congress of the Soviets, advocates, as the most 
important problem at present, the creation of “efficient organization” 
and higher discipline. Such resolutions are now readily supported by everybody. 
But that their realization requires compulsion, and compulsion in the form of a 
dictatorship, is ordinarily not comprehended. And yet, it would be the greatest 
stupidity and the most absurd opportunism to suppose that the transition from 
capitalism to Socialism is possible without compulsion and dictatorship. The Marxian 
theory has long ago criticized beyond misunderstanding this petty bourgeois-democratic 
and anarchistic nonsense. And Russia of 1917-1918 confirms in this respect the Marxian 
theory so clearly, palpably and convincingly that only those who, are hopelessly 
stupid or who have firmly determined to ignore the truth can still err in this respect. 
Either a Kornilov dictatorship (if Kornilov be taken as the Russian type of a bourgeois 
Cavaignac), or a dictatorship of the proletariat—no other alternative is possible 
for a country which is passing through an unusually swift development with unusually 
difficult transitions and which suffers from desperate disorganization created by 
the most horrible war. All middle courses are advanced—in order to deceive 
the people—by the bourgeois, who are not in a position to tell the truth 
and admit openly that they need a Kornilov, or—through stupidity—by 
the petty bourgeois democrats, the Tchernovs, Zeretellis and Martovs, prattling 
of a united democracy, of the dictatorship of democracy, of a single democratic 
front and similar nonsense. Those who have not learned even from the course of the 
Russian revolution of 1917-1918 that middle courses are impossible, must be given 
up as hopeless. 


On the other hand, it is not hard to see that during transition from capitalism 
to Socialism a dictatorship is necessary for two main reasons. In the first place, 
it is impossible to conquer and destroy capitalism without the merciless suppression 
of the resistance of the exploiters, who cannot be at once deprived of their wealth, 
of their advantages in organization and knowledge, and who will, therefore, during 
quite a long period inevitably attempt to overthrow the hateful (to them) authority 
of the poor. Secondly, every great revolution, especially a Socialist revolution, 
even if there were no external war, is inconceivable without an internal war, with 
thousands and millions of cases of wavering and of desertion from one side to the 
other, and with a state of the greatest uncertainty, instability and chaos. And, 
of course, all elements of decay of the old order, inevitably very numerous and 
connected largely with the petty bourgeoisie (for the petty bourgeoisie is the first 
victim of every war and every crisis) cannot fail to “give themselves away” 
during such a profound transformation. And these elements of decay cannot appear 
otherwise than through the increase of crimes, ruffianism, bribery, speculation and 
other indecencies. It takes time. and an iron hand to get rid of this. 


There never was a great revolution in history in which the people have not instinctively 
felt this and have not displayed a salutary firmness, shooting thieves on the spot. The 
trouble with the previous revolutions was this—that the revolutionary zeal of 
the masses, which kept them vigilant and gave them strength to suppress mercilessly 
the elements of decay, did not last long. The social, the class cause of such weakness 
of revolutionary zeal lay in the weakness of the proletariat, which is the only 
class capable (if sufficiently numerous, conscious and disciplined) of attracting 
the majority of the exploited toilers (the majority of the poor, if we should use 
a simpler and more popular expression) and of retaining the power for a sufficiently 
long time to suppress completely both all exploiters and all elements of decay. 


This historical experience of all revolutions, the universal historical, economic 
and political lesson was summed up by Marx in his brief, sharp, exact and vivid formula: 
the  dictatorship of the proletariat. And that the Russian revolution has correctly 
approached this universal historical problem has been proved by the victorious march 
of the Soviet organization among all the peoples and tongues of Russia. For the 
Soviet rule is nothing else than the organized form of the dictatorship of the proletariat, 
the dictatorship of the advanced class awakening to a new Democracy, to independent 
participation in the administration of the state, tens and tens of millions of exploited 
toilers, who through their experience are discovering that the disciplined and class-conscious 
vanguard of the proletariat is their most reliable leader. 


But “dictatorship” is a great word. And great words must not be used 
in vain. A dictatorship is an iron rule, with revolutionary daring and swift and 
merciless in the suppression of the exploiters as well as of the thugs (hooligans.) 
And our rule is too mild, quite frequently resembling putty rather than iron. We 
must not for a moment  forget that the bourgeois and petty bourgeois environment 
is offering resistance to the Soviet rule in two ways: on the one hand, by external 
pressure—by the methods of the Savinkovs, Gotz, Gegechkoris and Kornilovs, 
by conspiracies and insurrections, with their ugly “ideologic” reflection, 
by torrents of falsehood and calumny in the press of the Cadets, Socialists-Revolutionists 
of the Right and Mensheviks; on the other hand, this environment exerts internal 
pressure, taking advantage of every element of decay, of every weakness, to bribe, 
to increase the lack of discipline, dissoluteness, chaos. The nearer we get to the 
complete military suppression of the bourgeoisie, the more dangerous become for us 
the petty bourgeois anarchic inclinations. And these inclinations cannot be combated 
only by propaganda and agitation, by the organization of emulation, by the selection 
of organizers; they must also be combated by compulsion. 


To the extent to which the principal problem of the Soviet rule changes from military 
suppression to administration—suppression and compulsion will, as a rule, be 
manifested in trials, and not in shooting on the spot. And in this respect the revolutionary 
masses have taken, after November 7, 1917, the right road and have proved the vitality 
of the revolution, when they started to organize their own workmen’s and peasants’ 
tribunals, before any decrees were issued dismissing the bourgeois-democratic judicial 
apparatus. But our revolutionary and popular tribunals are excessively and incredibly 
weak. It is apparent that the popular view of courts—which was inherited from 
the regime of the landowners and the bourgeoisie—as not belonging to the workers, 
has not yet been completely destroyed. It is not sufficiently appreciated that the 
courts serve to attract all the poor to administration (for judicial activity is 
one of the functions of state administration); that the court is an organ of the 
rule of the proletariat and of the poorest peasantry; that the court is a means of 
training in discipline. There is a lack of appreciation of the simple and obvious 
fact that, if the chief misfortunes of Russia are famine and unemployment, these 
misfortunes cannot be overcome by any outbursts of enthusiasm, but only by thorough 
and universal organization and discipline, in order to increase the production of 
bread for men and fuel for industry, to transport it in time and to distribute it 
in the right way. That therefore responsibility for the pangs of famine and unemployment 
falls on everyone who violates the labor discipline in any enterprise and in any 
business. That those who are responsible should be discovered, tried and punished 
without mercy. The petty bourgeois environment, which we will have to combat persistently 
now, shows particularly in the lack of comprehension of the economic and political 
connection between famine and unemployment and the prevailing dissoluteness in organization 
and discipline—in the firm hold of the view of the small proprietor that “nothing
matters, if only I gain as much as possible.” 


This struggle of the petty bourgeois environment against proletarian organizations 
is displayed with particular force in the railway industry, which embodies, probably,
most clearly the economic ties created by large capitalism. The “office” 
element furnishes saboteurs and grafters in large numbers; the proletarian 
element, its best part, is fighting for discipline. But between these two elements 
there are, of course, many who waver, who are “weak,” who are unable 
to resist the “temptation” of speculation, bribery and personal advantage, 
at the expense of the industry, the uninterrupted work of which is necessary to 
overcome famine and unemployment.

 
A characteristic struggle occurred on this basis in connection with the last decree 
on railway management, the decree which granted dictatorial (or “unlimited”) 
power to individual directors. The conscious (and mostly, probably, unconscious) 
representatives of petty bourgeois dissoluteness contended that the granting of “unlimited”
(i. e. dictatorial) power to individuals was a defection from the principle of board 
administration, from the democratic and other principles of the Soviet rule. Some 
of the Socialist-Revolutionists of the Left carried on a plainly demagogic agitation 
against the decree of dictatorship, appealing to the evil instincts and to the petty, 
bourgeois desire for personal gain. The question thus presented is of really great 
significance; first, the question of principle is, in general, the appointment of 
individuals endowed with unlimited power, the appointment of dictators, in accord 
with the fundamental principles of the Soviet rule; secondly, in what relation is 
this case-this precedent, if you wish—to the special problems of the Soviet 
rule during the present concrete period? Both questions deserve serious consideration. 

Democracy and Dictatorship

That the dictatorship of individuals has very frequently in the history of revolutionary 
movements served as an expression and means of realization of the dictatorship of 
the revolutionary classes is confirmed by the undisputed experience of history. The 
dictatorship of individuals has undoubtedly been compatible with bourgeois democratic 
principles, but this point is always treated adroitly by the petty bourgeois critics 
of the Soviet rule and by their petty bourgeois aides. On the one hand, they declare 
the Soviet rule simply something absurd and anarchically wild, carefully avoiding 
all our historical comparisons and theoretical proofs that the Soviets are a higher 
form of democracy; nay, more, the beginning of a Socialist form of democracy. On the 
other hand, they demand of us a higher democracy than the bourgeois and argue: 
individual dictatorship is absolutely incompatible with your Bolshevist (i. e. 
Socialist, not bourgeois) democratic principles, with the Soviet democratic principles.


Extremely poor arguments, these. If we are not, anarchists, we must admit the necessity 
of a state; that is, of compulsion, for the transition from, capitalism to Socialism. 
The form of compulsion is determined by the degree of development of the particular 
revolutionary class, then by such special circumstances as, for instance, the heritage 
of a long and reactionary war, and then by the forms of resistance of the bourgeoisie 
and the petty bourgeoisie. There is therefore absolutely no contradiction in principle 
between the Soviet (Socialist) democracy and the use of dictatorial power of individuals. 
The distinction between a proletarian and a bourgeois dictatorship consists in this: 
that the first directs its attacks against the exploiting minority in the interests 
of the exploited majority; and, further, in, this—that the first is accomplished 
(through individuals) not only by the masses of the exploited toilers, but also by 
organizations which are so constructed that they arouse these masses to creative 
work of historic significance. The Soviets belong to this kind of organization. 


With respect to the second question on the significance of individual dictatorial 
power from the standpoint of the specific problems of the present period, we must 
say that every large machine industry—which is the material productive source 
and basis of Socialism—requires an absolute and strict unity of the will which 
directs the joint work of hundreds, thousands and tens of thousands of people. This 
necessity is obvious from the technical economic and historical standpoint, and has 
always been recognized as its prerequisite by all those who had given any thought 
to Socialism. But how can we secure a strict unity of will? By subjecting the will 
of thousands to the will of one. 


This subjection, if the participants in the common work are ideally conscious and 
disciplined, may resemble the mild leading of an orchestra conductor; it may also 
take the acute form of a dictatorship—if there is no ideal discipline; and 
consciousness. At any rate, complete submission to a single will for the success 
of the processes of work organized on thc type of large machine industry is absolutely 
necessary. This is doubly true of the railways. And just this transition from one 
political problem to another, which in appearance has no resemblance to the first, 
constitutes the peculiarity of the present period. The revolution has just broken 
the oldest, the strongest, and the heaviest chains to which the masses were compelled 
to submit. So it was yesterday. And today the same revolution—and indeed in the 
interest of Socialism—demands the absolute submission of the masses to the single 
will of those who direct the labor process. It is self-evident that such a transition 
cannot take place at once. It is self-evident that it can be realized only after great 
upheavals, crises, returns to the old; only through the greatest strain of the energy 
of the proletarian vanguard which is leading the people to the new order. This is 
ignored by those who, like the snug and comfort loving, fall into the hysterics of 
the “Novaya Zhizn,” “Vperod,” “Dielo Naroda” and 
“Nash Viek.”[11]

The Transition Period

Take the psychology of the average, ordinary type of the toiling and exploited masses 
and compare this psychology with the objective, material conditions of his social 
life. Before the November revolution he had never seen the possessing exploiting 
classes sacrifice in his favor anything that was really of value to them. He did 
not believe that he would be given the often promised land and liberty; that he 
would be given peace; that the interests of a “greater Russia” and of 
the secret treaties aiming at a “greater Russia,” would be opposed to 
the Bolsheviks would be sacrificed; that capital and profits would be surrendered.
He realized this only after November 7, 1917—when he took it himself by force 
and when he had to defend this by force against the Kerenskys, Gotz, Gegechkoris, 
Dutovs, and Kornilovs. It is natural that for a certain time all his attention, 
all his thoughts, all his energy are turned in one direction—to breathe freely, 
to straighten out, to expand, to take the immediate benefits of life which can be 
taken and which were denied to him by the overthrown exploiters. It is natural that 
it must take some time before the ordinary representative of the masses not only 
sees and becomes convinced, but comes to feel that he must not just simply seize, 
grab, snatch—that this leads to greater disorganization, to ruin, to the 
return of the Kornilovs. A corresponding change in the environment (and, hence, 
in the psychology) of the rank and file of the toiling masses is barely beginning. 
And we, the Communist party (the Bolsheviks), which gives conscious expression to 
the aspiration of the exploited masses for emancipation, should fully comprehend 
this change and its necessity, should be in the front ranks of the weary masses 
which are seeking a way out and should lead them along the right road—the 
road of labor discipline, harmonizing the problem of holding meetings to discuss 
the conditions of work, with the problem of absolute submission to the will of the 
Soviet director, or the dictator, during work. 


The habit of holding meetings is ridiculed, and more often wrathfully hissed at 
by the bourgeoisie, Mensheviks, etc., who see only chaos, senseless bustle and 
outbursts of petty bourgeois egoism. But without the “holding of meetings” 
the oppressed masses could never pass from the discipline forced by the exploiters 
to conscious and voluntary discipline. “Meeting holding” is the real 
democracy of the toilers, their straightening out, their awakening to new life, 
their first steps on the field which they themselves have cleared of reptiles (exploiters, 
imperialists, landed proprietors, capitalists) and which they want to learn to put 
in order themselves in their own way; for themselves, in accord with the principles 
of their, “Soviet,” rule, and not the rule of the foreigners, of the 
nobility and bourgeoisie. The November victory of the toilers against the exploiters, 
was necessary; it was necessary to have a whole period of elementary discussion 
by the toilers themselves of new conditions of life and of the new problems to make 
possible a secure transition to higher forms of labor discipline, to a conscious 
assimilation of the idea of the dictatorship of the proletariat, to absolute submission 
to the personal orders of the representatives of Soviet rule during work. 


This transition has now begun. 

The Three Stages of the Revolution

We have successfully solved the first problem of the revolution. We saw how the 
toiling masses formed in themselves the fundamental condition of a successful solution: 
united efforts against the exploiters to overthrow them. Such stages as October, 
1905,[12] and March and 
November, 1917, are of universal historical significance.

 
We have successfully solved the second problem of the revolution; to awaken and 
arouse the downtrodden social classes which were oppressed by the exploiters and 
which only after November 7, 1917, have obtained the freedom to overthrow them and 
to begin to take stock and to regulate their lives in their own way. The “meeting 
holding” of the most oppressed and downtrodden, of the least trained toiling 
masses, their joining the Bolsheviks, their creating Soviet organizations everywhere—this 
is the second great stage of the revolution. 

 
We are now in the third stage. Our gains, our decrees, our laws, our plans must be 
secured by the solid forms of everyday labor discipline. This is the most difficult, 
but also the most promising problem, for only its solution will give us Socialism. 
We must learn to combine the stormy, energetic breaking of all restraint on the part 
of the toiling masses, with iron discipline during work, with absolute submission 
to the will of one person, the Soviet director, during work.  


We have not yet learned this, but we will learn it. 


The restoration of bourgeois exploitation threatened us yesterday through the Kornilovs, 
Gotz, Dutovs, Gegechkoris, Bogajevskys. We defeated them. This restoration, the very 
same restoration threatens us today in a different form through the environment 
of petty bourgeois dissoluteness and anarchism, in the form of ordinary, small, 
but numerous attacks and aggressions of this environment against proletarian discipline. 
This environment of petty bourgeois anarchy we must and we will conquer. 

The Character of Soviet Organization

The Socialist character of the Soviet democracy—that is, of proletarian democracy 
in its concrete particular application—consists first in this: that the electorate 
comprises the toiling and exploited masses—that the bourgeoisie is excluded. 
Second in this: that all bureaucratic formalities and limitations of elections are 
done away with—that the masses themselves determine the order and the time 
of elections and with complete freedom of recall of elected officials. Third, that 
the best possible mass organization of the vanguard of the toilers—of the industrial 
proletariat—is formed, enabling them to direct the exploited masses, to attract 
them to active participation in political life, to train them politically through 
their own experience, that in this way a beginning has been made for the first time 
actually to get the whole population to learn how to manage and to begin managing.


Such are the principal distinctive features of the democracy which is being tried 
in Russia and which is a higher type of democracy, which breaks away from bourgeois 
distortion, and which is a transition to socialist democracy and to conditions which 
will mean the beginning of the end of the state. 


Of course, the chaotic petty bourgeois disorganization (which will inevitably manifest 
itself in one or another degree during every proletarian revolution, and which in 
our revolution, on account of the petty bourgeois character of the country, its 
backwardness, and the consequences of the reactionary war, manifests itself with 
special strength), cannot but leave its mark on the Soviets. 


We must work unceasingly to develop the organization of the Soviets and Soviet rule.
There is a petty bourgeois tendency to turn the members of the Soviets into “parliamentarians” 
or, on the other hand, into bureaucrats. This should be combated by attracting all 
members of the Soviet to practical participation in management. The departments of 
the Soviets are turning in many places into organs which gradually merge with the 
commissariats. Our aim is to attract every member of the poor classes to practical
participation in the management, and the different steps leading toward this end 
(the more diverse the better), should be carefully registered, studied, systematized, 
verified on broader, experiences and legalized. It is our object to obtain the free 
performance of state obligations by every toiler after he is through with his eight hour 
session of productive work. The transition toward this end is especially difficult, 
but only this transition will secure the definite realization of Socialism. The novelty 
and the difficulty of the change naturally cause an abundance of steps which are 
made, so to speak, in the dark, an abundance of mistakes and hesitations. Without 
this, no sudden movement forward is possible. The originality of the present situation
consists, from the standpoint of many who consider themselves Socialists, in this—that 
people have been used theoretically to contrast capitalism and Socialism, and between 
one and they profoundly put the word “leap” (some, recalling Engels, 
quote more profoundly this: “A leap from the kingdom of necessity to the kingdom 
of freedom.”) That the word “leap” was used by the Socialist teachers 
to denote the crisis of an historical transformation and that leaps of this kind 
comprise periods of ten or more years—this cannot be understood by most of 
the so-called Socialists who study Socialism from books, and who have never given 
serious thought to this matter. It is natural that the so-called “Intelligentzia” 
furnish during such times an infinite number of criers after the dead; one bewails 
the Constituent Assembly; another bourgeois discipline; a third, the capitalist order; 
a fourth, the cultured aristocrat; a fifth, imperialistic “greater Russia”; 
and so on and so forth. 

The Socialists and the Passing Order

The real interest of an epoch of great leaps consists in this: that the abundance 
of fragments of the old order which sometimes accumulate more rapidly than the germs 
of the new order (which are not always immediately discernible), requires ability 
to distinguish the most essential in the line or chain of development. There are 
historical periods when it is most important for the success of the revolution to 
smash as many fragments as possible that is, to blow up as many old institutions 
as possible. But there are periods when enough has been blown up, and it becomes 
necessary to turn to the “prosaic” work of clearing the ground of the 
fragments, which work the bourgeoise revolutionists calls “tedious.” 
And there are periods when it is most important to tend carefully the germs of the 
new growth under the fragments, on the soil that is yet full of rubbish.


It is not enough to be a revolutionist and an adherent of Socialism or Communism 
in general. One must be able to find at any moment that particular link in the chain 
that must be grasped with full strength lest the chain slip away, and to prepare 
a sound passage to the next link. The order of the links, their form, their connections, 
their distinction, from one to another in the historical chain of events is not so 
simple as in an ordinary chain which is made by a blacksmith. 


The outcome of struggle with the bureaucratic distortion of the Soviet organizations 
is assured by the firm bond between the Soviets and the people (in the sense of 
the exploited toilers), by the flexibility and elasticity of this bond. The bourgeois 
parliaments even in the most democratic capitalist republic are never looked upon 
by the poor as “their” institutions. But the Soviets are for the masses 
of the workers and peasants, “their own,” and not alien institutions. 
The modern “social-democrats” of the Scheidemann kind or, what is almost 
synonymous of the Martov kind, are just as averse to the Soviets, are just as much 
attracted to the well-behaved bourgeois parliament, or to the Constituent Assembly, 
as Turgenev attracted sixty years ago to a moderate monarchist and aristocratic 
constitution, as he was averse to the peasant democracy of Dobrolubov and 
Tchernyshevsky.[13]


This proximity of the Soviets to the toiling people creates special forms of recall 
and other methods of control by the masses which should now be developed with special 
diligence. For instance, the councils of popular education deserve the fullest sympathy 
and support as periodical conferences of the Soviet electors and their delegates 
to discuss and to control the activity of the Soviet authorities of the particular 
region. Nothing could be more foolish than turning the Soviets into something settled 
and self-sufficient. The more firmly we now have to advocate a merciless and firm 
rule and dictatorship of individuals for definite processes of work during certain 
periods of purely executive functions, the more diverse should be the forms and 
means of mass control in order to paralyze every possibility of distorting the Soviet 
role, in order repeatedly tirelessly to remove the wild grass of bureauratism.

Conclusions

An unusually grave, difficult and dangerous international situation exists; a period 
of “tacking;” a period of waiting for new outbursts of revolution in 
the West, which is painfully slow in coming. Within the country we are passing through 
a period of slow constructive work and of merciless rigor, of a long and persistent 
struggle of the proletarian discipline with the threatening petty bourgeois dissoluteness 
and anarchy. Such, in short, are the distinctive features of the present stage in 
the Socialist revolution. Such is the link in the historical chain of events which 
we must now grasp with all our strength to come out with honor, before we pass to 
the next link—which draws us by its glory, by the glory of the victories of the 
international proletarian revolution. 


Try to compare with the ordinary, popular idea of a “revolutionist,” 
the slogans which are dictated by the peculiarities of the present situation: to 
be cautious, to retreat, to wait, to build slowly, to be mercilessly rigorous, to 
discipline sternly, to attack dissoluteness. Is it surprising that some “revolutionists,” 
hearing this, become full of noble indignation and begin to “attack” 
us for forgetting the traditions of the November revolution, for compromising with 
bourgeois specialists, for compromises with the bourgeoisie, for petty bourgeois 
tendencies, for reformism, etc., etc.?


The trouble with these super-revolutionists is this: that even those who are actuated 
by the best motives in the world, and are absolutely loyal to the cause of Socialism, 
fail to comprehend the particular and “particularly unpleasant” state 
that must inevitably be passed by a backward country which has been shattered by 
a reactionary and ill-fated war and which started the Socialist revolution long before 
the more advanced countries. They lack firmness in difficult moments of a difficult 
transition. It is natural that this kind of “official” opposition to 
our party comes from the Socialist-Revolutionist of the Left. Of course there are, 
and always will be, individual exceptions to group and class types. But social types 
remain. In a country where the petty bourgeois population is vastly predominant in 
comparison with the purely proletarian, the difference between the proletarian and 
the petty bourgeois revolutionist will inevitably appear, and from time to time 
very sharply. The petty bourgeois revolutionist hesitates and wavers at every turn 
of events; passes from a violently revolutionary position in March, 1917, to lauding 
“coalition” in May; to hatred against the Bolsheviks, to bewailing their 
“adventurousness” in July; to cautiously drawing away from them in the 
beginning of November; to supporting them in December; and lastly, in March and 
April, 1918, such types usually turn up their noses scornfully and say, “I 
am not of those who sing hymns to organic work, to practicism and gradualism.”


The social course of such types is that of the small proprietor who has been maddened 
by the horrors of the war, by sudden ruin, by the unheard of torments of starvation 
and disorganization; who is tossing hysterically, seeking a way out, seeking salvation, 
hesitating between confidence and support to the proletariat on the one hand; and 
fits of despair on the other hand. We must clearly comprehend and firmly remember 
that Socialism cannot be built on such a social base. Only a class that marches 
along its road without hesitation, that does not become dejected and does not despair 
on the most difficult and dangerous crossings, can lead the toiling and exploited 
masses. We do not need hysterical outbursts. We need the regular march of the iron 
battalions of the proletariat. 
 

Moscow, April, 1918. 

 
THE BRIGAND’S PEACE
The International Situation

The history of mankind is today recording one of  the greatest and most difficult 
crises which has an infinite—we can say without the least exaggeration—world-wide 
liberating significance. It is not surprising that at the most difficult points of 
such a crisis, when everywhere around us the old order is crumbling and falling apart 
with tumult and crash, and a new order is being born in indescribable torments—it 
is not surprising that some are becoming bewildered, some become victims of despair, 
and others, to escape from the bitter reality, are taking cover behind beautifull 
and enchanting phrases.  

The Story of the Revolution

We were forced, however, to observe most clearly, and to pass through the sharp and 
painful experience of the most difficult crisis of history which turns the world 
from imperialism towards communistic revolution. In a few days we destroyed one of 
the oldest, most powerful, barbarous and cruel monarchies. In a few months we passed 
through a number of stages of compromise with the bourgeoisie and got over the petty 
bourgeois illusions, in the grip of which other countries have spent decades. In 
a few weeks we have overthrown the bourgeoisie and crushed her open resistance in 
civil war. We passed in a victorious and triumphant procession of Bolshevism from 
one end of an enormous country to the other. We aroused to freedom and independence 
the most humble sections of the toiling masses oppressed by czarism and the bourgeoisie. 
We introduced and firmly established the Soviet republic—a new type of state—infinitely 
higher and more democratic than the best of the bourgeois-parliamentary republics. 
We established the dictatorship of the proletariat, supported by the poorest peasantry, 
and have inaugurated a comprehensively planned system of Socialist reform. We awakened 
self-confidence and kindled the fire of enthusiasm in the hearts of millions upon 
millions of workers of all countries. We sent broadcast the clarion call of the 
international working class revolution. We challenged the imperialistic plunderers 
of all countries. 

Brest-Litovsk—A Brigand’s Peace

And in a few days an imperialistic brigand knocked us down, attacking those who had 
no arms. He forced us to sign an incredibly oppressive and humiliating peace—a 
penalty for our daring to break away, even for as short a time as possible, from 
the iron grip of the imperialistic war. And the more threateningly the spectre of 
a working class revolution in his own country rises before the brigand, the more 
furiously he oppresses and strangles and tears Russia to pieces. 

Must Face the Truth

We were compelled to sign a “Tilsit” peace. We must not deceive ourselves. 
We must have courage to face the unadorned, bitter truth. We must size up in full, 
to the very bottom, the abyss of defeat, partition, enslavement and humiliation into 
which we have been thrown. The clearer we understand this, the firmer, the more hardened 
and inflexible will become our will for liberation, our desire to arise anew from 
enslavement to independence, our firm determination to see at all costs, that Russia 
shall cease to be poor and weak, that she may become truly powerful and prosperous. 


She can become such, for we still have left sufficient expanse and natural resources 
to supply all and everyone, if not with abundance, at least with sufficient means 
of subsistence. We have the material in the natural resources, in the supply of human 
energy, and in the splendid impetus which the creative spirit of the people received 
through the great revolution, to create a really mighty and abundant Russia. 


Russia will become such, provided she frees herself of all dejection and phrase-mongering; 
provided she strains her every nerve and every muscle; provided she comes to understand 
that salvation is possible only on the road of the international Socialist revolution, 
which we have chosen. To move forward along this road, not becoming dejected in case of 
defeats; to lay, stone after stone, the firm foundation of a Socialist society; to 
work tirelessly to create discipline and self-discipline; to strengthen everywhere 
organization, order, efficiency, the harmonious cooperation of all the people’s 
forces, state accounting and control over production and distribution of products—such 
is the road towards the creation of military power and Socialist power. 

The Proper Understanding

It is unworthy of a true Socialist, if badly defeated, either to deny that fact or 
to become despondent. It is not true that we have no way out and that we can only 
choose between a “disgraceful” death (from the standpoint of a feudal 
knight), which an oppressive peace is, and a “glorious” death in a hopeless 
battle. It is not true that we have betrayed our ideals or our friends when we signed 
the “Tilsit” peace. We have betrayed nothing and nobody, we have not 
sanctioned or covered any lie, we have not refused to aid any friend and comrade 
in misfortune in any way we could, or by any means at our disposal. 


A commander who leads into the interior the remnants of an army which is defeated 
or disorganized by a disorderly flight and who, if necessary, protects this retreat 
by a most humiliating and oppressive peace, is not betraying those parts of the army 
which he cannot help and which are cut off by the enemy. Such a commander is only 
doing his duty, he is choosing the only way to save what can still be saved, he is 
scorning adventures, telling the people the bitter truth, “yielding territory 
in order to win time,” utilizing any, even the shortest respite in order to 
gather, again his forces, and to give the army, which is affected by disintegration 
and demoralization, a chance to rest and recover.

An Historical Parallel

We, have signed a “Tilsit” peace. When Napoleon I forced Prussia in 1807 
to accept the Tilsit peace, the conqueror had defeated all the German armies, occupied 
the capital and all the large cities, established his police, compelled the conquered 
to give him auxiliary corps in order to wage new wars of plunder of the conquerors, 
dismembered Germany, forming an alliance with some of the German states against other 
German states. And nevertheless, even after such a peace the German people were not 
subdued; they managed to recover, to rise and to win the right to freedom and independence. 


To any person able and willing to think, the example of the Tilsit peace (which was 
only one of the many oppressive and humiliating treaties forced upon the Germans 
in that epoch) shows clearly how childishly naive is the thought that an oppressive 
peace is, under all circumstances, ruinous, and war the road of valor and salvation. 
The war epochs teach us that peace has in many cases in history served as a respite 
to gather strength for new battles. The Peace of Tilsit was the greatest humiliation 
of Germany and at the same time a turning point to the greatest national awakening. 
At that time the historical environment offered, only one outlet for this awakening—a 
bourgeois state. At that time, over a hundred years ago, history was made by a handful 
of noblemen and small groups of bourgeois intellectuals, while the mass of workers 
and peasants were inactive and inert. Owing to this, history at that time could crawl 
only with awful slowness. 

With an Eye Toward Socialism
 
Now capitalism has considerably raised the level of culture in general and 
of the culture of the masses in particular. The war aroused the masses, awakened 
them by unheard of horrors and sufferings. The war has given impetus to history and 
now the world is speeding along with the speed of a locomotive. History is now being 
independently made by millions and tens of millions of people. Capitalism has now 
become ripe for Socialism. 


Thus, if Russia now moves—and it cannot be denied that she does move from a 
“Tilsit” peace to national awakening and to a great war for the fatherland—the 
outlet of such an awakening leads not to the bourgeois state but to an international 
Socialist revolution. We are “resistants” since November 7, 1917. We 
are for the “defense of our fatherland,” but the war for the fatherland 
towards which we are moving is a war for a Socialist fatherland, for Socialism, as 
a part of the universal army of Socialism. 

 

Notes
[1] 
The Bolsheviks—formerly 
a faction within the Social-Democratic Labor Party, have recently changed their name 
to Communist Party to distinguish themselves from the other Social-Democratic groups.


The terms Bolsheviks and Mensheviks 
date back to 1903, when at a congress 
of the Russian Social-Democratic Labor Party a difference arose on a seemingly 
unimportant question (editorial supervision of the party organ), when upon a vote 
which decided the question, there naturally was a majority and minority. Those 
who were with the majority were nicknamed Bolsheviks and those with the minority 
Mensheviks, deriving their names from the Russian words Bolshinstvo and Menshinstvo, 
meaning majority and minority respectively.

[2]
November 7, 1917, is the date of the successful Bolshevik coup d’etat. 
The Kerensky 
coalition government was forced to abdicate on that day and the Soviet 
government, with the Bolshevik leaders, Nikolai Lenin and Leon Trotsky, at the helm, 
was instituted in its place. 

[3]
Tchernov and Zeretelli, leaders of the moderate Socialist-Revolutionists and Social-Democrats 
(Mensheviks) respectively were members of the Kerensky government, which had also 
non-Socialist (Constitutionalists-Democrats) representatives. They favored coalition, 
while the Bolsheviks stood for a complete control of the government by the Soviets. 

[4]
The Constitutionalists-Democrats, the party of the bourgeois liberals, led by 
Professor Paul N. Miluykov, who was Foreign Minister in the first Provisional Government, 
derive the name Cadets from the two Russian initials of their full name.

[5]
The Mensheviks are the moderate wing of the Russian Social-Democratic Labor Party, 
and have always opposed the Bolsheviks on questions of tactics. The war and the 
Revolution have widened the gulf which separated them, though both elements considered 
themselves as belonging to one Marxian Socialist movement. Since the beginning of 
the war the Mensheviks themselves were split into two factions, the one led by George V. Plechanov, 
which was nationalist, and the other led by Martov, which was internationalist. 
During the first eight months of the Revolution (March-November), the Mensheviks 
were in control of the Soviets, while the Bolsheviks were the opposition, demanding 
the break of the Mensheviks with the bourgeois parties. It was this policy that finally 
led to the victory of the Bolsheviks over the Mensheviks in the Soviet. 

[6]
The Party of Socialist-Revolutionists was the other Socialist party in Russia. It 
represented the non-Marxian Socialist movement. While the Social-Democrats were primarily 
active among the city workers, the Socialist-Revolutionists interested themselves 
in the agrarian problem and spread their organization among the peasants. With this 
party was also connected the Terrorist group, which was responsible for the various 
assassinations under the old regime. As with the Social-Democrats, the war and the 
Revolution have brought about a split among the Socialist-Revolutionists. Corresponding 
to the Plechanov group among the Social-Democrats, were the elements among the Socialist-Revolutionists, 
led by Mme. Breshko-Breskovsky, known as Babushka (little mother), who supported 
Kerensky, also a member of this party. The moderate Internationalist group led by 
Victor Tchernov formed the center and the radical elements led by Spiridonova formed 
the left wing. 

[7]
Reference is here made to the surrender of the leader of the Don Cossacks during 
one of the counter-revolutionary attempts in the region under General Kaledin, the 
Hetman of the Don Cossacks.

[8]
Persons representing bourgeois counter-revolutionary elements and Socialist groups 
actively opposing the Bolsheviks, and thirdly or indirectly aiding the counter-revolutionists.

[9]
Middle class intellectuals form a separate entity in Russian society.

[10]
See note 8.

[11]
Liberal and moderate Socialist journals representing group opposed to the Bolsheviks.

[12]
October, 1905, saw the beginning of the first Russian Revolution. It was during that, 
month that the General strike was declared and the open struggle between the revolutionary 
forces and the autocracy ensued. The Czar’s government was forced to grant a 
constitution (October 30) and establish a parliamentary form of government (Duma).

[13]
Noted radical sociologists and publicists of that period.

 






Works Index




Collected Works




Volume 27




L.I.A. Index





 



==========

## Session of the All-Russia
C.E.C, April 29, 1918











Session of the All-Russia C.E.C.



V. I. Lenin
Session of the All-Russia C.E.C..
April 29 1918[1]


Delivered:April 29, 1918
First Published: 1920 in the book: Minutes of the Sessions of the All-Russia C.E.C., 4th Convocation. Verbatim Report, Moscow; Published according to the text of the book, collated with the verbatim report and with the text of the pamphlet: N. Lenin (V. I. Ulyanov), Old Articles on Almost New Subjects, Moscow, 1922
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 279-313
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

Table of Contents

1. Report On The Immediate Tasks Of The Soviet Government       
     
     

2. Reply To The Debate On The Report On The Immediate Tasks .      
 

1
 Report On The Immediate Tasks Of The Soviet Government
  
      Comrades, as regards my report, I shall have to present the
      question today in a somewhat unusual fashion. The point is that
      the real report is my article on the
      immediate tasks of the Soviet government, which was
      published on Sunday in two newspapers, and with which I presume
      the majority of those present are acquainted. 
 Hence I consider that there is no need for me now to repeat
    here what was said in the report and I can confine myself merely
    to additions to and explanations of the report. I think that the
    most suitable form for such explanations now will be that of a
    polemic, because the question I have touched on in these theses on
    immediate tasks is nothing but a development of the resolution
    already adopted by the All-Russia
    Extraordinary Congress in Moscow on March 15, a resolution
    which was not confined to the question of peace then under
    discussion, but pointed out also the chief task of the present
    time, the organisational task, the task of self-discipline, the
    task of combating disorganisation. 
 It is this that has been the basis, it seems to me, of our political
    trends, or the chief lines of our political trends, which have become fairly
    definitely marked in the recent period. I think, therefore, that a polemical
    form can most clearly confirm what I tried to sketch in a positive form in
    my article on immediate tasks. 
    
Comrades, if you look at the political trends of contemporary Russia you
    are above all confronted with the task—here too, as always, so as not
    to make any mistake in your appraisal—of trying to look at all the
    trends taken together, for only in this way, only on this condition, can we
    safeguard ourselves from the errors involved in selecting particular
    examples. It is clearly possible to find any number of examples to confirm
    some particular proposition. But that is not the essence of the matter. We
    can try to get near to elucidating the connection between what is happening
    to the political trends in the country, taking these trends as a whole, and
    what is happening to the class interests, which are always manifested in
    big, serious and powerful political trends, only if we examine these trends
    as a whole, in their totality. 
 And so, if we take a look at the big political trends in Russia, it
    cannot be disputed, I think, that they are clearly and unquestionably
    divisible into three big groups. In the first group we have the entire
    bourgeoisie, united wholly and strongly, as one man, in the most determined,
    one might say reckless, “opposition” to the Soviet
    government. It is, of course, an opposition in quotation marks, because in
    fact we have here a furious struggle, which at this moment has drawn to the
    side of the bourgeoisie all those petty-bourgeois parties which agreed with
    Kerensky during the revolution. These are the Mensheviks, the Novaya
    Zhizn adherents and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, who outdid
    even the bourgeoisie in the fury of their attacks on us, for it is well
    known that very often the fury of attacks and the loudness of yelping are
    inversely proportional to the strength of the political elements from which
    the furious attacks proceed. (Applause.) 
 The entire bourgeoisie and all its yes-men and servitors, of the Chernov
    and Tsereteli type, joined in furious attacks against the Soviet
    system. With an eye to the pleasant prospect which has been realised by
    their friends, their political fellow-thinkers in the Ukraine, they are all
    longing to conclude a peace which would allow them, with the help of German
    bayonets and the bourgeoisie at home, to suppress the influence of the
    Bolsheviks. This is only too well known. We see a beautiful example of such
    friends in the shape of Chkhenkeli in the Caucasus. Everyone will remember
    this from the newspapers. 
 It is obvious that the proletariat, having taken power and launched the
    dictatorship of the working people, the dictatorship of the very poor over
    the exploiters, could not, of course, meet with anything else. 
 On the one hand, we have one flank, one front, completely united. If we
    are sometimes proffered dreams of a united democratic front, I at least, in
    the rare moments when I have occasion to pick up bourgeois newspapers, in
    the rare event of having the pleasure of reading such newspapers as Nash
    Vek, Dyelo Naroda, etc., even if only glancing at all these
    newspapers, I always think: what more do you need for unity of the
    democratic front? 
 All this unity of the democratic front they have to the full, and we can
    only rejoice at this unity, for—in so far as fragments of this
    bourgeois journalism come the way of the masses—it is not unity of a
    democratic front but unity of attacks on the Bolsheviks. And this unity of
    the front, from Milyukov to Martov, has deserved that we should put it on a
    roll of honour on May Day for excellent propaganda in favour of the
    Bolsheviks. 
 Comrades, if you take the other, opposite camp, you will see there now
    only our Party, the Party of Communist Bolsheviks. Events have developed in
    such a way that our allies during a great part of the post-October
    period—the Left S.R.s—have at present resigned from formal
    participation in the government. Their last Congress marked especially
    vividly the extreme vacillation in this party,[2] and this has now been shown more
    clearly than ever, since even in the press this party also gives expression
    to its complete confusion and complete vacillation. 
 If you decided to draw a graph showing how this party from February
    1917—of course, prior to the split of the S.R.s into a Left and a
    Right wing—if you decided to draw a graph showing month by month on
    which side this party stood, on the side of the proletariat or on the side
    of the bourgeoisie, and if you were to continue drawing it for a year, the
    result would be a graph looking like a medical chart, at the sight of which
    everyone would say: here is a remarkable case of fever, a remarkably
    persistent fever! 
In point of fact, hardly any other party has undergone such permanent and
    continual vacillations in the history of the revolution. 
  And so, if we take all these three main trends and look at them, it
    will become clear to us that such an alignment is not accidental, that it
    fully confirms what we Bolsheviks had occasion to point out in 1915, while
    still abroad, when the first news began to arrive that the revolution in
    Russia was growing, that it was inevitable—and when we had to answer
    questions about what the situation of the party would be if events put it in
    power while the war was still going on. At that time we had to say: it is
    possible that the revolution will win a decisive victory, this is possible
    from the class standpoint if at the decisive moments and decisive points the
    leading elements of the petty bourgeoisie waver to the side of the
    proletariat[See present edition, Vol. 21,
    p. 403.—Editor;]; and that is literally what happened,
    that is the course the history of the Russian revolution took and is taking
    at the present moment. Of course, in these vacillations of the
    petty-bourgeois elements we cannot find the slightest grounds for pessimism,
    not to speak of despair. It is clear that revolution in a country which has
    turned against the imperialist war earlier than other countries, revolution
    in a backward country which, to a considerable extent owing to this
    backwardness, events have put—of course, for a short time and, of
    course, in particular questions—in front of other, more advanced
    countries, this revolution, of course, is inevitably doomed to experience
    moments of the greatest difficulty and gravity, and most disheartening as
    well in the near future. For it to hold its front and its allies, for it to
    manage without waverers at such moments, would be absolutely unnatural; it
    would mean completely leaving out of account the class character of the
    revolution, and the nature of the parties and political groupings. 
  And so, if we look at the sum total of the political trends in Russia
    from the standpoint of the immediate tasks, from the standpoint of how the
    real, immediate and prime tasks confront us, the tasks of organisation and
    discipline, the tasks of accounting and control, we see that there is not
    the slightest attempt to make a real assessment of this task in the camp
    which is united in a single democratic front from Milyukov to Martov. There
    is not and cannot be such an assessment because there is only a single
    malevolent desire there—and the more vicious it is, the more it does
    honour to us—to find some possibility, or hint, or dream, of the
    overthrow of the Soviet regime, and nothing else. Unfortunately,
    representatives of the party of Left S.R.s have actually expressed most of
    all—in spite of the very great devotion to the revolution displayed by
    a large number of members of this party who have always shown much
    initiative and energy—they have displayed vacillation precisely over
    the immediate tasks of the present moment in regard to proletarian
    discipline, accounting, organisation and control, tasks which became natural
    for socialists when power had been won and the military attacks ranging from
    the Kerenskys and Krasnovs to the Kornilovs, Gegechkoris and Alexeyevs had
    been repulsed. 
 Now, when for the first time we have come to the vital core of the
    development of the revolution, the question is whether proletarian
    discipline and organisation will prevail, or whether victory will go to the
    petty-bourgeois element, which is especially strong in Russia. 
 For our opponents from the petty-bourgeois camp, the chief arena of
    struggle against us is the sphere of home policy and economic construction;
    their weapon is the undermining of everything that the proletariat decrees
    and endeavours to bring about in the matter of building an organised,
    socialist economy. Here the petty-bourgeois element—the element of
    petty proprietors and unbridled selfishness—acts as the determined
    enemy of the proletariat. 

      And in the graph shown by the petty bourgeoisie through out the events of
      the revolution we see their most marked withdrawal from us. Naturally we
      find here in this camp the chief opposition to the immediate and current
      tasks of the moment, opposition in the more exact sense of the word; here
      we have the opposition of people who do not reject agreement with us in
      principle, who support us on more essential questions than those on which
      they criticise, an opposition that is combined with support. 
    
We shall not be surprised if in the pages of the Left S.R. press we come
    across such statements as those I found in Znamya Truda [3] of April 25. It
    writes: “The Right-wing Bolsheviks are ratifiers” (a horribly
    contemptuous nickname). What would happen if the opposite nickname was given
    to the warriors? Would it produce a less horrible impression? Well, if one
    encounters such trends in Bolshevism, it is an indication of something. It
    was on April 25 that I happened to look at the theses in a newspaper that
    gave a political characterisation of us. When I read this thesis I thought
    this must be someone from Kommunist, the newspaper of the
    “Left Communists” or from their magazine—there is so much
    that is similar here; but I was destined to disillusionment, because it
    turned out to be a thesis of Isuv’s, published in the newspaper
    Vperyod.[4] (Laughter, applause.) 
 And so, comrades, when we observe such political phenomena as the
    solidarity of Znamya Truda with a particular trend of Bolshevism or
    with some sort of formulation of Menshevik theses of the very party that
    pursued the policy of an alliance with Kerensky, of the very party in which
    Tsereteli concluded an agreement with the bourgeoisie, when we meet with
    attacks exactly coinciding with those emanating from the group of Left
    Communists and the new magazine—there is something amiss here. There
    is something here which sheds light on the real significance of these
    attacks, and it is worth while paying attention to these attacks if only
    because we have here an opportunity of assessing the chief tasks of the
    Soviet government in disputes with people with whom it is worth while
    disputing, because here we have Marxist theory, and we can take into
    consideration the significance of the events of the revolution and the
    undoubted desire to seek out the truth. Here the main basis for a real
    debate is provided by devotion to socialism and the obvious resolve to be on
    the side of the proletariat, against the bourgeoisie, whatever
    errors—in the opinion of particular persons, groups or
    trends—may have been committed in this respect by the proletariat in
    fighting against the bourgeoisie. 
 When I say that it is worth while disputing with them, I mean by a
    worth-while dispute, of course, not a polemic, but the fact that the
    question concerns a dispute over the most essential, fundamental problem of
    the present time. It is no accident that it is along this line that disputes
    are taking place. Objectively, it is along this line that the cardinal task
    lies at the present time—the task of the revolutionary struggle of the
    proletariat, which is dictated by the existing conditions in Russia and
    which has to be carried out in every way in the presence of an abundance of
    the most diverse petty-bourgeois trends, and when there is every need for
    the proletariat to say to itself that on this point it cannot make any
    concessions, because the socialist revolution, begun by wresting power from
    the bourgeoisie and continued by smashing all resistance of the bourgeoisie,
    places firmly in the forefront the problems of proletarian discipline and
    organisation of the working people and ability to tackle the work with
    strictly businesslike methods and knowledge of the interests of large-scale
    industry. These problems the proletariat must solve in practice, for
    otherwise it will suffer defeat.—Here is the chief, real difficulty of
    the socialist revolution.—This is the reason why it is so worth while,
    so important, in the historical and political sense of the word, to argue
    with the representatives of the group of Left Communists, in spite of the
    fact that, taking their position and theory and examining it, we see there,
    I repeat—and I shall prove it in a moment—absolutely nothing but
    the same petty-bourgeois waverings. The comrades of the group of Left
    Communists, whatever they call themselves, strike a blow primarily at their
    own theses. I assume that their views are known to the great majority of
    those at this meeting, because we have discussed the essence of them in
    Bolshevik circles, starting from the beginning of March, while those who
    have not taken an interest in the major political literature must have got
    to know and must have discussed these views in connection with the disputes
    that arose at the last All-Russia Congress of Soviets. 
 And so, we see in their theses primarily the same thing that we see now
    in the whole S.R. party, the same thing that we see now both in the
    Right-wing camp and in the camp of the bourgeoisie from Milyukov to Martov,
    for whom these present difficulties of the situation for Russia are
    especially painful from the point of view of the loss of her position as a
    Great Power, from the point of view of her conversion from the old nation,
    an oppressing state, into an oppressed country, from the standpoint of
    deciding not on paper but in practice whether the hardships of the road to
    socialism are worth while, whether the hardships of the newly-begun
    socialist revolution are worth while, whether it is worth while that the
    country should undergo the most difficult situations as regards its
    statehood, as regards its national independence. 
 Here the deepest division of all is between those for whom that state
    independence is, as it is for all the bourgeoisie, an ideal and a boundary,
    their holy of holies—a boundary which must not be crossed and an
    encroachment on which is a denial of socialism—and those who say that
    in the age of frenzied imperialist slaughter for redivision of the world the
    socialist revolution cannot proceed without very heavy defeats for many
    nations which were formerly considered oppressors. And so, however painful
    it is for mankind, socialists, class-conscious socialists are ready to
    undergo all such trials. 
 The Left S.R.s have wavered most of all on this basis, which is most of
    all unacceptable to them, and it is just on this basis that we see the
    greatest waverings among the Left Communists. 
 In their theses, which, as we know, they discussed with us on April 4,[5] and which
    they published on April 20, they keep returning to the question of
    peace. 
 They devote the greatest attention to appraising the question of peace
    and thereby try to prove that peace is a manifestation of the psychology of
    the exhausted and declassed masses. 
 How very comic their arguments are, when they quote their figures: that
    12 were against and 28 were for the conclusion of peace.[6] But if one is to
    collect statistics, and if the vote of a month and a half ago is to be
    recalled, should one not take more recent figures. If political significance
    is to be attached to that vote, should one not call to mind the vote of the
    All-Ukraine Congress of Soviets[7] before saying that the healthy South was against
    peace, while the exhausted, declassed, industrially weakened North was
    allegedly for peace. Should one not call to mind the vote of the majority of
    the group at the All-Russia Congress of Soviets, in which not even one-tenth
    were against peace. If figures are to be recalled and political significance
    attached to them, the political voting needs to be taken as a whole, and
    then you will see at once that the parties which learnt certain slogans by
    heart, which made a fetish of these slogans, proved to be on the side of the
    petty bourgeoisie, while the mass of the working and exploited people, the
    mass of workers, soldiers and peasants, did not reject peace. 
 And now, when alongside the criticism of this stand for peace the
    allegation is made that it was insisted upon by the exhausted, declassed
    masses, while we see clearly that it was the declassed intelligentsia that
    was against peace, when we are given the appraisal of events that I read in
    the newspapers—this fact shows us that on the question of the
    conclusion of peace the majority of our Party was absolutely right, that
    when we were told that the game was not worth the candle, that all the
    imperialists had already combined against us and would in any case strangle
    us, bring us into disgrace, etc.—we nevertheless concluded peace. It
    not only seemed to them disgraceful, it seems to them of no avail. They told
    us that we would not gain a respite. And when we replied: it is impossible
    to know how international relations will develop, but we do know that the
    imperialist enemies are fighting one another, events confirmed this, and it
    was acknowledged by the group of Left Communists, our opponents in ideology
    and principle, who by and large adopt the standpoint of communism. 
 This phrase alone is a complete recognition of the correctness of our
    tactics and the fullest condemnation of those waverings on the question of
    peace which most of all drove away from us a certain wing of our supporters,
    both the entire wing grouped in the party of Left S.R.s, and the wing which
    has existed and still exists in our Party, and which one can confidently say
    will remain there, and which in its vacillations especially clearly reveals
    the source of these vacillations. Yes, the peace which we have arrived at is
    in the highest degree unstable; the respite which we have gained may be cut
    short any day both from the West and from the East—of this there is no
    doubt. Our international situation is so critical that we must exert all our
    strength to hold out as long as possible, until the Western revolution
    matures, the Western revolution which is maturing much more slowly than we
    expected and desired, but is undoubtedly maturing; it is undoubtedly
    absorbing and accumulating more and more inflammable material. 
 If we, as a separate contingent of the world proletariat, have been the
    first to go forward, it is not because this contingent has been more
    strongly organised than others. No, it is worse, more weakly and less
    organised than others, but it would be the height of stupidity and pedantry
    to argue, as many do: well, if things had been begun by the most organised
    contingent, and if it had been followed by one less well organised, and
    after that by one with a third-rate organisation, then we should willingly
    have been supporters of the socialist revolution. But since things did not
    go according to the book, since it turned out that the leading contingent
    was not supported by other contingents, our revolution is doomed to
    perish. We, on the other hand, say: no, our task is to transform the
    organisation in general; our task, since we are alone, is to maintain the
    revolution, to preserve for it at least a certain bastion of socialism,
    however weak and moderately sized, until the revolution matures in other
    countries, until other contingents come up to us. But to expect history to
    set the socialist contingents of the various countries in motion in strict
    sequence and according to a plan, means to have no notion of revolution or,
    out of stupidity, to renounce support of the socialist revolution. 
 At a time when we have found out for ourselves and proved that we have a
    firm position in Russia but do not have forces to oppose international
    imperialism, we have only one task, our tactics become those of manoeuvring,
    waiting and retreat. I am very well aware that these words cannot claim to
    be popular and that if they are given an appropriate turn and put in
    association with the word “coalition”, then the way is wide open
    here for piquant comparisons and for all kinds of reproaches and
    scoffing. But however much our adversaries—the bourgeoisie—on
    the Right and Our friends of yesterday on the Left, the Left S.R.s, and our
    friends—friends, I am sure, of yesterday, today and tomorrow—the
    Left Communists, however much they aim the shafts of their wit at this, and
    whatever proofs they give of their petty-bourgeois vacillations, they cannot
    refute these facts. Events have confirmed us, we have gained a respite
    solely because the imperialist slaughter in the West continues, and in the
    Far East imperialist rivalry nares up ever more extensively—only this
    explains the existence of the Soviet Republic, for the time being hanging by
    the weakest of threads, to which we are holding tight in this political
    situation. Of course, no piece of paper, no peace treaty, will protect us,
    nor the circumstance that we do not want to fight against Japan; it is true
    that she is plundering us, without being deterred by any treaties or
    formalities. We shall be protected, of course, not by a paper treaty or
    “state of peace”, but by the continuing struggle between the two
    “giants” of imperialism in the West, and by our endurance. We
    have not forgotten the basic Marxist lesson which has been so clearly
    confirmed by the Russian revolution: that it is necessary to reckon forces
    in tens of millions; anything less is not taken into account in politics;
    politics discard anything less as a magnitude of no importance. If we look
    at the international revolution from this aspect, the matter is as clear as
    it could possibly be: a backward country can easily begin because its
    adversary has become rotten, because its bourgeoisie is not organised, but
    for it to continue demands of that country a hundred thousand times more
    circumspection, caution and endurance. It will be different in Western
    Europe; there it will be immeasurably more difficult to begin but
    immeasurably easier to go on. It could not be otherwise, because the degree
    of organisation and solidarity of the proletariat there is incomparably
    greater. So long as we are alone, we must say to ourselves, taking all the
    forces into account: we have just one chance until the outbreak of the
    European revolution, which will solve all our difficulties—the
    continuation of the struggle of the international imperialist giants; we
    have estimated this chance correctly, we have held on to it for several
    weeks, but it may be shattered tomorrow. Hence the conclusion is: to
    continue in our foreign policy what we began in March, which can be
    formulated in the words: to manoeuvre, to retreat, to wait. When the words
    “an active foreign policy” turn up in this Left-wing
    Kommunist, when the expression defence of the socialist fatherland
    is put in quotation marks, which are bound to be ironical, then I say to
    myself: these people have understood absolutely nothing of the position of
    the Western proletariat. While they call themselves Left Communists, they
    are going over to the standpoint of the wavering petty bourgeoisie, which
    regards the revolution as a means for ensuring its own specific
    system. International relations indicate as plainly as could be: any Russian
    who contemplated the task of overthrowing international imperialism on the
    basis of Russian forces would be a lunatic. While over there in the West the
    revolution is maturing, although it is now maturing more rapidly than
    yesterday, our task is only this: we, being the contingent that has come to
    the forefront despite our weakness, must do everything, take advantage of
    every chance, so as to hold out in the positions we have won. AIl other
    considerations must be subordinated to this, to taking full advantage of our
    chance, so that we can put off for a few weeks the moment when international
    imperialism will unite against us. If we act in that way we shall advance
    along a road that will be approved by every class-conscious worker in the
    European countries, for he knows what we have learnt since 1905, whereas
    France and Britain have been learning it for centuries—he knows how
    slowly revolution grows in the free society of the united bourgeoisie, he
    knows that against such forces it will be necessary to set in operation an
    agitational bureau which will conduct propaganda in the true sense of the
    word when we stand side by side with the German, French and British
    proletariat which have risen in revolt. Until then, however distressing it
    may be, however repugnant to revolutionary traditions, the only tactics are:
    to wait, manoeuvre and retreat. 
 When people say that we have no foreign, international policy, I say:
    every other policy consciously or unconsciously slips into playing a
    provocatory role and makes Russia a tool of alliance with imperialists of
    the type of Chkhenkeli or Semyonov. 
 And we say: it is better to endure and be patient, to suffer infinitely
    greater national and state humiliations and hardships, but to remain at our
    post as a socialist contingent that has been cut off by the force of events
    from the ranks of the socialist army and compelled to wait until the
    socialist revolution in other countries comes to its aid. And it is coming
    to our aid. It comes slowly but it is coming. The war that is now going on
    in the West is revolutionising the masses more than before and is bringing
    near the hour of an uprising. 
 The propaganda conducted up to now has said that the imperialist war is
    a most criminal and most reactionary war for the sake of annexations. But it
    is now being confirmed that on the Western front, where there are hundreds
    of thousands and millions of French and German soldiers engaged in
    slaughter, the revolution cannot fail to mature more rapidly than hitherto,
    although this revolution is coming more slowly than we expected. 
 I have dwelt on the question of foreign policy more than I intended, but
    it seems to me that we see here very clearly that in this question we are,
    strictly speaking, faced with two main lines—the proletarian line,
    which says that the socialist revolution is what is dearest and highest for
    us, and that we must take account of whether it will soon break out in the
    West, and the other line—the bourgeois line—which says that for
    it the character of the state as a Great Power and national independence are
    dearer and higher than anything else. 
 In regard to domestic issues, we see the same thing on the part of the
    group of Left Communists, who repeat the main arguments levelled against us
    from the bourgeois camp. For example, the main argument of the group of Left
    Communists against us is that there can be observed a Right Bolshevik
    deviation, which threatens the revolution by directing it along the path of
    state capitalism. 
 Evolution in the direction of state capitalism, there you have the evil,
    the enemy, which we are invited to combat. 
 When I read these references to such enemies in the newspaper of the
    Left Communists, I ask: what has happened to these people that fragments of
    book-learning can make them forget reality? Reality tells us that state
    capitalism would be a step forward. If in a small space of time we could
    achieve state capitalism in Russia, that would be a victory. 

    
      How is it that they cannot see that it is the petty proprietor, small
      capital, that is our enemy? How can they regard state capitalism as the
      chief enemy? They ought not to for get that in the transition from
      capitalism to socialism our chief enemy is the petty bourgeoisie, its
      habits and customs, its economic position. The petty proprietor fears
      state capitalism above all, because he has only one desire—to grab,
      to get as much as possible for himself, to ruin and smash the big
      landowners, the big exploiters. In this the petty proprietor eagerly
      supports us. 
 Here he is more revolutionary than the workers, because he is more
    embittered and more indignant, and therefore he readily marches forward to
    smash the bourgeoisie—but not as a socialist does in order, after
    breaking the resistance of the bourgeoisie, to begin building a socialist
    economy based on the principles of firm labour discipline, within the
    framework of a strict organisation, and observing correct methods of control
    and accounting—but in order, by grabbing as much as possible for
    himself, to exploit the fruits of victory for himself and for his own ends,
    without the least concern for general state interests and the interests of
    the class of working people as a whole. 
 What is state capitalism under Soviet power? To achieve state capitalism
    at the present time means putting into effect the accounting and control
    that the capitalist classes carried out. We see a sample of state capitalism
    in Germany. We know that Germany has proved superior to us. But if you
    reflect even slightly on what it would mean if the foundations of such state
    capitalism were established in Russia, Soviet Russia, everyone who is not
    out of his senses and has not stuffed his head with fragments of book
    learning, would have to say that state capitalism would be our
    salvation. 
 I said that state capitalism would be our salvation; if we had it in
    Russia, the transition to full socialism would he easy, would be within our
    grasp, because state capitalism is something centralised, calculated,
    controlled and socialised, and that is exactly what we lack: we are
    threatened by the element of petty-bourgeois slovenliness, which more than
    anything else has been developed by the whole history of Russia and her
    economy, and which prevents us from taking the very step on which the
    success of socialism depends. Allow me to remind you that I had occasion to
    write my statement about state capitalism some time before the revolution
    and it is a howling absurdity to try to frighten us with state capitalism. I
    remind you that in my pamphlet the Impending CatastropheSee present edition, Vol. 25,
    pp. 319-65.—Editor. I then wrote. . . . (He reads the
    passage.) 
 I wrote this about the revolutionary-democratic state, the state of
    Kerensky, Chernov, Tsereteli, Kishkin and their confreres, about a state
    which had a bourgeois basis and which did not and could not depart from
    it. I wrote at that time that state capitalism is a step towards socialism;
    I wrote that in September 1917, and now, in April 1918, after the
    proletariat’s taking power in October, when it has proved its
    capacity: many factories have been confiscated, enterprises and banks
    nationalised, the armed resistance of the bourgeoisie and saboteurs
    smashed—now, when they try to frighten us with capitalism, it is so
    ludicrous, such a sheer absurdity and fabrication, that it becomes
    surprising and one asks oneself: how could people have this idea? They have
    forgotten the mere trifle that in Russia we have a petty-bourgeois mass
    which sympathises with the abolition of the big bourgeoisie in all
    countries, but does not sympathise with accounting, socialisation and
    control— herein lies the danger for the revolution, here you have the
    unity of social forces which ruined the great French revolution and could
    not fail to do so, and which, if the Russian proletariat proves weak, can
    alone ruin the Russian revolution. The petty bourgeoisie, as we see, steeps
    the whole social atmosphere with petty-proprietor tendencies, with
    aspirations which are bluntly expressed in the statement: I took from the
    rich, what others do is not my affair. 
 Here is our main danger. If the petty bourgeois were subordinated to
    other class elements, subordinated to state capitalism, the class-conscious
    worker would be bound to greet that with open arms, for state capitalism
    under Kerensky’s democracy would have been a step towards socialism,
    and under the Soviet government it would be three-quarters of socialism,
    because anyone who is the organiser of state capitalist enterprises can be
    made one’s helper. The Left Communists, however, adopt a different
    attitude, one of disdain, and when we had our first meeting with the Left
    Communists on April 4, which incidentally proved that this question from
    remote history, which had been long discussed, was already a thing of the
    past, I said that it was necessary, if we properly understood our tasks, to
    learn socialism from the organisers of the trusts. 
 These words made the Left Communists horribly indignant, and one of
    them—Comrade Osinsky—devoted his whole article to inveighing
    against them. That is substantially what his arguments amounted
    to.—The fact is, we do not want to teach them, but to learn from
    them.—We, “Right-wing” Bolsheviks, we want to learn from
    the organisers of the trusts, but these “Left Communists” want
    to teach them. But what do you want to teach them? Socialism, perhaps? Teach
    socialism to merchants, to businessmen? (Applause.) No, take on the
    job yourselves, if you like. We are not going to help you, it is labour in
    vain. It is no use our teaching these engineers, businessmen and
    merchants. It is no use teaching them socialism. If we had a bourgeois
    revolution, then there would be nothing to learn from them—except
    perhaps that you should grab what you can and have done with it, there is
    nothing more to learn. But that is not a socialist revolution—that is
    something that happened in France in 1793, that occurs where there is no
    socialism but only an approach to socialism. 
 The landowners have to be overthrown, the bourgeoisie has to be
    overthrown, and all the actions of the Bolsheviks, all their struggle, their
    violence against the landowners and capitalists, expropriation and forcible
    suppression of the resistance of the landowners and capitalists, will be
    justified and proved a million times correct by history. Taken as a whole,
    this was a very great historical task, but it was only the first step. What
    matters now is the purpose for which we crushed them. Was it in order to say
    that now, having finally crushed them, we shall bow down before their
    capitalism? No, we shall now learn from them because we lack knowledge,
    because we do not have this knowledge. We know about socialism, but
    knowledge of organisation on a scale of millions, knowledge of the
    organisation and distribution of goods, etc.—this we do not have. The
    old Bolshevik leaders did not teach us this. The Bolshevik Party cannot
    boast of this in its history. We have not done a course on this yet. And we
    say, let him be a thorough-paced rascal even, but if he has organised a
    trust, if he is a merchant who has dealt with the organisation of production
    and distribution for millions and tens of millions, if he has acquired
    experience—we must learn from him. If we do not learn this from them,
    we shall not get socialism, the revolution will remain at the stage it has
    now reached. Only the development of state capitalism, only the painstaking
    establishment of accounting and control, only the strictest organisation and
    labour discipline, will lead us to socialism. Without this there is no
    socialism. (Applause.) 
 It is no use our undertaking the ridiculous task of teaching the
    organisers of trusts—there is nothing to teach them. We have to
    expropriate them. That is not where the hitch lies. There is no difficulty
    whatsoever in that. (Applause.) That we have sufficiently
    demonstrated and proved. 
I told every workers’ delegation with which I had to deal when they
    came to me and complained that their factory was at a standstill: you would
    like your factory to be confiscated. Very well, we have blank forms for a
    decree ready, they can be signed in a minute. (Applause.) But tell
    us: have you learnt how to take over production and have you calculated what
    you will produce? Do you know the connection between what you are producing
    and the Russian and international market? Whereupon it turns out that they
    have not learnt this yet; there has not been anything about it yet in
    Bolshevik pamphlets, and nothing is said about it in Menshevik pamphlets
    either. 
 The situation is best among those workers who are carrying out this
    state capitalism: among the tanners and in the textile and sugar industries,
    because they have a sober, proletarian knowledge of their industry and they
    want to preserve it and make it more powerful—because in that lies the
    greatest socialism.[8] They say: I can’t cope with this task just
    yet; I shall put in capitalists, giving them one-third of the posts, and I
    shall learn from them. And when I read the ironical statement of the Left
    Communists: it is yet to be seen who is taking advantage of whom, I find
    their short-sightedness strange. Of course, if, after taking power in
    October and after a victorious campaign against the whole bourgeoisie from
    October to April, we could still be doubtful as to who is taking advantage
    of whom—whether the workers of the trust organisers, or the
    businessmen and rascals of the workers—if that were the case, we
    should have to pack up our belongings and go home, leaving the field to the
    Milyukovs and Martovs. But that is not the case. The class-conscious worker
    will not believe it, and the fright of the petty bourgeoisie is laughable;
    they know that socialism begins where larger-scale industry begins, that the
    merchants and businessmen have learnt this by their own experience. 
 We have said: only these material conditions, the material conditions of
    large-scale machine industry serving tens of millions of people, only these
    are the basis of socialism, and to learn to deal with this in a
    petty-bourgeois, peasant country is difficult, but possible. Revolution
    comes at the price of civil war, but that is something that is the more
    serious the more the country is civilised and developed. In Germany, state
    capitalism prevails, and therefore the revolution in Germany will be a
    hundred times more devastating and ruinous than in a petty-bourgeois
    country—there, too, there will be gigantic difficulties and tremendous
    chaos and imbalance. Therefore I do not see the slightest shadow of a reason
    for despair or despondency in the fact that the Russian revolution
    accomplished the easier task to start with—that of overthrowing the
    landowners and bourgeoisie—and is faced now by the more difficult
    socialist task of organising nation-wide accounting and control. It is
    facing the task with which real socialism begins, a task which has the
    backing of the majority of the workers and class-conscious working
    people. Yes, the majority of the workers, who are better organised and have
    gone through the school of the trade unions, are wholeheartedly with
    us. 
 This majority raised the questions of piece-work and
    Taylorism—questions which the gentlemen from Vperyod are
    scoffingly trying to reject—in the trade union councils before we did,
    even before the coming of Soviet power with its Soviets; they got busy and
    set about working out standards of labour discipline. These people showed
    that for all their proletarian modesty they were well acquainted with the
    conditions of factory labour, they grasped the essence of socialism better
    than those who spouted revolutionary phrases but in reality consciously or
    unconsciously descended to the level of the petty bourgeoisie, whose
    standpoint was: throw out the rich but it’s not worth while putting
    oneself under the accounting and control of an organisation; that’s
    not needed for small proprietors, they don’t want that—but in
    that alone lies the guarantee of the stability and triumph of our
    revolution. 
 Comrades, I shall not touch on further details and quotations from the
    newspaper Levi Kommunist,[9] but I shall say briefly: it is time to cry out
    when people have gone so far as to say that the introduction of labour
    discipline will be a step back. And I must say that I regard this as such an
    unheard-of reactionary thing, such a threat to the revolution, that if I did
    not know that it was said by a group without any influence, and that it
    would be refuted at any class-conscious meeting of workers, I would say: the
    Russian revolution is lost. 
 The Left Communists write: “The introduction of labour discipline,
    coupled with restoring the leadership of capitalists in industry, cannot
    substantially raise labour productivity but it will lower the class
    initiative, activity and organised character of the proletariat. It
    threatens serfdom for the working class. . . .” This is untrue; if it
    were the case, our Russian revolution as regards its socialist tasks and its
    socialist essence would be on the point of collapse. But this is not
    true. The declassed petty-bourgeois intelligentsia does not understand that
    the chief difficulty for socialism lies in ensuring labour
    discipline. Socialists wrote about this long ago, they thought most of all
    about this in the distant past, they devoted the greatest concern to it and
    its analysis, they understood that the real difficulties for the socialist
    revolution begin here. More than once up to now there have been revolutions
    which ruthlessly overthrew the bourgeoisie, no less vigorously than we did,
    but when we went so far as to establish Soviet power we thereby showed that
    we were making the practical transition from the abolition of economic
    serfdom to the self-discipline of labour, that our rule is one which must
    really be the rule of labour. When people say to us that the dictatorship of
    the proletariat is recognised in words but that in reality it is mere
    phrases that are written, this actually shows that they have no notion of
    the dictatorship of the proletariat, for it by no means merely consists in
    over throwing the bourgeoisie or the landowners—that happened in all
    revolutions—our dictatorship of the proletariat is the establishment
    of order, discipline, labour productivity, accounting and control by the
    proletarian Soviet power, which is more stable and firmly based than the
    previous one. That is what you won’t solve, that is what we have not
    yet taught, that is what is needed by the workers, that is why it is good to
    show them a mirror in which all these shortcomings are plainly visible. I
    consider that this is a useful task for it will cause all thinking,
    class-conscious workers and peasants to devote their main efforts to
    it. Yes, by overthrowing the landowners and bourgeoisie we cleared the way
    but we did not build the edifice of socialism. On the ground cleared of one
    bourgeois generation, new generations continually appear in history, as long
    as the ground gives rise to them, and it does give rise to any number of
    bourgeois. As for those who look at the victory over the capitalists in the
    way that the petty proprietors look at it—"they grabbed, let me have a
    go too"—indeed, every one of them is the source of a new generation of
    bourgeois. When they tell us that the introduction of labour discipline
    coupled with restoring capitalists as leaders is a threat to the revolution,
    I say: it is just the socialist character of our revolution that these
    people have failed to understand, they repeat the very thing that easily
    unites them with the petty bourgeois, who fear discipline, organisation,
    accounting and control as the devil fears holy water. 
 They may say: you are actually proposing here to give us capitalists as
    leaders among the working-class leaders. Yes, they are being brought in
    because in the matter of practical organisation they have knowledge that we
    do not possess. The class-conscious worker will never be afraid of such a
    leader, because he knows that Soviet power is his power, that it will stand
    firm in his defence, because he knows that he wants to learn the practice of
    organisation. 
 We organised thousands under the tsar and hundreds of thousands under
    Kerensky. That is nothing, it does not count in politics. It was preparatory
    work, it was a preparatory course. Until the leading workers have learnt to
    organise tens of millions, they will not be socialists or creators of a
    socialist society, they will not acquire the necessary knowledge of
    organisation. The road of organisation is a long road and the tasks of
    socialist construction demand stubborn, long-continued work and appropriate
    knowledge, of which we do not have enough. Even the more developed
    generation of the immediate future will hardly achieve the complete
    transition to socialism. 
 Recall what former socialists wrote about the future socialist
    revolution; it is doubtful whether it would be possible to pass to socialism
    without learning from the organisers of trusts, for they have been concerned
    with this type of production on a large scale. We do not need to teach them
    socialism, we need to expropriate them and to break their sabotage. These
    two tasks we have carried out. We have to make them submit to workers’
    control. And if our critics among the Left Communists have levelled against
    us the reproach that we are not leading to communism by our tactics but are
    going back, their reproaches are ridiculous: they forget that we have lagged
    behind with accounting and control because it has been very difficult to
    smash this resistance and bring the bourgeoisie and its technicians and
    bourgeois specialists into our service. But we need their knowledge, their
    experience and labour, without which it is impossible, in fact, to gain
    possession of the culture that was created by the old social relations and
    has remained as the material basis of socialism. If the Left Communists have
    not noticed this, it is because they do not see life as it really is but
    concoct their slogans by counterposing state capitalism to ideal
    socialism. We, however, must tell the workers: yes, it is a step back, but
    we have to help ourselves to find a remedy. There is only one remedy:
    organise to the last man, organise accounting over production, organise
    accounting and control over consumption and act so that we do not have to
    turn out hundreds of millions in currency from the printing press,[10] and so
    that not a single hundred-ruble note is lost to the state treasury by
    falling into the wrong hands. This cannot be done by any outburst of
    revolutionary fervour, by any knock-out blow to the bourgeoisie. It can be
    done only by self-discipline, only by organising the labour of the workers
    and peasants, only by accounting and control. This we do not have yet and
    for it we have paid tribute by paying the capitalist organisers a higher
    remuneration than they paid you. This we have not learnt, but must learn, it
    is the road to socialism, the sole road—that of teaching the workers
    the practical business of managing gigantic enterprises, of organising big
    industry and large-scale distribution. 
 Comrades, I am very well aware how easy it is to talk of accounting,
    control, discipline and self-discipline when the speaker is someone
    occupying a definite social position. What a lot of material for witticisms
    this provides, and for saying: when your Party was not in power it promised
    the workers rivers flowing with milk and honey, mountains of sugar candy,
    but when these people are in power there is the usual transformation, they
    begin to talk of accounting, discipline, self-discipline, control, etc. I am
    very well aware what promising material this is for publicists of the type
    of Milyukov and Martov. 
 I am very well aware what rich material this is for persons whose
    concern is hack writing or showmanship, and who are inclined to use the
    flimsiest arguments, which receive scant sympathy from class-conscious
    workers. 
 
    

      In the newspaper Levi Kommunist I came across a review of my
      book[11] by such an eminent publicist as Bukharin; it
      was moreover a sympathetic review, but anything of value in it lost all
      its value for me when I had read through this review to the end. I
      perceived that Bukharin had not seen what should have been seen, and this
      happened because he wrote his review in April but quoted what had already
      become out of date for April, what belonged to a previous day, viz., that
      it was necessary to smash the old state. This we have already done, it is
      a task which belongs to a previous day, and we have to go forward and look
      not at the past but at the future and create a state based on the commune;
      he wrote about what is already embodied in Soviet organisations, but said
      nothing about accounting, control and discipline. What a frame of mind
      these people have, and how their psychology coincides with the sentiments
      of the petty bourgeoisie: let us overthrow the rich, but there is no need
      for control. That is how they look at it; it holds them captive and it
      divides the class-conscious proletarian from the petty bourgeoisie and
      even from the extreme revolutionaries. This is when the proletarian says:
      let us organise and brace up, or some petty kulak, and there are millions
      of them, will overthrow us. 
 Here is the division between the class-conscious proletarian and the
    petty bourgeois; here the revolution takes leave of the petty
    bourgeoisie. And how blind are those people who do not say anything about
    this. 
 I shall venture to remind you of some more of my quotations; I said that
    people will be able to do without coercion when they are accustomed to act
    without it; such a custom, of course, may be the result of long
    training. 
 When the Left Communists hear this, they clutch their heads and say: how
    is it that we didn’t notice this? Bukharin, why didn’t you
    criticise it? We showed our strength in suppressing the landowners and the
    bourgeoisie, and now we have to show our strength as regards self-discipline
    and organisation, because this is known from thousands of years of past
    experience and the people must be told that only in this lies the strength
    of our Soviet power, of the workers’ dictatorship, of our proletarian
    authority. The petty bourgeois, however, hide from this truth behind the
    shield of revolutionary phraseology. 
 We have to show our strength. Yes, the small employers, petty
    proprietors, are ready to help us proletarians to overthrow the landowners
    and capitalists. But after this our paths diverge. They have no love for
    organisation, discipline, they are hostile to it. And here we have to wage
    the most determined, ruthless struggle against these proprietors and small
    employers. Because it is here, in the sphere of organisation, that socialist
    construction begins for us. And when I express my dissent to those people
    who claim to be socialists and who promise the workers they shall enjoy as
    much as they like and whatever they like, I say that communism presupposes a
    productivity of labour that 
      we do not have at present. Our productivity is too low, that is a
    fact. Capitalism leaves us as a heritage, especially in a backward country,
    a host of customs through which all state property, all public property, is
    regarded as something that may be maliciously spoilt. This psychology of the
    petty-bourgeois mass is felt at every step, and the struggle in this sphere
    is a very difficult one. Only the organised proletariat can endure
    everything. I wrote: “Until the higher phase of communism arrives, the
    socialists demand the strictest control by society and by the state."[The State and
    Revolution] 
 I wrote this before the October Revolution and I stand by it now. 
 Now, having suppressed the bourgeoisie and broken their sabotage, the
    time has come when we have an opportunity of dealing with this matter. While
    this was not the case, the heroes of the day and the heroes of the
    revolution were the Red Guards who performed their great historic
    deeds. They took up arms without the consent of the propertied classes. They
    performed this great historic work. They took up arms in order to overthrow
    the exploiters and make their arms an instrument for defence of the workers,
    and in order to look after the standards of production and labour and the
    standard of consumption. 
 We have not produced this, but it contains the kernel and the basis of
    socialism. If there are any to whom such work seems boring and
    uninteresting, they are representatives of petty-bourgeois laziness. 
 If our revolution halted here, it would go down in history no less than
    the revolution of 1793. But people will say: that was in the eighteenth
    century. For the eighteenth century that sufficed, but for the twentieth it
    is not enough. Accounting and control—that is mainly what is needed
    for the proper functioning of communist society. So I wrote before the
    October Revolution.[The State and Revolution] 
    I repeat, it was impossible to tackle this matter until the Alexeyevs,
    Kornilovs and Kerenskys were crushed. Now the armed resistance of the
    bourgeoisie has been crushed. Our task is to put all the saboteurs to work
    under our control, under the control of the Soviet power, to set up
    managerial bodies so that accounting and control will be strictly carried
    out. The country is being ruined because after the war it has been through
    it lacks the elementary conditions for normal existence. Our enemies who are
    attacking us seem terrible only because we have not instituted accounting
    and control. When I hear hundreds of thousands of complaints about famine,
    when you see and know that these complaints are justified, that we have
    grain and cannot transport it, when we encounter the scoffing of the Left
    Communists and their objections to such measures as our railway
    decree—they have mentioned it twice—these are trifles. 
 At the meeting with the Left Communists on April 4, I said: give us your
    draft of the decree; after all, you are citizens of the Soviet Republic,
    members of Soviet institutions, you are not critics standing apart from us,
    outside the gate, like the bourgeois traders and saboteurs who criticise in
    order to vent their spleen. You, I repeat, are leaders of Soviet
    organisations; try to give us your draft decree. They cannot give it and
    will never be able to, because our railway decree is correct, because by
    introducing dictatorship our decree has the sympathy of the masses and
    class-conscious working people of the railways, but is opposed by those
    managers who plunder and accept bribes, because a vacillating attitude to it
    is shown by all those who waver between the Soviet government and its
    enemies— whereas the proletariat, which learnt discipline from
    large-scale production, knows that there cannot be socialism until
    production is organised on a large scale and until there is even stricter
    discipline. 
 This proletariat supports us in the railway movement; it will combat the
    anarchy of the petty proprietors and will show that the Russian revolution,
    which is capable of winning brilliant victories, is capable also of
    overcoming its own lack of organisation. And among the May Day slogans, from
    the standpoint of immediate tasks, it will appreciate the slogan of the
    Central Committee which reads: “We conquered capital, we shall conquer
    also our own lack of organisation”. Only then shall we reach the full
    victory of socialism! (Loud applause.) 

     
2
Reply To The Debate On The Report On The Immediate Tasks

      First of all I must reply to Comrade Bukharin’s speech. In my first
      speech I remarked that we were nine-tenths in agreement with him, and so I
      think it is a pity that we should disagree as regards the other tenth. He
      is one-tenth in the position of having to spend half his speech
      disassociating and exorcising himself from absolutely everyone who spoke
      in support of him. And no matter how excellent his intentions and those of
      his group, the falsity of their position is proved by the fact that he
      always has to spend time making excuses and disassociating himself on the
      issue of state capitalism. 
 Comrade Bukharin is completely wrong; and I shall make this known in the
    press because this question is extremely important. I have a couple of words
    to say about the Left Communists’ reproaching us on the grounds that a
    deviation in the direction of state capitalism is to be observed in our
    policy; now Comrade Bukharin wrongly states that under Soviet power state
    capitalism is impossible. So he is contradicting himself when he says that
    there can be no state capitalism under Soviet power—that is an obvious
    absurdity. The large number of enterprises and factories under the control
    of the Soviet government and owned by the state, this alone shows the
    transition from capitalism to socialism, but Comrade Bukharin ignores
    this. Instead, he recalls that we were against him in the Left Zimmerwald,[12] but
    that was ages ago and to recall that now, after Soviet power has been in
    existence for six months, after we have performed all the experiments we
    could when we had expropriated, confiscated and nationalised—after all
    that to recall what we wrote in 1915 is absurd. . . . Now we cannot help
    bringing up the problem of state capitalism and socialism, of how to act in
    the transitional period, in which you have bits of capitalism and socialism
    existing side by side under Soviet power. Comrade Bukharin refuses to
    understand this problem; but I think we cannot throw it out all at once, and
    Comrade Bukharin does not propose throwing it out and does not deny that
    this state capitalism is something higher than what is left of the small
    proprietor’s mentality, economic conditions and way of life, which are
    still extremely prevalent. Comrade Bukharin has not refuted that fact, for
    it cannot be refuted without forgetting the word Marxist. 
 Ghe’s position that the proletariat in Europe is unclean, that in
    Germany the proletariat is corrupted,[13] is so crudely nationalistic,
    so obtuse that I don’t know what he will say next. The proletariat in
    Europe is not one bit more unclean than in Russia, but to start a revolution
    there is more difficult because the people in power are not idiots like
    Romanov or boasters like Kerensky but serious leaders of capitalism, which
    was not the case in Russia. 
 Finally I come to the chief objections that have been showered upon my
    article and my speech from all sides. Particularly heavy fire was directed
    at the slogan: “steal back the stolen”, a slogan in which, no
    matter how I look at it, I can find nothing wrong, when history comes on the
    scene. If we use the words “expropriate the expropriators”, why
    can’t we do without Latin words? (Applause.) 
 I think history will fully justify us, and the masses of the working
    people are coming over to our side even before history; but if the slogan
    “steal back the stolen” has shown itself unrestrainedly in the
    activity of the Soviets, and if it turns out that in a practical and
    fundamental matter like famine and unemployment we are confronted by
    enormous difficulties, it is appropriate to say that after the words
    “steal back what was stolen” the proletarian revolution makes a
    distinction, which runs: “Count up what was stolen and don’t let
    it be filched piecemeal, and if people start filching for themselves
    directly or indirectly, these infringers of discipline must be
    shot. . . .” 

And when they start yelling and shouting that this is dictatorship, when
    they start yelling about Napoleon III and Julius Caesar, when they say this
    is the working class’s inability to act seriously, when they accuse
    Trotsky, it means there is the same muddle-headedness, the same political
    mood induced by petty-bourgeois anarchy, which has been protesting not
    against the “steal back the stolen” slogan, but against the
    slogan of strict accounting and correct distribution. There will be no
    famine in Russia if we calculate how much grain there is, check up on all
    stocks, and if any breaking of the regulations is followed by the most
    severe punishment. That is where the difference lies. And it arises from the
    situation that obtains when the socialist revolution is seriously supported
    only by the proletariat while the petty bourgeoisie approaches it with
    hesitation, a fact we have always been aware of and always taken into
    account; and in this wavering they are against us. This will not make us
    hesitate and we shall continue to follow our path in the certainty that half
    the proletariat will follow us because it knows perfectly well how the
    factory owners robbed and stole merely so that the poor should have
    nothing. 
 It is just a lot of verbal trickery, all this talk about a dictatorship,
    Napoleon III, Julius Caesar and so forth. People can be fooled with that
    kind of talk here, but in the provinces, at every factory, in every village
    they know perfectly well that we are lagging behind in this respect; no one
    will question this slogan, everyone knows what it means. And there can be no
    doubt either that we shall direct all our efforts towards organising
    accounting, control and correct distribution. 
 Bukharin told us: “I disassociate myself from those who embrace
    me.” But there are so many of them that Bukharin cannot extricate
    himself. They don’t tell us what their proposals are because they have
    nothing to propose. Do you know what to propose? I have reproached you in
    the press and in my speeches. Over the matter of the railway decree we had
    the pleasure of recalling April 4. There is a reference to this in your
    magazine, and I have said that if you are not quite satisfied with the
    decree, give us a new decree. But there has not been a word about this in
    the 

      first issue, nor in the second issue, the proofs of which have kindly been
      given to me to look at; and there was not a word about it in Comrade
      Bukharin’s speech either—a complete coincidence. Both Comrade
      Bukharin and Comrade Martov have got on their hobby horse—the
      railway decree—and are riding it to death. They talk about the
      dictatorship of Napoleon III, Julius Caesar and so on, providing material
      for a hundred issues that no one will read. But this is a little nearer
      the point. This is about the workers and the railways. Without railways
      not only will there be no socialism but everyone will starve to death like
      dogs while there is grain to be had close by. Everyone knows this
      perfectly well. Why don’t you answer? You are closing your eyes. You
      are throwing dust in the eyes of the workers—the adherents of
      Novaya Zhizn and the Mensheviks deliberately, Comrade Bukharin by
      mistake. You are concealing the main issue from the workers when you talk
      of construction. What can be constructed without railways? And when I see
      some merchant or other, who tells me during a meeting of some kind, or
      when I am receiving a delegation, that there has been some improvement on
      such and such a railway, that praise is worth a million times more to me
      than 20 resolutions by Communists or anyone else, or any speeches. 
 When the practical people—engineers, merchants and so on—say
    that if this government copes at least to some extent with the railways,
    they will admit that it is a government, their opinion matters more than
    anything else. Because the railways are the key, they are one of the most
    striking manifestations of the connection between town and country, between
    industry and agriculture, on which socialism is entirely based. To make this
    connection good for the sake of planned activity in the interests of the
    whole population, we need railways. 
 All these phrases about dictatorship and so on, over which the Martovs
    and Karelins have found common ground and which have been masticated twice
    over by the Constitutional-Democratic press—they amount to
    nothing. 
 I have given you the example of the workers’ organisations that
    are doing it, and the state capitalism of other enterprises, other branches
    of industry; the tobacco workers and tanners have more state capitalism than
    others, and their affairs are in better order, and their road to socialism
    is more certain. There is no concealing this fact, and another thing you
    can’t do is to come out with absurd phrases as Ghe does, when he says
    that with a rifle he can force anyone. That is a complete absurdity and a
    complete failure to understand what a rifle is for. After that one might
    think that a rifle is a bad thing, unless it is anarchist Ghe’s head
    that is the bad thing. (Applause.) A rifle was a very good thing
    when the capitalist who was waging war against us had to be shot, when
    thieves had to be caught at their thievery and shot. But when Comrade
    Bukharin said there were people who were receiving salaries of 4,000 and
    they ought to be put up against a wall and shot, he was wrong. We have got
    to find such people. We have not very many posts where people get 4,000. We
    pick them up here and there. The whole point is that we have no experts,
    that is why we have got to enlist 1,000 people, first-class experts in their
    fields, who value their work, who like large-scale industry because they
    know that it means improvements in technology. When people here say that
    socialism can be won without learning from the bourgeoisie, I know this is
    the psychology of an inhabitant of Central Africa. The only socialism we can
    imagine is one based on all the lessons learned through large-scale
    capitalist culture. Socialism without postal and telegraph services, without
    machines is the emptiest of phrases. But it is impossible to sweep aside the
    bourgeois atmosphere and bourgeois habits all at once; it needs the kind of
    organisation on which all modern science and technology are based. To say a
    rifle will do the job is the greatest stupidity. Everything depends on
    nation-wide organisation—the whole population’s paying income
    tax, the introduction of labour service, everyone’s being registered;
    while a person is not registered, we have to pay him. When Bukharin said he
    could not see the principle, he was missing the point. Marx envisaged buying
    up the bourgeoisie as a class. He was writing about Britain, before Britain
    had imperialism, when a peaceful transition to socialism was
    possible—it certainly is not a reference to the earlier type of
    socialism.[14] We are talking not about the bourgeoisie but
    about recruiting experts. I have given one example. One could cite
    thousands. It is simply a question of attracting people who can be attracted
    either by buying them with high salaries or by ideological organisation,
    because you can’t deny the fact that it is they who are receiving all
    the high wages. We know from the example I gave—up to now you have
    been criticising only tacitly, yet the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries know
    perfectly well that the salaries paid are high. And the Left Communists and
    Novaya Zhizn adherents know it too. 
 And they don’t criticise this. That’s their sincere
    criticism of the Soviet government! When they saw that their engineers were
    getting 1,500, they kept quiet. Far better to pay these engineers. And no
    mention of Julius Caesar or dictatorship. This is political education of the
    masses. But if I say we are going to pay from 1,500 to 2,000 a month,
    that’s a step back. Then out come Julius Caesar and Napoleon III and
    the Brest-Litovsk peace and everything; but not a word about your experts,
    about your engineers. And when they say, when Bukharin says, this is no
    violation of principle, I say that here we have a violation of the principle
    of the Paris Commune. State capitalism is not money but social relations. If
    we pay 2,000 in accordance with the railway decree, that is state
    capitalism. Comrade Bukharin referred to the Zimmerwald resolution of 1915
    and he can’t free himself of that ill-digested theory. Free yourself,
    Comrade Bukharin. Now Comrade Bukharin has said that I am attacking the
    petty-bourgeois element. 
 I was not attacking the working peasants when I spoke of the
    petty-bourgeois element. Let us leave the working peasants
    alone—that’s not what I am talking about. But among the
    peasantry there are working peasants and petty-bourgeois peasants, who live
    like petty proprietors at the expense of others; the working peasants are
    exploited by others, but they want to live at their own expense. So Comrade
    Karelin in thinking that the working peasants are being attacked is
    wrong. The poor peasants who have nothing to gain from stealing what is
    stolen are on our side. They will accept our slogans. We know very well and
    have seen how people in the villages understand the slogan “steal back
    the stolen”. If people go there agitating about dictatorship and
    spouting phrases about the Brest peace and so forth, these people who are
    arguing against us will find themselves isolated and will receive no
    support. The proletariat, the mass of the peasants, who are ruined and have
    no hopes as regards individual farming, will be on our side because they
    know perfectly well that Russia cannot be kept going simply by stealing. We
    all know that quite well and everyone can see and feel it in his own,
    everyday affairs. 
 In this we are keeping up with economic demands and the mood of the
    masses of the working people. So when the declassed intellectuals among the
    Left Communists hurl their thunderbolts at us, we must remain confident that
    no matter how much they curse us, this slogan of the socialist revolution is
    the only correct slogan, which the masses of the working people must
    understand and use if we are to consolidate and complete the socialist
    revolution. You won’t wriggle out of that problem at any
    workers’ meeting; you will be pursued with this decree, this
    problem. We do not claim to be infallible; many of our decrees are bad. Put
    them right; you have various magazines and groups of writers. Tell us what
    is wrong with the railway decree. We suggested you should do so at the
    meeting of April 4, and today it is April 29th. Twenty-five days have passed
    and a whole group of splendid writers is silent because they have nothing to
    say. 
 You know that our railway decree, in spite of all its mistakes, which we
    are quite ready to correct, got down to the core of what is needed. It
    pivots on that mass of workers who respond to the strictest discipline, who
    need to be organised by a single authority which the Soviets can appoint and
    which the Soviets can replace and from whom they demand unfailing execution
    of assignments so that large-scale industry will operate like a machine and
    thousands of people will be directed by a single will, obey the orders of a
    single Soviet manager. (Applause.) And to bring up Napoleon and
    Julius Caesar on these grounds is either to go mad or to become completely
    lost in the literature of the privileged classes whose sole purpose in life
    is to curse the Bolsheviks. The railway decree, comrades, is a step that
    shows we are on the right road. In my speech I informed you why we had taken
    that road; in the Council of People’s Commissars we did not spend our
    time discussing Napoleon the Great and Julius Caesar but we did go over the
    question a hundred times of how to get the railways in order, and we know
    the response from the provinces, and we know from any number of talks with
    the railway organisations that the proletarians are for us, that they seek
    discipline and expect order. They see that people in Central Russia are
    starving while there is grain, but that owing to the transport muddle it is
    hard to deliver it. 
 But if there are people who are wavering, lost, in a petty-bourgeois
    mood, who have been frightened by one-man management, who go into hysterics
    and refuse to support us, why is this? Is it because there is a Right wing,
    or because people have got hysterics, particularly the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries? In their case the confusion is complete, no one
    could sort it out. So to avoid a lot of useless argument we say: get down to
    the main issue and deal with it in specific terms. 
 When people here talk of conciliation with the bourgeoisie, as Karelin
    and Martov have done, that is nonsense. I will remind you from
    Kautsky’s authoritative pamphlet how he conceived life the day after
    the social revolution. I will tell you approximately what he wrote; the
    trust organisers will not be left without work to do. That was written by a
    man who realised that to organise tens of millions of people for the
    production and distribution of goods is some job! We have not learned this
    and there is nowhere to learn it, but the trust organisers know that without
    this there will be no socialism. And we need to know it too. So all these
    phrases about conciliation and agreement with the bourgeoisie are empty
    chatter. You cannot refute Kautsky’s premise that large-scale industry
    must be learned through experience. 

    

Endnotes
[1]   The
    politically active workers of Moscow and many Party and Soviet workers were
    invited to a meeting of the All-Russia C.E.C. on April 29, 1918.



 
      N. K. Krupskaya wrote of Lenin’s speech at this meeting, “To
      enable the workers’ active of Moscow to hear Ilyich’s report
      on the immediate tasks of the Soviet government, the meeting was held at
      the Polytechnical Museum. Ilyich was greeted with a tumultuous ovation and
      listened to with rapt attention. Obviously, the question was one of keen
      interest to everybody. Ilyich spoke there with extraordinary
      fervour” (see N. K. Krupskaya,   Reminiscences
      of Lenin. 

    
[2] 
      The reference is to the Second Congress of the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party, which was held from April 17 to 25, 1918 in
      Moscow. Two trends emerged during the discussion of the party’s
      tasks in the current situation. One section of the delegates led by
      B. D. Kamkov defended the activities of the Central Committee directed
      against the conclusion of the Brest peace and approved the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries’ refusal to work in the central organs of
      the Soviet Government because the treaty had been ratified by the
      Extraordinary Fourth Congress of Soviets. Another section, led by
      M. A. Spiridonova, criticised the Central Committee, accused it of extreme
      “Leftism” and insisted that the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries
      should participate in the Soviet Government in order to get their agrarian
      programme adopted. After a heated debate the Congress passed an ambivalent
      decision. While approving the position of the Central Committee on the
      question of the Brest peace and the withdrawal of the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries from the Council of People’s Commissars,
      it advocated participation in the central and local administrative bodies
      with the aim of “straightening out the general line of Soviet
      policy”.

[3]
Znamya Truda (Banner of Labour)—daily newspaper of
      the Petrograd Committee of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party. It first
      appeared on August 23 (September 5), 1917. After the First All-Russia
      Congress of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Party, as from No. 105, which
      appeared on December 28, 1917 (January 10, 1918), the newspaper became the
      central organ of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Party. It was banned in
      July 1918 during the Left Socialist-Revolutionary revolt. 


[4] 
      This refers to the third point in the theses passed at the proposal of the
      Menshevik I. A. Isuv by the plenum of the Moscow Regional Committee of
      Social-Democrats (Mensheviks), held in April 1918. In his article “
      ’Left-Wing’ Childishness and the Petty-Bourgeois
      Mentality” Lenin compared this thesis (a “perfect example of
      bourgeois provocatory speech-making") with the economic propositions put
      forward by the “Left Communists”, showing that they were the
      same and that the position the “Left Communists” had taken up
      meant their complete renunciation of communism in practice and complete
      desertion to the camp of the petty bourgeoisie” (see this volume,
      p. 348). 

[5]
Theses on the Present Situation put forward by the “Left
      Communists” were discussed at a joint meeting of members of the
      Party Central Committee and the “Left Communist” group on
      April 4, 1918. Lenin examined and criticised these theses in detail in his
      article “Left-Wing” Childishness and the Petty-Bourgeois
      Mentality” (see this volume, pp. 323-54). 

[6]
 
      The reference is to the voting on the ratification of the peace treaty at
      the Extraordinary Seventh Congress of the R.C.P.(B). Distorting the facts,
      the “Left Communists” quoted the number who voted for the
      peace treaty according to the results of the preliminary voting on the two
      resolutions—Lenin’s and that of the “Left
      Communists” (the former, Lenin’s resolution, gained 28 votes,
      the latter only 9, and was immediately turned down). But when speaking of
      how many votes were cast against conclusion of the peace treaty the
      “Left Communists” quoted the results of the final voting on
      Lenin’s resolution alone (30 votes in favour, 12 against, and 4
      abstentions). 

[7]
The Second All-Ukraine Congress of Soviets was held in
      Ekaterinoslav (now Dniepropetrovsk) March 17-19, 1918. The Congress was
      attended by 964 delegates: 428 Bolsheviks, 414 Left Socialist-
      Revolutionaries, 82 non-Party, and 40 other delegates. The Bolsheviks had
      to fight not only the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries and the bourgeois
      nationalists but also the “Left Communists”, who tried to use
      the Congress to promote their adventuristic policy and put forward a
      disruptive motion of censure against the Soviet Government’s
      conclusion of the Brest Treaty. The Bolshevik group, however led by
      Y. B. Gamarnik, A. V. Ivanov, F. A. Sergeyev (Artyom) and N. A. Skrypnik,
      staunchly defended Lenin’s position over the matter of peace and got
      the Congress to approve the decision of the Fourth All-Russia Congress of
      Soviets on the ratification of the peace treaty with Germany. 


      In its Resolution on the Political Situation, which expressed the will of
      the Ukrainian people, the Congress stated that the mass of the working
      people of the Ukraine together with the workers and peasants of Russia and
      the other republics would fight resolutely for Soviet power. In view of
      the situation that had arisen in connection with the Brest peace, the
      Congress declared the Ukraine an independent Soviet republic and called on
      the working people of the Ukraine to wage a ruthless struggle against the
      Austro-German invaders and the Central Rada. At the same time the Congress
      stressed that the terms of the peace treaty insisted on by imperialist
      Germany were unjust, that the Ukraine’s federative connection with
      Russia was only formally broken, and that essentially her relations with
      the R.S.F.S.R. remained unchanged. 

[8] 
      Lenin is referring to the state-capitalist combines set up in the leather,
      textile and sugar industries. At the beginning of 1918 the Tanners’
      Union came to an agreement with the All-Russia Society of Manufacturers
      and Factory-owners of the Leather Industry, under which the tanneries were
      to work on a subsidised basis for the Soviet Government and place all
      their output at the disposal of the state. The industry was administered
      by the Central Leather Board (Glavkozha), on which two-thirds of the seats
      were held by workers and one-third by private manufacturers and bourgeois
      technical experts. Analogous agreements were concluded in textiles, sugar
      and some other branches of the light and food industries. The state
      retained the right to confiscate any enterprises that were part of a
      state-capitalist combine. 



      Lenin approved the “proletariat’s attempts to make contracts
      with the manufacturers’ associations” under conditions of the
      dictatorship of the proletariat, and stated that agreements of this kind
      could ensure the workers’ control over whole branches of
      industry”. 

[9]
Levi Kommunist (Left Communist) was how Lenin ironically dubbed
      the magazine Kommunist, the mouthpiece of the anti-Party group of
      “Left Communists”. 

[10] 
      Lenin is referring to the issue of money and banknotes by the Soviet
      Government to make good its insufficient revenues from the usual sources
      (industry, transport, regular taxes and so on). Thanks to Party and
      Government measures to improve the country’s financial position,
      this emission was reduced in the middle of 1918. 

[11] 
      The reference is to Lenin’s book  The State and Revolution, which
      was reviewed on April 20, 1918 in the “Left Communist”
      magazine Kommunist No. 1. 

[12]
The Left Zimmerwald—a group of Left Internationalists
      founded on Lenin’s initiative at the International Socialist
      Conference in Zimmerwald, September 1915. See also Glossary Entry
      for Zimmerwald Left.

[13] 
      Speaking on Lenin’s report at a meeting of the All-Russia C.E.C.,
      the anarchist A. Y. Ghe stated that “hope of assistance from the
      German proletariat is a utopia”. According to Ghe, the German
      proletariat, like the whole West-European proletariat was
      “unclean” and “hypnotised by its depraving orthodox
      Social Democratic education”. 

[14]  
      Karl Marx spoke of the possibility of a peaceful transition to socialism
      under certain specific conditions in a speech at a meeting in Amsterdam on
      September 8, 1872 (Marx/Engels, Werke, Band 18, S. 160, Dietz
      Verlag, Berlin). Marx regarded purchasing the means of production from the
      capitalists as one of the specific ways of bringing about such a
      transition. Engels wrote: “We are certainly not of the opinion that
      buying up is inadmissible under any circumstances; Marx has stated his
      opinion to me—and how often!—that the cheapest thing for us
      would be if we could buy off the whole gang of them” (Marx/Engels,
      Werke, Band 22, S. 504). 

 


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Six Theses on the Immediate
Tasks of the Soviet Government











Six Theses on the Immediate Tasks



V. I. Lenin
Six Theses On The
    Immediate Tasks Of The Soviet Government[1]

Written:Between April 30 and May 3,
    1918
First Published: 1918 in the pamphlet: N. Lenin The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government, All-Russia C.E.C. Publishers; Published according to the text of the second edition of the pamphlet, 1918, collated with the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 314-317
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive March, 2002

1. The international position of the Soviet Republic is extremely difficult
    and critical, because the deepest and fundamental interests of international capital and
    imperialism induce it to strive not only for a military onslaught on Russia, but also for an
    agreement on the partition of Russia and the strangulation of the Soviet power.
Only the intensification of the imperialist slaughter of the peoples in Western Europe and
    the imperialist rivalry between Japan and America in the Far East paralyse, or restrain,
    these aspirations, and then only partially, and only for a certain, probably short, time.
Therefore, the tactics of the Soviet Republic must be, on the one hand, to exert every
    effort to ensure the country’s speediest economic recovery, to increase its defence
    capacity, to build up a powerful socialist army; on the other hand, in international policy,
    the tactics must be those of manoeuvring, retreat, waiting for the moment when the
    international proletarian revolution—which is now maturing more quickly than before in
    a number of advanced countries—fully matures.
2. In the sphere of domestic policy, the task that comes to the forefront at the present
    time in conformity with tho resolution adopted by the All-Russia Congress of Soviets on March
    15, 1918, is the task of organisation. It is this task, in connection with the new and higher
    organisation of production and distribution on the basis of socialised large-scale machine
    (labour) production, that constitutes the chief content—and chief condition of complete
    victory —of the socialist revolution that was begun in Russia on October 25, 1917.
3. From the purely political point of view, the essence of the present situation is that
    the task of convincing the working people of Russia that the programme of the socialist
    revolution is correct and the task of winning Russia from the exploiters for the working
    people have, in main and fundamental outline, been carried out, and the chief problem that
    comes to the forefront now is—how to administer Russia. The organisation of proper
    administration, the undeviating fulfilment of the decisions of the Soviet
    government—this is the urgent task of the Soviets, this is the condition for the
    complete victory of the Soviet type of state, which it is not enough to proclaim in formal
    decrees, which it is not enough to establish and introduce in all parts of the country, but
    which must also be practically organised and tested in the course of the regular, everyday
    work of administration.
4. In the sphere of the economic building of socialism, the essence of the present
    situation is that our work of organising the country-wide and all-embracing accounting and
    control of production and distribution, and of introducing proletarian control of production,
    lags far behind the direct expropriation of the expropriators—the land owners and
    capitalists. This is the fundamental fact deter mining our tasks.
From this it follows, on the one hand, that the struggle against the bourgeoisie is
    entering a new phase, namely: the centre of gravity is shifting to the organisation of
    accounting and control. Only in this way is it possible to consolidate all the economic
    achievements directed against capital, all the measures in nationalising individual branches
    of the national economy that we have carried out since October; and only in this way is it
    possible to prepare for the successful consummation of the struggle against the bourgeoisie,
    i.e., the complete consolidation of socialism.
From this basic fact follows, on the other hand, the explanation as to why the Soviet
    government was obliged in certain cases to take a step backward, or to agree to compromise
    with bourgeois tendencies. Such a step backward and departure from the principles of the
    Paris Commune was,
for example, the introduction of high salaries for a number of bourgeois experts. Such a
    compromise was the agreement with the bourgeois co-operatives concerning steps and measures
    for gradually bringing the entire population into the co-operatives. Compromises of this kind
    will be necessary until the proletarian government has put country-wide control and
    accounting firmly on its feet; and our task is, while not in the least concealing their
    unfavourable features from the people, to exert efforts to improve accounting and control as
    the only means and method of completely eliminating all compromises of this kind. Compromises
    of this kind are needed at the present time as the sole (because we are late with accounting
    and control) guarantee of slower, but surer progress. When the accounting and control of
    production and distribution is fully introduced the need for such compromises will
    disappear.
5. Particular significance now attaches to measures for raising labour discipline and the
    productivity of labour. Every effort must be exerted for the steps already undertaken in this
    direction, especially by the trade unions, to be sustained, consolidated and increased. This
    includes, for example, the introduction of piece-work, the adoption of much that is
    scientific and progressive in the Taylor system, the payment of wages commensurate with the
    general results of the work of a factory, the exploitation of rail and water transport, etc.
    This also includes the organisation of competition between individual producers’ and
    consumers’ communes, selection of organisers, etc.
6. The proletarian dictatorship is absolutely indispensable during the transition from
    capitalism to socialism, and in our revolution this truth has been fully confirmed in
    practice. Dictatorship, however, presupposes a revolutionary government that is really firm
    and ruthless in crushing both exploiters and hooligans, and our government is too mild.
    Obedience, and unquestioning obedience at that, during work to the one-man decisions of
    Soviet directors, of the dictators elected or appointed by Soviet institutions, vested with
    dictatorial powers (as is demanded, for example, by the railway decree), is far, very far
    from being guaranteed as yet. This is the effect of the influence of petty-bourgeois anarchy,
    the anarchy of small-proprietor habits, aspirations and sentiments, which fundamentally
    contradict proletarian discipline and socialism. The proletariat must concentrate all its
    class-consciousness on the task of combating this petty-bourgeois anarchy, which is not only
    directly apparent (in the support given by the bourgeoisie and their hangers-on, the
    Mensheviks, Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, etc., to every kind of resistance to the
    proletarian government), but also indirectly apparent (in the historical vacillation
    displayed on the major questions of policy by both the petty-bourgeois Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and the trend in our Party called “Left Communist”,
    which descends to the methods of petty-bourgeois revolutionariness and copies the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries).
Iron discipline and the thorough exercise of proletarian dictatorship against
    petty-bourgeois vacillation—this is the general and summarising slogan of the
    moment.

Endnotes
[1] Six Theses on the Immediate
    Tasks of the Soviet Government were written by Lenin on instructions of the All-Russia
    C.E.C. after his report on the immediate tasks of the Soviet government had been discussed at
    a meeting of the All-Russia C.E.C. on April 29, 1918. Lenin’s theses were unanimously
    approved by the Party Central Committee on May 3, and on May 4 the Presidium of the
    All-Russia C.E.C. sent them out to the local Soviets with a circular letter stating that
    Lenin’s theses “should form the basis of the work of all Soviets”.

Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Basic Proposition on Economic
and Especially on Banking Policy














Vladimir Lenin's
Basic Proposition on Economic and Especially on Banking Policy


Written: April 1918
First Published: Lenin Miscellany XXI,
    1933
Online Version: marx.org 1997; marxists.org 1999
Transcribed: Conal
    Tuohy
HTML Markup: Brian
    Baggins and David Walters 
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2003. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License
Completion of nationalisation of industry and
    exchange.
    Nationalisation of banks and gradual transition to socialism.
    Compulsory organisation of the population in consumer co-operative
    societies.
    {+Commodity exchange}
    Accounting and control of production and distribution of goods.
    Labour discipline.
    {+Tax policy}

Centralisation
Measures for transition to compulsory current accounts or to compulsory
    keeping of money in the banks.
Compulsory organisation of the population in consumer co-operative
    societies and measures for transition to this.
Conditions of an agreement with co-operators on gradual transition of
    their apparatus towards organisation of the whole population in consumer
    co-operative societies.
Compulsory labour service, begun from the top.
The most ruthless measures to combat chaos, disorder and idleness, and
    the most vigorous and severe measures for raising the discipline and
    self-discipline of the workers and peasants, are to be regarded as
    absolutely essential and urgent.
Conversion of state control into a real control for setting up mobile
    groups of controllers in all spheres of economic life.
Practical conditions concerning the employment of bourgeois
    intellectuals and saboteurs who express the desire to work with the Soviet
    government. Industrial courts for taking account of production, stocks of
    goods and labour productivity. (lmmediate and categorical.)
Completion of nationalisation of industry.
Gradual transition to organisation of one and all in consumer
    co-operatives and commodity exchange.
Banking policy.
Labour discipline and so forth.
Tax policy (finance).
1. Completion of the nationalisation of all factories, railways, means
    of production and exchange.
* Categorical and ruthless struggle agaiust the syndicalist and chaotic
    attitude to nationalised enterprises. Persistent carrying out of
    centralisation of economic life on a nationwide scale. Unremitting demand
    for preliminary plans and estimates, weekly reports and actual increase of
    labour productivity. Establishment and practical trial of the apparatus for
    managing the nationalised industries.
* The reason for this demand was that when certain enterprises were
    nationalised the staffs of these enterprises and certain trade unions had a
    tendency to regard the enterprise or branch of industry as belonging to the
    staff of the enterprise or to the trade union. Lenin was very much against
    such anarcho-syndicalist tendencies. When the question of water transport
    on the Volga was being discussed by the Council of People's Commissars on
    March 4, 1918, Lenin condemned the proposal to make the nationalised river
    craft the property of the trade unions of the various shipping lines and
    stressed that such aspirations had nothing in common with socialism. "The
    task of socialism," Lenin said, "is to make all the means of production the
    property of the whole people, and certainly not to have the ships handed
    over to the ship workers and the banks handed over to the bank
    workers."

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Draft Plan of Scientific and
Technical Work











Draft Plan of Scientific and Technical Work



V. I. Lenin
Draft Plan of
     Scientific and Technical Work[1]

Written: April 1918
First Published:  March 4, 1924 in Pravda No. 52
    Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 314-317
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

The Supreme Economic Council should immediately give its instructions to the
    Academy of Sciences, which has launched a systematic study and investigation of the natural
    productive forces[2] of
    Russia, to set up a number of expert commissions for the speediest possible compilation of a
    plan for the reorganisation of industry and the economic progress of Russia. The plan should
    include: the rational distribution of industry in Russia from the standpoint of proximity to
    raw materials and the lowest consumption of labour-power in the transition from the
    processing of the raw materials to all subsequent stages in the processing of
    semi-manufactured goods, up to and including the output of the finished product; the rational
    merging and concentration of industry in a few big enterprises from the standpoint of the
    most up-todate large-scale industry, especially trusts; enabling the present Russian Soviet
    Republic (excluding the Ukraine and the regions occupied by the Germans) as far as possible
    to provide itself independently with all the chief items of raw materials and organise main
    branches of industry; special attention to the electrification of industry and transport and
    the application of electricity to farming, and the use of lower grades of fuel (peat,
    low-grade coal) for the production of electricity, with the lowest possible expenditure on
    extraction and transport; water power and wind motors in general and in their application to
    farming.

Endnotes
[1] The Draft Plan of Scientific
    and Technical Work marked an important stage in the process of mobilising Russia's scientific
    personnel to deal with the problems of the national economy.
Negotiations with the Academy of Sciences were initiated by Lenin and the
    Soviet Government in January 1918. Lenin directed the work of the People's Commissariat for
    Education, which was conducting the negotiations. At the end of March the Academy of Sciences
    in a declaration to the Soviet Government consented to the government's proposal that the
    Academy should work in the field of exploring the country's natural resources. On April 12,
    at a meeting of the Council of People's Commissars with Lenin in the chair a resolution was
    passed that set the Academy of Sciences "the urgent task of systematically solving the
    problems of the correct distribution of the country's industry and the most rational
    utilisation of economic resources". A decision was also taken recognising the need to finance
    the work of the Academy in this field. With considerable financial backing from the
    government the Academy's Commission for the Study of Russia's Natural Productive Forces
    enlarged the scope of its activities.
In the Draft Plan of Scientific and Technical Work Lenin outlined a broad
    programme for the work of the Academy of Sciences and all the country's scientific and
    technical personnel. Lenin's pointers were later amplified in a number of documents drawn up
    by the Supreme Economic Council (SEC). One of these was the model programme of work of the
    expert commissions of the Academy of Sciences compiled on April 25 by the Supreme Economic
    Council Department for the Organisation of Production. Guided by Lenin's instructions, the
    Soviet economic departments in the capital and the provinces, the Academy of Sciences and
    various research institutes and societies studied the country's natural wealth, power
    resources and various problems connected with the electrification of the national economy.
    Committees and bureaus for the electrification of the basic industrial areas were set u in
    Petrograd and Moscow in the first months of Soviet rule. In Me autumn of 1918, the Central
    Electrotechnical Council was formed on a mandate from Lenin, which set out its main task as
    "producing the best and most rapid solution of the technical and estimating problems in the
    field of the new power developments". Electrification on a large scale for those days was
    launched in 1918.
[2] Publication of this material
    must be accelerated to the utmost; a note about this must be sent to the Commissariat for
    Education, the Printing Workers’ Trade Union and the Commissariat for Labour.[3]
[3]Lenin is referring to the
    materials provied by the Commission for the Stud of Russia’s Natural Prdouctive Forces, set
    up by the Academy of Sciences in 1915. On Lenin’s instuctin the commission was given much
    wider scope for publishing its findings. A series of books called Ã¢ÂÂRussa’s RichesÃ¢ÂÂ and the
    multi-volume The Natural roductive forces of Russia began to appear. In the frist
    three years of Soviet power (1918-1920) the commission published four times as man books as
    in the previous three years preceeding the revolution.

Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## To the C.C., R.C.P.











To the C. C., R.C.P.



V. I. Lenin

      To the C. C., R.C.P.[1]


Written: 4 May, 1918
First Published:  1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXI Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, page 322 
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002



      I request you to put on the agenda the question of expelling
      from the Party those members who, being judges in the case (May
      2, 1918) against bribe-takers, where bribery was proved and
      admitted by the defendants, confined themselves to a sentence of
      six months’ imprisonment.

    
      To award bribe-takers such derisively weak and mild sentences,
      instead of shooting, is disgraceful behaviour for a Communist
      and revolutionary. Such comrades must be pilloried by the court
      of public opinion and expelled from the Party, for their place
      is at the side of Kerensky and Martov and not at the side of
      revolutionary Communists.
    
Lenin
May 4, 1918

Endnotes
[1] 
      On May 2, 1918 the Moscow Revolutionary Tribunal passed a light
      sentence against four judges serving on the Moscow Commission of
      Investigation who had been charged with blackmail and taking
      bribes. Lenin first sent his letter on the subject to
      N. V. Kry-lenko, a member of the Board of the People’s
      Commissariat for Justice, with a request that the Party Central
      Committee should be informed of the names of the guilty
      judges. When he received the reply, which was written on the
      other side of the letter, Lenin sent it to the Central
      Committee, drawing their attention to the facts furnished by
      Krylenko. On Lenin’s insistence the All-Russia
      C.E.C. reconsidered the case and three of the accused had their
      sentences increased to’ ten years’ imprisonment.

     
      Simultaneously with his letter to the Central Committee Lenin
      sent the Poople’s Commissar for Justice D. I. Kursky a
      note demanding that “a law must be introduced at once,
      with demonstrative haste, stating that the punishment for
      bribery (extortion, subornation, arranging of bribes and
      so on) is to be not less than ten years’ imprisonment
      with an additional ten years’ compulsory labour”
      (see present edition Vol. 35, “Letter to
      D. I. Kursky”). On Lenin’s initiative the
      Council of People’s Commissars passed a decision on
      May 4, 1918 instructing the People’s Commissariat for
      Justice to draw up a decree that stipulated a heavy minimum
      sentence for bribery and any connivance in bribery. The Draft
      Decree on Bribery was submitted by the People’s
      Commissariat for Justice for consideration at a meeting of
      the Council of People’s Commissars on May 8. Lenin
      introduced an amendment, after which the decree was passed (see
      Decrees of the Soviet Government, Russian edition,
      Vol. 2, 1959, pp. 236-37 and 240-42). 

    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## “Left-Wing”
Childishness and the Petty-Bourgeois Mentality










“Left-Wing” Childishness



V. I. Lenin
“Left-Wing” Childishness 



Written:
April 1918
First Published: Published May 9, 10, 11,
1918 in;Pravda Nos. 88, 89, 90 Signed: N. Lenin;
Published according to the text of the pamphlet: N. Lenin, The
Chief Task of Our Duty, Pribol Publishers, Moscow, 1918, collated
with the Pravda text and the text of the pamphlet: N. Lenin
(V. I. Ulyanov), Old Articles on Almost New Subjects, Moscow,
1922
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works,
4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages
323-334
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert
Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
& Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin
Internet Archive March, 2002

 The publication by a small group of “Left Communists”
of their journal, Kommunist (No. 1, April 20, 1918), and of
their “theses”, strikingly confirms my views expressed in the pamphlet The Immediate
Tasks of the Soviet Government. There could not be better
confirmation, in political literature, of the utter naïvete of the
defence of petty-bourgeois sloppiness that is sometimes concealed by

“Left” slogans. It is useful and necessary to deal with the arguments
of “Left Communists” because they are characteristic of the period we
are passing through. They show up with exceptional clarity the negative
side of the “core” of this period. They are instructive, because the
people we are dealing with are the best of those who have failed to
understand the present period, people who by their knowledge and
loyalty stand far, far above the ordinary representatives of
the same mistaken views, namely, the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 I 
 As a political magnitude, or as a group claiming to play a
political role, the “Left Communist” group has presented its “Theses on
the Present Situation”. It is a good Marxist custom to give a coherent
and complete exposition of the principles underlying one’s views and
tactics. And this good Marxist custom has helped to reveal the mistake
committed by our “Lefts”, because the mere attempt to argue and not to
declaim exposes the unsoundness of their argument. 
 The first thing that strikes one is the abundance of allusions,
hints and evasions with regard to the old question of whether it was
right to conclude the Brest Treaty. The “Lefts” dare not put the
question in a straightforward manner. They flounder about in a comical
fashion, pile argument on argument, fish for reasons, plead that “on
the one hand” it may be so, but “on the other hand” it may not, their
thoughts wander over all and sundry subjects, they try all the time not
to see that they are defeating themselves. The “Lefts” are very careful
to quote the figures: twelve votes at the Party Congress against peace,
twenty-eight votes in favour, but they discreetly refrain from
mentioning that of the hundreds of votes cast at the meeting of the
Bolshevik group of the Congress of Soviets they obtained less than
one-tenth. They have invented a “theory” that the peace was carried by

“the exhausted and declassed elements”, while it was opposed by “the
workers and peasants of the southern regions, where there was greater
vitality in economic life and the supply of bread was more assured”. .
. . Can one do anything but laugh at this? There is not a word about
the voting at the All-Ukraine Congress of Soviets in favour of peace,
nor about the social and class character of the typically
petty-bourgeois and declassed political conglomeration in Russia who
were opposed to peace (the Left Socialist-Revolutionary party). In an
utterly childish manner, by means of amusing “scientific” explanations,
they try to conceal their own bankruptcy, to conceal the facts, the
mere review of which would show that it was precisely the declassed,
intellectual “cream” of the party, the elite, who opposed the peace
with slogans couched in revolutionary petty-bourgeois phrases, that it
was precisely the mass of workers and exploited peasants who
carried the peace. 
 Nevertheless, in spite of all the above-mentioned declarations and
evasions of the “Lefts” on the question of war and peace, the plain and
obvious truth manages to come to light. The authors of the theses are
compelled to admit that “the conclusion of peace has for the time being
weakened the imperialists’ attempts to make a deal on a world scale”

(this is inaccurately formulated by the “Lefts”, but this is not the
place to deal with inaccuracies). “The conclusion of peace has already
caused the conflict between the imperialist powers to become more
acute.” 
 Now this is a fact. Here is something that has decisive
significance. That is why those who opposed the conclusion of peace
were unwittingly playthings in the hands of the imperialists and fell
into the trap laid for them by the imperialists. For, until the world
socialist revolution breaks out, until it embraces several countries
and is strong enough to overcome international imperialism,
it is the direct duty of the socialists who have conquered in one
country (especially a backward one) not to accept battle against the
giants of imperialism. Their duty is to try to avoid battle, to wait
until the conflicts between the imperialists weaken them even more,
and bring the revolution in other countries even nearer. Our “Lefts”

did not understand this simple truth in January, February and March.
Even now they are afraid of admitting it openly. But it comes to light
through all their confused reasoning like “on the one hand it must be
confessed, on the other hand one must admit”. 
 “During the coming spring and summer,” the “Lefts” write in their
theses, “the collapse of the imperialist system must begin. In the
event of a victory for German imperialism in the present phase of the
war this collapse can only be postponed, but it will then express
itself in even more acute forms.” 
 This formulation is even more childishly inaccurate despite its
playing at science. It is natural for children to “understand” science
to mean something that can determine in what year, spring, summer,
autumn or winter the “collapse must begin”. 
 These are ridiculous, vain attempts to ascertain what cannot be
ascertained. No serious politician will ever say when this or
that collapse of a “system” “must begin” (the more so that the collapse
of the system has already begun, and it is now a question of
the moment when the outbreak of revolution in particular
countries will begin). But an indisputable truth forces its way through
this childishly helpless formulation, namely, the outbreaks of
revolution in other, more advanced, countries are nearer now,
a month since the beginning of the “respite” which followed the
conclusion of peace, than they were a month or six weeks ago. 
 What follows? 
 It follows that the peace supporters were absolutely right, and
their stand has been justified by the course of events. They were right
in having drummed into the minds of the lovers of ostentation that one
must be able to calculate the balance of forces and not help
the imperialists by making the battle against socialism easier for them
when socialism is still weak, and when the chances of the battle are
manifestly against socialism. 
 Our “Left” Communists, however, who are also fond of calling
themselves “proletarian” Communists, because there is very little that
is proletarian about them and very much that is petty-bourgeois, are
incapable of giving thought to the balance of forces, to calculating
it. This is the core of Marxism and Marxist tactics, but they
disdainfully brush aside the “core” with “proud” phrases such as: 
 “. . . That the masses have become firmly imbued with an inactive *&8216;peace mentality’
is an objective fact of the political situation. . . .” 
 What a gem! After three years of the most agonising and reactionary
war, the people, thanks to Soviet power and its correct tactics, which
never lapsed into mere phrase-making, have obtained a very, very brief,
insecure and far from sufficient respite. The “Left” intellectual
striplings, however, with the magnificence of a self-infatuated
Narcissus, profoundly declare “that the masses [???] have become firmly
imbued [!!!] with an inactive [!!!???] peace mentality”. Was I not
right when I said at the Party Congress that the paper or journal of
the “Lefts” ought to have been called not Kommunist but Szlachcic. [Szlachcic—a Polish nobleman —Ed.] 
 Can a Communist with the slightest understanding of the mentality
and the conditions of life of the toiling and exploited people descend
to the point of view of the typical declassed petty-bourgeois
intellectual with the mental outlook of a noble or szlachcic,
which declares that a “peace mentality” is “inactive” and believes that
the brandishing of a cardboard sword is “activity"? For our “Lefts”
merely brandish a cardboard sword when they ignore the universally
known fact, of which the war in the Ukraine has served as an additional
proof, that peoples utterly exhausted by three years of butchery cannot
go on fighting without a respite; and that war, if it cannot be
organised on a national scale, very often creates a mentality of
disintegration peculiar to petty proprietors, instead of the iron
discipline of the proletariat. Every page of Kommunist shows
that our “Lefts” have no idea of iron proletarian discipline and how it
is achieved, that they are thoroughly imbued with the mentality of the
declassed petty-bourgeois intellectual. 
 II 
 Perhaps all these phrases of the “Lefts” about war can be put down
to mere childish exuberance, which, moreover, concerns the past, and
therefore has not a shadow of political significance? This is the
argument some people put up in defence of our “Lefts”. But this is
wrong. Anyone aspiring to political leadership must be able to think
out political problems, and lack of this ability converts the “Lefts”
into spineless preachers of a policy of vacillation, which objectively
can have only one result, namely, by their vacillation the “Lefts” are
helping the imperialists to provoke the Russian Soviet Republic
into a battle that will obviously be to its disadvantage, they are
helping the imperialists to draw us into a snare. Listen to this: 
 “. . . The Russian workers’ revolution cannot *&8216;save itself’ by
abandoning the path of world revolution, by continually avoiding battle
and yielding to the pressure of international capital, by making
concessions to ’home capital’. 
 “From this point of view it is necessary to adopt a determined
class international policy which will unite international revolutionary
propaganda by word and deed, and to strengthen the organic connection
with international socialism (and not with the international
bourgeoisie). . . .” 
 I shall deal separately with the thrusts at home policy contained
in this passage. But examine this riot of phrase-making—and timidity in
deeds—in the sphere of foreign policy. What tactics are binding

at the present time on all who do not wish to be tools of
imperialist provocation, and who do not wish to walk into the snare?
Every politician must give a clear, straightforward reply to this
question. Our Party’s reply is well known. At the present
moment we must retreat and avoid battle. Our “Lefts” dare not
contradict this and shoot into the air: “A determined class
international policy"!! 
 This is deceiving the people. If you want to fight now, say so
openly. If you don’t wish to retreat now, say so openly.
Otherwise, in your objective role, you are a tool of imperialist
provocation. And your subjective “mentality” is that of a frenzied
petty bourgeois who swaggers and blusters but senses perfectly well
that the proletarian is right in retreating and in trying to
retreat in an organised way. He senses that the proletarian is right in
arguing that because we lack strength we must retreat (before Western
and Eastern imperialism) even as far as the Urals, for in this lies the

only chance of playing for time while the revolution in the
West matures, the revolution which is not “bound” (despite the twaddle
of the “Lefts") to begin in “spring or summer”, but which is coming
nearer and becoming more probable every month. 
 The “Lefts” have no policy of their “own”. They dare not

declare that retreat at the present moment is unnecessary. They twist
and turn, play with words, substitute the question of “continuously”
avoiding battle for the question of avoiding battle at the present
moment. They blow soap bubbles such as “international
revolutionary propaganda by deed"!! What does this mean? 
 It can only mean one of two things: either it is mere Nozdryovism,[1] or it
means an offensive war to overthrow international imperialism. Such
nonsense cannot be uttered openly, and that is why the “Left”
Communists are obliged to take refuge from the derision of every
politically conscious proletarian behind high-sounding and empty
phrases. They hope the inattentive reader will not notice the real
meaning of the phrase “international revolutionary propaganda by deed”.


 The flaunting of high-sounding phrases is characteristic of the
declassed petty-bourgeois intellectuals. The organised proletarian
Communists will certainly punish this “habit” with nothing less than
derision and expulsion from all responsible posts. The people must be
told the bitter truth simply, clearly and in a straightforward manner:
it is possible, and even probable, that the war party will again get
the upper hand in Germany (that is, an offensive against us will
commence at once), and that Germany together with Japan, by official
agreement or by tacit understanding, will partition and strangle us.
Our tactics, if we do not want to listen to the ranters, must be to
wait, procrastinate, avoid battle and retreat. If we shake off the
ranters and “brace ourselves” by creating genuinely iron, genuinely
proletarian, genuinely communist discipline, we shall have a good
chance of gaining many months. And then by retreating even, if the
worst comes to the worst, to the Urals, we shall make it easier
for our ally (the international proletariat) to come to our aid, to
“catch up” (to use the language of sport) the distance between the
beginning of revolutionary outbreaks and revolution. 
 These, and these alone, are the tactics which can in fact
strengthen the connection between one temporarily isolated section of
international socialism and the other sections. But to tell the truth,
all that your arguments lead to, dear “Left Communists”, is the

“strengthening of the organic connection” between one high-sounding
phrase and another. A bad sort of “organic
connection”, this! 
 I shall enlighten you, my amiable friends, as to why such disaster
overtook you. It is because you devote more effort to learning by heart
and committing to memory revolutionary slogans than to thinking them
out. This leads you to write “the defence of the socialist fatherland”
in quotation marks, which are probably meant to signify your attempts
at being ironical, but which really prove that you are muddleheads. You
are accustomed to regard “defencism” as something base and despicable;
you have learned this and committed it to memory. You have learned this
by heart so thoroughly that some of you have begun talking nonsense to
the effect that defence of the fatherland in an imperialist epoch

is impermissible
(as a matter of fact, it is impermissible only in an imperialist,
reactionary war, waged by the bourgeoisie). But you have not thought
out why and when “defencism” is abominable. 
 To recognise defence of the fatherland means recognising the
legitimacy and justice of war. Legitimacy and justice from what point
of view? Only from the point of view of the socialist, proletariat and
its struggle for its emancipation. We do not recognise any other point
of view. If war is waged by the exploiting class with the object of
strengthening its rule as a class, such a war is a criminal
war, and “defencism” in such a war is a base betrayal of socialism. If
war is waged by the proletariat after it has conquered the bourgeoisie
in its own country, and is waged with the object of strengthening and
developing socialism, such a war is legitimate and “holy”. 
 We have been “defencists” since October 20, 1917. I have
said this more than once very definitely, and you dare not deny this.
It is precisely in the interests of “strengthening the connection” with
international socialism that we are in duty bound to defend
our socialist fatherland. Those who treat frivolously the
defence of the country in which the proletariat has already achieved
victory are the ones who destroy the connection with international
socialism. When we were the representatives of an oppressed class we
did not adopt a frivolous attitude towards defence of the fatherland in
an imperialist war. We opposed such defence on principle. Now that we
have become representatives of the ruling class, which has begun to
organise socialism, we demand that everybody adopt a serious

attitude towards defence of the country. And adopting a serious
attitude towards defence of the country means thoroughly preparing for
it, and strictly calculating the balance of forces. If our forces are
obviously small, the best means of defense is retreat into the
interior of the country (anyone who regards this as an artificial
formula, made up to suit the needs of the moment, should read old
Clausewitz, one of the greatest authorities on military matters,
concerning the lessons of history to be learned in this connection).
The “Left Communists”, however, do not give the slightest indication
that they understand the significance of the question of the balance of
forces. 
 When we were opposed to defencism on principle we were justified in
holding up to ridicule those who wanted to “save” their fatherland,
ostensibly in the interests of socialism. When we gained the right to
be proletarian defencists the whole question was radically altered. It
has become our duty to calculate with the utmost accuracy the different
forces involved, to weigh with the utmost care the chances of our ally
(the international proletariat) being able to come to our aid in time.
It is in the interest of capital to destroy its enemy (the
revolutionary proletariat) bit by bit, before the workers in all
countries have united (actually united, i.e., by beginning the
revolution). It is in our interest to do all that is possible, to take
advantage of the slightest opportunity to postpone the decisive battle
until the moment (or until after the moment) the
revolutionary workers’ contingents have united in a single great
international army. 
III 
 We shall pass on to the misfortunes of our “Left” Communists in the
sphere of home policy. It is difficult to read the following phrases in
the theses on the present situation without smiling. 
 “. . . The systematic use of the remaining means of production is
conceivable only if a most determined policy of socialisation is
pursued” . . . “not to capitulate to the bourgeoisie and its
petty-bourgeois intellectualist servitors, but to rout the bourgeoisie
and to put down sabotage completely. . . .” 
 Dear “Left Communists”, how determined they are, but how little
thinking they display. What do they mean by pursuing “a most determined
policy of socialisation"? 
 One may or may not be determined on the question of nationalisation
or confiscation, but the whole point is that even the greatest possible
“determination” in the world is not enough to pass from
nationalisation and confiscation to socialisation. The
misfortune of our “Lefts” is that by their naïve, childish
combination of the words “most determined policy of socialisation” they
reveal their utter failure to understand the crux of the question, the
crux of the “present” situation. The misfortune of our “Lefts” is that
they have missed the very essence of the “present situation”, the
transition from confiscation (the carrying out of which requires above
all determination in a politician) to socialisation (the carrying out
of which requires a different quality in the revolutionary). 
 Yesterday, the main task of the moment was, as determinedly as
possible, to nationalise, confiscate, beat down and crush the
bourgeoisie, and put down sabotage. Today, only a blind man could fail
to see that we have nationalised, confiscated, beaten down and put down
more than we have had time to count. The difference between
socialisation and simple confiscation is that confiscation can be
carried out by “determination” alone, without the ability to calculate
and distribute properly, whereas socialisation cannot be brought
about without this ability. 
 The historical service we have rendered is that yesterday we were
determined (and we shall be tomorrow) in confiscating, in beating down
the bourgeoisie, in putting down sabotage. To write about this today in
“theses on the present situation” is to fix one’s eyes on the past and
to fail to understand the transition to the future. 
 “. . . To put down sabotage completely. . . .” What a task they
have found! Our saboteurs are quite sufficiently “put down”. What we
lack is something quite different. We lack the proper calculation
of which saboteurs to set to work and where to place them. We lack the
organisation of our own forces that is needed for, say, one Bolshevik
leader or controller to be able to supervise a hundred saboteurs who
are now coming into our service. When that is how matters stand, to
flaunt such phrases as “a most determined policy of socialisation”,
“routing”, and “completely putting down” is just missing the mark. It
is typical of the petty-bourgeois revolutionary not to notice that
routing, putting down, etc., is not enough for socialism. It is
sufficient for a small proprietor enraged against a big proprietor. But
no proletarian revolutionary would ever fall into such error. 
 If the words we have quoted provoke a smile, the following
discovery made by the “Left Communists” will provoke nothing short of
Homeric laughter. According to them, under the “Bolshevik deviation to
the right” the Soviet Republic is threatened with “evolution towards
state capitalism”. They have really frightened us this time! And with
what gusto these “Left Communists” repeat this threatening revelation
in their theses and articles. . . . 
 It has not occurred to them that state capitalism would be a step
forward as compared with the present state of affairs in our
Soviet Republic. If in approximately six months’ time state capitalism
became established in our Republic, this would be a great success and a
sure guarantee that within a year socialism will have gained a
permanently firm hold and will have become invincible in our country. 
 I can imagine with what noble indignation a “Left Communist” will
recoil from these words, and what “devastating criticism” he will make
to the workers against the “Bolshevik deviation to the right”. What!
Transition to state capitalism in the Soviet Socialist
Republic would be a step forward?. . . Isn’t this the betrayal of
socialism? 
 Here we come to the root of the economic mistake of the
“Left Communists”. And that is why we must deal with this point in
greater detail. 
 Firstly, the “Left Communists” do not understand what kind of transition
it is from capitalism to socialism that gives us the right and the
grounds to call our country the Socialist Republic of Soviets. 
 Secondly, they reveal their petty-bourgeois mentality precisely by not
recognising the petty-bourgeois element as the principal
enemy of socialism in our country. 
 Thirdly, in making a bugbear of “state capitalism”, they betray
their failure to understand that the Soviet state differs from the
bourgeois state economically. 
 Let us examine these three points. 
 No one, I think, in studying the question of the economic system of
Russia, has denied its transitional character. Nor, I think, has any
Communist denied that the term Socialist Soviet Republic implies the
determination of Soviet power to achieve the transition to socialism,
and not that the new economic system is recognised as a socialist
order. 
 But what does the word “transition” mean? Does it not mean, as
applied to an economy, that the present system contains elements,
particles, fragments of both capitalism and socialism?
Everyone will admit that it does. But not all who admit this take the
trouble to consider what elements actually constitute the various
socio-economic structures that exist in Russia at the present time. And
this is the crux of the question. 
 Let us enumerate these elements: 
 1) patriarchal, i.e., to a considerable extent natural, peasant
farming; 
 2) small commodity production (this includes the
majority of those peasants who sell their grain); 
 3) private capitalism; 
 4) state capitalism; 
 5) socialism. 
 Russia is so vast and so varied that all these different types of
socio-economic structures are intermingled. This is what constitutes
the specific features of the situation. 
 The question arises: what elements predominate? Clearly in a
small-peasant country, the petty-bourgeois element predominates and it
must predominate, for the great majority of those working the land are
small commodity producers. The shell of our state capitalism (grain
monopoly, state controlled entrepreneurs and traders, bourgeois
co-operators) is pierced now in one place, now in another by profiteers,
the chief object of profiteering being grain. 
 It is in this field that the main struggle is being waged. Between
what elements is this struggle being waged if we are to speak in terms
of economic categories such as “state capitalism"? Between the fourth
and the fifth in the order in which I have just enumerated them. Of
course not. It is not state capitalism that is at war with socialism,
but the petty bourgeoisie plus private capitalism fighting together
against both state capitalism and socialism. The petty bourgeoisie
oppose every kind of state interference, accounting and
control, whether it be state capitalist or state socialist. This is an
absolutely unquestionable fact of reality, and the root of the economic
mistake of the “Left Communists” is that they have failed to understand
it. The profiteer, the commercial racketeer, the disrupter of
monopoly—these are our principal “internal” enemies, the enemies of the
economic measures of Soviet power. A hundred and twenty-five years ago
it might have been excusable for the French petty bourgeoisie, the most
ardent and sincere revolutionaries, to try to crush the profiteer by
executing a few of the “chosen” and by making thunderous declamations.
Today, however, the purely rhetorical attitude to this question assumed
by some Left Socialist-Revolutionaries can rouse nothing but disgust
and revulsion in every politically conscious revolutionary. We know
perfectly well that the economic basis of profiteering is both the
small proprietors, who are exceptionally widespread in Russia, and
private capitalism, of which every petty bourgeois is an
agent. We know that the million tentacles of this petty-bourgeois hydra
now and again encircle various sections of the workers, that, instead
of state monopoly, profiteering forces its way into every pore of
our social and economic organism. 
 Those who fail to see this show by their blindness that they are
slaves of petty-bourgeois prejudices. This is precisely the case with
our “Left Communists”, who in words (and of course in their deepest
convictions) are merciless enemies of the petty bourgeoisie, while in
deeds they help only the petty bourgeoisie, serve only this section of
the population and express only its point of view by fighting—in
April 1918!!—against . . . “state capitalism”. They are wide of
the mark! 
 The petty bourgeoisie have money put away, the few thousand that
they made during the war by “honest” and especially by dishonest means.
They are the characteristic economic type that serves as the basis of
profiteering and private capitalism. Money is a certificate entitling
the possessor to receive social wealth; and a vast section of small
proprietors, numbering millions, cling to this certificate and conceal
it from the “state”. They do not believe in socialism or communism, and
“mark time” until the proletarian storm blows over. Either we
subordinate the petty bourgeoisie to our control and
accounting (we can do this if we organise the poor, that is, the
majority of the population or semi-proletarians, around the politically
conscious proletarian vanguard), or they will overthrow our workers’

power as surely and as inevitably as the revolution was overthrown by
the Napoleons and Cavaignacs who sprang from this very soil of petty
proprietorship. This is how the question stands. Only the Left
Socialist Revolutionaries fail to see this plain and evident truth
through their mist of empty phrases about the “toiling” peasants. But
who takes these phrase-mongering Left Socialist-Revolutionaries
seriously? 
 The petty bourgeois who hoards his thousands is an enemy of state
capitalism. He wants to employ his thousands just for himself, against
the poor, in opposition to any kind of state control. And the sum total
of these thousands, amounting to many thousands of millions, forms the
base for profiteering, which undermines our socialist construction. Let
us assume that a certain number of workers produce in a few days values
equal to 1,000. Let us then assume that 200 of this total vanishes
owing to petty profiteering, various kinds of embezzlement and the
“evasion” by the small proprietors of Soviet decrees and regulations.
Every politically conscious worker will say that if better order and
organisation could be obtained at the price of 300 out of the 1,000 he
would willingly give 300 instead of 200, for it will be quite easy
under Soviet power to reduce this “tribute” later on to, say, 100 or
50, once order and organisation are established and once the
petty-bourgeois disruption of state monopoly is completely overcome. 
 This simple illustration in figures, which I have deliberately
simplified to the utmost in order to make it absolutely clear, explains
the present correlation of state capitalism and socialism.
The workers hold state power and have every legal opportunity of

“taking” the whole thousand, without giving up a single kopek, except
for socialist purposes. This legal opportunity, which rests upon the
actual transition of power to the workers, is an element of socialism. 
 But in many ways, the small proprietary and private capitalist
element undermines this legal position, drags in profiteering, hinders
the execution of Soviet decrees. State capitalism would be a gigantic
step forward even if we paid more than we are
paying at present (I took a numerical example deliberately to bring
this out more sharply), because it is worth while paying for “tuition”,
because it is useful for the workers, because victory over disorder,
economic ruin and laxity is the most important thing; because the
continuation of the anarchy of small ownership is the greatest, the
most serious danger, and it will certainly be our ruin
(unless we overcome it), whereas not only will the payment of a heavier
tribute to state capitalism not ruin us, it will lead us to socialism
by the surest road. When the working class has learned how to defend
the state system against the anarchy of small ownership, when it has
learned to organise large-scale production on a national scale, along
state capitalist lines, it will hold, if I may use the expression, all
the trump cards, and the consolidation of socialism will be assured. 
 In the first place, economically, state capitalism is
immeasurably superior to our present economic system. 
 In the second place, there is nothing terrible in it for Soviet
power, for the Soviet state is a state in which the power of the
workers and the poor is assured. The “Left Communists” failed to
understand these unquestionable truths, which, of course, a “Left
Socialist-Revolutionary”, who cannot connect any ideas on political
economy in his head in general, will never understand, but which every
Marxist must admit. It is not even worth while arguing with a
Left Socialist-Revolutionary. It is enough to point to him as a
“repulsive example” of a windbag. But the “Left Communists” must be
argued with because it is Marxists who are making a mistake, and an
analysis of their mistake will help the working class to find
the true road. 
IV 
 To make things even clearer, let us first of all take the most
concrete example of state capitalism. Everybody knows what this example
is. It is Germany. Here we have “the last word” in modern large-scale
capitalist engineering and planned organisation, subordinated to
Junker-bourgeois imperialism. Cross out the words in italics, and
in place of the militarist, Junker, bourgeois, imperialist state
put also a state, but of a different social type, of a
different class content—a Soviet state, that is, a
proletarian state, and you will have the sum total of the
conditions necessary for socialism. 
 Socialism is inconceivable without large-scale capitalist
engineering based on the latest discoveries of modern science. It is
inconceivable without planned state organisation, which keeps tens of
millions of people to the strictest observance of a unified standard in
production and distribution. We Marxists have always spoken of this,
and it is not worth while wasting two seconds talking to people who do
not understand even this (anarchists and a good half of the
Left Socialist-Revolutionaries). 
 At the same time socialism is inconceivable unless the proletariat
is the ruler of the state. This also is ABC. And history (which nobody,
except Menshevik blockheads of the first order, ever expected to bring
about “complete” socialism smoothly, gently, easily and simply) has
taken such a peculiar course that it has given birth in 1918
to two unconnected halves of socialism existing side by side like two
future chickens in the single shell of international imperialism. In
1918 Germany and Russia have become the most striking embodiment of the
material realisation of the economic, the productive and the
socio-economic conditions for socialism, on the one hand, and the
political conditions, on the other. 
 A successful proletarian revolution in Germany would immediately
and very easily smash any shell of imperialism (which unfortunately is
made of the best steel, and hence cannot be broken by the efforts of any

. . . chicken) and would bring about the victory of world socialism for
certain, without any difficulty, or with slight difficulty—if, of
course, by “difficulty” we mean difficult on a world historical scale,
and not in the parochial philistine sense. 
 While the revolution in Germany is still slow in “coming forth”,
our task is to study the state capitalism of the Germans, to spare no
effort in copying it and not shrink from adopting dictatorial
methods to hasten the copying of it. Our task is to hasten this copying
even more than Peter hastened the copying of Western culture by
barbarian Russia, and we must not hesitate to use barbarous methods in
fighting barbarism. If there are anarchists and Left
Socialist-Revolutionaries (I recall off-hand the speeches of Karelin
and Ghe at the meeting of the Central Executive Committee) who indulge
in Narcissus-like reflections and say that it is unbecoming for us
revolutionaries to “take lessons” from German imperialism, there is
only one thing we can say in reply: the revolution that took these
people seriously would perish irrevocably (and deservedly). 
 At present, petty-bourgeois capitalism prevails in Russia, and it
is one and the same road that leads from it to both
large-scale state capitalism and to socialism, through one
and the same intermediary station called “national accounting and
control of production and distribution”. Those who fail to understand
this are committing an unpardonable mistake in economics. Either they
do not know the facts of life, do not see what actually exists and are
unable to look the truth in the face, or they confine themselves to
abstractly comparing “capitalism” with “socialism” and fail to study
the concrete forms and stages of the transition that is taking place in
our country. Let it be said in parenthesis that this is the very
theoretical mistake which misled the best people in the Novaya
Zhizn and Vperyod camp. The worst and the mediocre of
these, owing to their stupidity and spinelessness, tag along behind the
bourgeoisie, of whom they stand in awe. The best of them have failed to
understand that it was not without reason that the teachers of
socialism spoke of a whole period of transition from capitalism to
socialism and emphasised the “prolonged birth pangs” of the new
society. And this new society is again an abstraction which can come
into being only by passing

through a series of varied, imperfect concrete attempts to create this
or that socialist state. 
 It is because Russia cannot advance from the economic situation now
existing here without traversing the ground which is common
to state capitalism and to socialism (national accounting and control)
that the attempt to frighten others as well as themselves with
“evolution towards state capitalism” (Kommunist No.
1, p. 8, col. 1) is utter theoretical nonsense. This is letting one’s
thoughts wander away from the true road of “evolution”, and failing to
understand what this road is. In practice, it is equivalent to pulling
us back to small proprietary capitalism. 
 In order to convince the reader that this is not the first time I
have given this “high” appreciation of state capitalism and that I gave
it before the Bolsheviks seized power I take the liberty of
quoting the following passage from my pamphlet  The Impending
Catastrophe and How to Combat It , written in September 1917. 
 “. . . Try to substitute for the Junker-capitalist state, for the
landowner-capitalist state, a revolutionary-democratic state,
i.e., a state which in a revolutionary way abolishes all privileges and
does not fear to introduce the fullest democracy in a revolutionary
way. You will find that, given a really revolutionary-democratic state,
state-monopoly capitalism inevitably and unavoidably implies a step,
and more than one step, towards socialism! 
 “. . . For socialism is merely the next step forward from
state-capitalist monopoly. 
 “. . . State-monopoly capitalism is a complete material
preparation for socialism, the threshold of socialism, a rung
on the ladder of history between which and the rung called socialism there
are no intermediate rungs
” (pages 27 and 28) 
 Please note that this was written when Kerensky was in power, that
we are discussing not the dictatorship of the proletariat, not
the socialist state, but the “revolutionary-democratic” state. Is it
not clear that the higher we stand on this political ladder, the
more completely we incorporate the socialist state and the
dictatorship of the proletariat in the Soviets, the less

ought we to fear “state capitalism"? Is it not clear that from the material,
economic and productive point of view, we are not yet on “the
threshold” of socialism? Is it not clear that we cannot pass through
the door of socialism without crossing “the threshold” we have not yet
reached? 
 From whatever side we approach the question, only one conclusion
can be drawn: the argument of the “Left Communists” about the “state
capitalism” which is alleged to be threatening us is an utter mistake
in economics and is evident proof that they are complete slaves of
petty-bourgeois ideology. 
 V
 The following is also extremely instructive. 
 When we argued with Comrade Bukharin in the Central Executive
Committee; see
present edition, Volume. 25, pages 358, 359.—Ed. he
declared, among other things, that on the question of high salaries for
specialists “we” (evidently meaning the “Left Communists") were “more
to the right than Lenin”, for in this case “we” saw no deviation from
principle, bearing in mind Marx’s words that under certain conditions
it is more expedient for the working class to “buy out the whole lot of
them”[2]

(namely, the whole lot of capitalists, i.e., to buy from the
bourgeoisie the land, factories, works and other means of production). 
 This extremely interesting statement shows, in the first place,
that Bukharin is head and shoulders above the Left
Socialist-Revolutionaries and anarchists, that he is by no means
hopelessly stuck in the mud of phrase-making, but on the contrary is
making efforts to think out the concrete difficulties of the
transition—the painful and difficult transition—from capitalism to
socialism. 
 In the second place, this statement makes Bukharin’s mistake still
more glaring. 
 Let us consider Marx’s idea carefully. 
 Marx was talking about the Britain of the seventies of the last
century, about the culminating point in the development of pre-monopoly
capitalism. At that time Britain was a country in which militarism and
bureaucracy were less pronounced than in any other, a country in which
there was the greatest possibility of a “peaceful” victory for
socialism in the sense of the workers “buying out” the bourgeoisie. And
Marx said that under certain conditions the workers would certainly not
refuse to buy out the bourgeoisie. Marx did not commit himself, or the
future leaders of the socialist revolution, to matters of form, to ways
and means of bringing about the revolution. He understood perfectly
well that a vast number of new problems would arise, that the whole
situation would change in the course of the revolution, and that the
situation would change radically and often in the
course of revolution. 
 Well, and what about Soviet Russia? Is it not clear that after
the seizure of power by the proletariat and after the
crushing of the exploiters’ armed resistance and sabotage, certain
conditions prevail which correspond to those which might have existed
in Britain half a century ago had a peaceful transition to socialism
begun there? The subordination of the capitalists to the workers in
Britain would have been assured at that time owing to the following
circumstances: (1) the absolute preponderance of workers, of
proletarians, in the population owing to the absence of a peasantry (in
Britain in the seventies there was hope of an extremely rapid spread of
socialism among agricultural labourers); (2) the excellent organisation
of the proletariat in trade unions (Britain was at that time the
leading country in the world in this respect); (3) the comparatively
high level of culture of the proletariat, which had been trained by
centuries of development of political liberty; (4) the old habit of the
well-organised British capitalists of settling political and economic
questions by compromise—at that time the British capitalists were
better organised than the capitalists of any country in the world (this
superiority has now passed to Germany). These were the circumstances
which at that time gave rise to the idea that the peaceful
subjugation of the British capitalists by the workers was possible. 
 In our country, at the present time, this subjugation is assured by
certain premises of fundamental significance (the victory in October
and the suppression, from October to February, of the capitalists’
armed resistance and sabotage). But instead of the absolute
preponderance of workers, of proletarians, in the population, and instead
of a high degree of organisation among them, the important factor
of victory in Russia was the support the proletarians received from the
poor peasants and those who had experienced sudden ruin. Finally, we
have neither a high degree of culture nor the habit of compromise. If
these concrete conditions are carefully considered, it will become
clear that we can and ought to employ two methods simultaneously.
On the one hand we must ruthlessly suppress[3] the uncultured capitalists
who refuse to have anything to do with “state capitalism” or to
consider any form of compromise, and who continue by means of
profiteering, by bribing the poor peasants, etc., to hinder the
realisation of the measures taken by the Soviets. On the other hand, we
must use the method of compromise, or of buying off the
cultured capitalists who agree to “state capitalism”, who are capable
of putting it into practice and who are useful to the proletariat as
intelligent and experienced organisers of the largest types
of enterprises, which actually supply products to tens of millions of
people. 
 Bukharin is an extremely well-read Marxist economist. He therefore
remembered that Marx was profoundly right when he taught the workers
the importance of preserving the organisation of large-scale
production, precisely for the purpose of facilitating the transition to
socialism. Marx taught that (as an exception, and Britain was then an
exception) the idea was conceivable of paying the capitalists well,
of buying them off, if the circumstances were such as to
compel the capitalists to submit peacefully and to come over to
socialism in a cultured and organised fashion, provided they were paid.

 But Bukharin went astray because he did not go deep enough into the
specific features of the situation in Russia at the present time—an
exceptional situation when we, the Russian proletariat, are in advance
of any Britain or any Germany as regards our political order, as
regards the strength of the workers’ political power, but are behind

the most backward West-European country as regards organising a good
state capitalism, as regards our level of culture and the degree of
material and productive preparedness for the “introduction” of
socialism. Is it not clear that the specific nature of the present
situation creates the need for a specific type of “buying out” which
the workers must offer to the most cultured, the most skilled, the most
capable organisers among the capitalists who are ready to enter the
service of Soviet power and to help honestly in organising “state”
production on the largest possible scale? Is it not clear that in this
specific situation we must make, every effort to avoid two mistakes,
both of which are of a petty-bourgeois nature? On the one hand, it
would be a fatal mistake to declare that since there is a discrepancy
between our economic “forces” and our political strength, it “follows”
that we should not have seized power.[4] Such an argument can be advanced only by a “man in a muffler”,[5] who
forgets that there will always be such a “discrepancy”, that it always
exists in the development of nature as well as in the development of
society, that only by a series of attempts—each of which, taken by
itself, will be one sided and will suffer from certain
inconsistencies—will complete socialism be created by the revolutionary
co-operation of the proletarians of all countries. 
 On the other hand, it would be an obvious mistake to give free rein
to ranters and phrase-mongers who allow themselves to be carried away
by the “dazzling” revolutionary spirit, but who are incapable of
sustained, thoughtful and deliberate revolutionary work which takes
into account the most difficult stages of transition. 
 Fortunately, the history of the development of the revolutionary
parties and of the struggle that Bolshevism waged against them has left
us aheritage
of sharply defined types, of which the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries
and anarchists are striking examples of bad revolutionaries. They are
now shouting hysterically, choking and shouting themselves hoarse,
against the “compromise” of the “Right Bolsheviks”. But they are
incapable of thinking what is bad in “compromise”, and why

“compromise” has been justly condemned by history and the course of the
revolution. 
 Compromise in Kerensky’s time meant the surrender of power to the
imperialist bourgeoisie, and the question of power is the fundamental
question of every revolution. Compromise by a section of the Bolsheviks
in October November 1917 either meant that they feared the proletariat
seizing power or wished to share power equally, not only with
“unreliable fellow-travellers” like the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries,
but also with the enemies, with the Chernovists and the Mensheviks. The
latter would inevitably have hindered us in fundamental matters, such
as the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly, the ruthless
suppression of the Bogayevskys, the universal setting up of the Soviet
institutions, and in every act of confiscation. 
 Now power has been seized, retained and consolidated in the hands
of a single party, the party of the proletariat, even without the
“unreliable fellow-travellers”. To speak of compromise at the present
time when there is no question, and can be none, of sharing power,
of renouncing the dictatorship of the proletariat over the bourgeoisie,
is merely to repeat, parrot-fashion, words which have been learned by
heart but not understood. To describe as “compromise” the fact that,
having arrived at a situation when we can and must rule the country, we
try to win over to our side, not grudging the cost, the most skilled
people capitalism has trained and to take them into our service against
small proprietary disintegration, reveals a total incapacity to think
out the economic tasks of socialist construction. 
 Therefore, while it is to Comrade Bukharin’s credit that on the
Central Executive Committee he “felt ashamed” of the “service” he had
been rendered by Karelin and Ghe, nevertheless, as far as the “Left
Communist” trend is concerned, the reference to their
political comrades-in-arms still remains a serious warning. 
 Take, for example, Znamya Truda, the organ of the Left
Socialist-Revolutionaries, of April 25, 1918, which proudly declares,

“The present position of our party coincides with that of another trend
in Bolshevism (Bukharin, Pokrovsky and others)”. Or take the Menshevik Vperyod
of the same date, which contains among other articles the following
“thesis” by the notorious Menshevik Isuv: 
 “The policy of Soviet power, from the very outset devoid of a
genuinely proletarian character, has lately pursued more and more
openly a course of compromise with the bourgeoisie and has assumed an
obviously anti-working class character. On the pretext of nationalising
industry, they are pursuing a policy of establishing industrial trusts,
and on the pretext of restoring the productive forces of the country,
they are attempting to abolish the eight hour day, to introduce
piece-work and the Taylor system, black lists and victimisation. This
policy threatens to deprive the proletariat of its most important
economic gains and to make it a victim of unrestricted exploitation by
the bourgeoisie.” 
 Isn’t it marvellous? 
 Kerensky’s friends, who, together with him, conducted an
imperialist war for the sake of the secret treaties, which promised
annexations to the Russian capitalists, the colleagues of Tsereteli,
who, on June 11, threatened to disarm the workers,[6] the
Lieberdans, who screened the rule of the bourgeoisie with high-sounding
phrases—these are the very people who accuse Soviet power of “compromising
with the bourgeoisie”, of “establishing trusts” (that is, of
establishing “state capitalism"!), of introducing the Taylor system. 
 Indeed, the Bolsheviks ought to present Isuv with a medal, and his
thesis ought to be exhibited in every workers’ club and union as an
example of the provocative speeches of the bourgeoisie. The
workers know these Lieberdans, Tseretelis and Isuvs very well now. They
know them from experience, and it would be extremely useful indeed for
the workers to think over the reason why such lackeys of the
bourgeoisie should incite the workers to resist the Taylor system
and the “establishment of trusts”. 
 Class-conscious workers will carefully compare the “thesis” of
Isuv, a friend of the Lieberdans and the Tseretelis, with the following
thesis of the “Left Communists”. 
 “The introduction of labour discipline in connection with the
restoration of capitalist management of industry cannot considerably
increase the productivity of labour, but it will diminish the class
initiative, activity and organisation of the proletariat. It threatens
to enslave the worklng class; it will rouse discontent among the
backward elements as well as among the vanguard of the proletariat. In
order to implement this system in the face of the hatred prevailing
among the proletariat against the ’capitalist saboteurs’, the Communist
Party would have to rely on the petty bourgeoisie, as against the
workers, and in this way would ruin itself as the party of the
proletariat” (Kommunist No. 1, p. 8, col. 2). 
 This is most striking proof that the “Lefts” have fallen into the
trap, have allowed themselves to be provoked by the Isuvs and the other
Judases of capitalism. It serves as a good lesson for the workers, who
know that it is precisely the vanguard of the proletariat which stands
for the introduction of labour discipline, and that it is precisely the
petty bourgeoisie which is doing its utmost to disrupt this discipline.
Speeches such as the thesis of the “Lefts” quoted above are a terrible
disgrace and imply the complete renunciation of communism in practice
and complete desertion to the camp of the petty bourgeoisie. 
 “In connection with the restoration of capitalist management"—these
are the words with which the “Left Communists” hope to “defend
themselves”. A perfectly useless defence, because, in the first place,
when putting “management” in the hands of capitalists Soviet power
appoints workers’ Commissars or workers’ committees who watch the
manager’s every step, who learn from his management experience and who
not only have the right to appeal against his orders, but can secure
his removal through the organs of Soviet power. In the second place,

“management” is entrusted to capitalists only for executive functions
while at work, the conditions of which are determined by the Soviet
power, by which they may be abolished or revised. In the third place,
“management” is entrusted by the Soviet power to capitalists not as
capitalists, but as technicians or organisers for higher salaries. And
the workers know very well that ninety-nine per cent of the organisers
and first-class technicians of really Iarge-scale and
giant enterprises, trusts or other establishments belong to the
capitalist class. But it is precisely these people whom we, the
proletarian party, must appoint to “manage” the labour process and the
organisation of production, for there are no other people who
have practical experience in this matter. The workers, having grown out
of the infancy when they could have been misled by “Left” phrases or
petty-bourgeois loose thinking, are advancing towards socialism
precisely through the capitalist management of trusts, through gigantic
machine industry, through enterprises which have a turnover of several
millions per year—only through such a system of production and such
enterprises. The workers are not petty bourgeois. They are not afraid
of large-scale “state capitalism”, they prize it as their proletarian

weapon which their Soviet power will use against small
proprietary disintegration and disorganisation. 
 This is incomprehensible only to the declassed and consequently
thoroughly petty-bourgeois intelligentsia, typified among the “Left
Communists” by Osinsky, when he writes in their journal: 
 “. . . The whole initiative in the organisation and manage ment of
any enterprise will belong to the ‘organisers of the
trusts’. We are not going to teach them, or make rank-and-file workers
out of them, we are going to learn from them” (Kommunist No.
1, p. 14, col. 2). 
 The attempted irony in this passage is aimed at my words “learn
socialism from the organisers of the trusts”. 
 Osinsky thinks this is funny. He wants to make “rank and-file
workers” out of the organisers of the trusts. If this had been written
by a man of the age of which the poet wrote “But fifteen years, not
more?. . .“[7] there
would have been nothing surprising about it. But it is somewhat strange
to hear such things from a Marxist who has learned that socialism is
impossible unless it makes use of the achievements of the engineering
and culture created-by large scale capitalism. There is no trace of
Marxism in this. 
 No. Only those are worthy of the name of Communists who understand
that it is impossible to create or introduce socialism without
learning from the organisers of the trusts. For socialism is not a
figment of the imagination, but the assimilation and application by the
proletarian vanguard, which has seized power, of what has been created
by the trusts. We, the party of the proletariat, have no other way

of acquiring the ability to organise large-scale production on trust
lines, as trusts are organised, except by acquiring it from first-class
capitalist experts. 
 We have nothing to teach them, unless we undertake the childish
task of “teaching” the bourgeois intelligentsia socialism. We must not
teach them, but expropriate them (as is being done in Russia
“determinedly” enough), put a stop to their sabotage, subordinate
them as a section or group to Soviet power. We, on the other hand, if
we are not Communists of infantile age and infantile understanding,
must learn from them, and there is something to learn, for the party of
the proletariat and its vanguard have no experience of
independent work in organising giant enterprises which serve the needs
of scores of millions of people. 
 The best workers in Russia have realised this. They have begun to
learn from the capitalist organisers, the managing engineers and the
technicians. They have begun to learn steadily and cautiously with easy
things, gradually passing on to the more difficult things. If things
are going more slowly in the iron and steel and engineering industries,
it is because they present greater difficulties. But the textile and
tobacco workers and tanners are not afraid of “state capitalism” or of
“learning from the organisers of the trusts”, as the declassed
petty-bourgeois intelligentsia are. These workers in the central
leading institutions like Chief Leather Committee and Central Textile
Committee take their place by the side of the capitalists, learn
from them, establish trusts, establish “state capitalism”, which
under Soviet power represents the threshold of socialism, the condition
of its firm victory. 
 This work of the advanced workers of Russia, together with their
work of introducing labour discipline, has begun and is proceeding
quietly, unobtrusively, without the noise and fuss so necessary to some
“Lefts”. It is proceeding very cautiously and gradually, taking into
account the lessons of practical experience. This hard work, the work
of learning practically how to build up large-scale
production, is the guarantee that we are on the right road, the
guarantee that the class-conscious workers in Russia are carrying on
the struggle against small proprietary disintegration and
disorganisation, against petty-bourgeois indiscipline[8]—the guarantee
of the victory of communism. 
 Two remarks in conclusion. 
 In arguing with the “Left Communists” on April 4, 1918 (see Kommunist
No. 1, p. 4, footnote), I put it to them bluntly: “Explain what you are
dissatisfied with in the railway decree; submit your
amendments to it. It is your duty as Soviet leaders of the proletariat
to do so, otherwise what you say is nothing but empty phrases.”  
 The first issue of Kommunist appeared on April 20, 1918,
but did not contain a single word about how, according to the
“Left Communists”, the railway decree should be altered or amended. 
 The “Left Communists” stand condemned by their own silence. They
did nothing but attack the railway decree with all sorts of
insinuations (pages 8 and 16 of No. 1), they gave no

articulate answer to the question, “How should the decree be amended if
it is wrong?” 
 No comment is needed. The class-conscious workers will call such
“criticism” of the railway decree (which is a typical example of our
line of action, the line of firmness, the line of dictatorship, the
line of proletarian discipline) either “Isuvian” criticism or empty
phrase-making. 
 Second remark. The first issue of Kommunist contained a
very flattering review by Comrade Bukharin of my pamphlet The State
and Revolution. But however much I value the opinion of people
like Bukharin, my conscience compels me to say that the character

of the review reveals a sad and significant fact. Bukharin regards the
tasks of the proletarian dictatorship from the point of view of the past
and not of the future. Bukharin noted and emphasised what the
proletarian revolutionary and the petty-bourgeois revolutionary may
have in common on the question of the state. But Bukharin “overlooked”
the very thing that distinguishes the one from the other. 
 Bukharin noted and emphasised that the old state machinery must be
“smashed” and “blown up”, that the bourgeoisie must be “finally and
completely strangled” and so on. The frenzied petty bourgeoisie may
also want this. And this, in the main, is what our revolution has already

done between October 1917 and February 1918. 
 In my pamphlet I also mention what even the most revolutionary
petty bourgeois cannot want, what the class-conscious proletarian does
want, what our revolution has not yet accomplished. On this
task, the task of tomorrow, Bukharin said nothing. 
 And I have all the more reason not to be silent on this point,
because, in the first place, a Communist is expected to devote greater
attention to the tasks of tomorrow, and not of yesterday, and, in the
second place, my pamphlet was written before the Bolsheviks
seized power, when it was impossible to treat the Bolsheviks to vulgar
petty-bourgeois arguments such as: “Yes, of course, after

seizing power, you begin to talk about discipline.” 
 “. . . Socialism will develop into communism . . . since people
will become accustomed to observing the elementary conditions of social
life without violence and without subordination.” [The
State and Revolution, pages 77-78]; thus, “elementary
conditions” were discussed before the seizure of power.) 
 “. . . Only then will democracy begin to wither away . . ." when “people
gradually become accustomed to observing the elementary rules of social
intercourse that have been
known for centuries and repeated for thousands of years in all
copy-book maxims; they will become accustomed to observing them without
force, without coercion, without the special apparatus for coercion
called the state” [The State and Revolution,
page 462.]; thus mention was made of “copy-book maxims” before

the seizure of power). 
 “. . . The higher phase of the development of communism” (from each
according to his ability, to each according to his needs) “. . .
presupposes not the present productivity of labour and not the present
ordinary run of people, who, like the seminary students in
Pomyalovsky’s stories, are capable of damaging the stocks of public
wealth just for fun, and of demanding the impossible” [The State and Revolution, pages pages 469-470.]

 “Until the higher phase of communism arrives, the socialists demand
the strictest control by society and by the state over the measure of
labour and the measure of consumption . . .” (ibid.). 
 “Accounting and control—that is mainly what is needed for the
smooth working, for the proper functioning of the first phase of
communist society” [The State and Revolution,
page 473.] And this control must be established not only over
“the insignificant capitalist minority, over the gentry who wish to
preserve their capitalist habits”, but also over the workers who “have
been thoroughly corrupted by capitalism”[The
State and Revolution, page 474.] and over the “parasites,
the sons of the wealthy, the swindlers and other guardians of
capitalist traditions” (ibid.). 
 It is significant that Bukharin did not emphasise this.

Lenin
May 5, 1918 

Endnotes
[1] Nozdryov—a
character in Gogol’s Dead Souls personifying the bullying
type of landowner. 
[2] Lenin is
quoting statements by Karl Marx set forth by Engels in The Peasant
Question in France and Germany (see Marx and Engels, Selected
Works, Vol. II, Moscow, p. 438). 
[3] In this
case also we must look truth in the face. We stlll have too little of
that ruthlessness which is indispensable for the success of socialism,
and we have too little not because we lack determination. We have
sufficient determination. What we do lack is the ablllty to catch
quickly enough a sufficient number of proflteers, racketeers and
capitalists—the people who infringe the measures passed by the Soviets.
The “ability” to do this can only be acquired by establishing
accounting and control! Another thing is that the courts are not
sufficiently firm. Instead of sentencing people who take bribes to be
shot, they sentence them to six months’ imprisonment. These two defects
have the same social root: the influence of the petty-bourgeois
element, its flabbiness. 
[4] Lenin has
in mind one of the basic arguments used by the Mensheviks against the
October Socialist Revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat.
The Mensheviks maintained that the seizure of power was “premature”,
that Russia had not yet achieved a high enough development of the
productive forces for socialism to be feasible. After the October
Revolution they continued to oppose Soviet power and revolutionary
socialist reforms. 
 These Menshevik views were summed up in a book by
N. Sukhanov, Notes on the Revolution, which Lenin criticised
in his article “Our Revolution (Appropos the Notes of N. Sukhanov)”.
Refuting the Menshevik idea that the socialist revolution in Russia was
“premature” because of economic and cultural backwardness, Lenin wrote
that the working class of Russia must begin with the winning of state
power by revolutionary means “and then, with the aid of the workers’

and peasants’ government and the Soviet system, proceed to overtake the
other nations” (Selected Works, Vol. 3, p. 822). 
[5] The
Man in a Muffler—a character from the story of that title by Anton
Chekhov. Typifies the narrow-minded Philistine afraid of all innovation
and initiative. 
[6] In June
1917 the Bolshevik Central Committee was planning a peaceful
demonstration by the workers and soldiers of Petrograd. At a joint
meeting of the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’

and Soldiers’ Deputies and members of the Presidium of the First
All-Russia Congress of Soviets held to discuss the matter on June 11
(24), 1917, the Menshevik I. G. Tsereteli made a viciously slanderous
statement against the Bolsheviks, accusing them of plotting against the
government and aiding the counter-revolution, and threatened to take
resolute steps to disarm the workers who supported the Bolsheviks. 
[7] Lenin is
quoting V. L. Pushkin’s epigram about a mediocre poet who sent his
verses to Phoebus, god of the sun and patron of the arts. The epigram
ends with the following lines: 
 And while he read, the yawning Phoebus asked

What age this rhymster had attained,

How long such rumbling odes composed?

“He is fifteen,” Erato made reply.

“But fifteen years?” “No more, my lord.”

“Then shall the birch be his reward!“ 
[8] It is
extremely characteristic

that the authors of the theses do not say a single word ahout the
significance of the dictatorship of the prolotariat in the economic
sphere. They talk only of the “organisation” and so on. But that is
accepted also by the petty bourgeoisie, who shun dictatorship
by the workers in economic relations. A proletarian rovolutionary could
never at such a moment “forget” this core of the proletarian
revolution, which is directed against the economic foundations of
capitalism. 

 Collected Works
Volume 27 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Decision of the C.C.,
R.C.P.(B) on the International Situation











 Decision Of  The C.C., R.C.P.(B.) On The International Situation 



V. I. Lenin
Decision Of  The C.C., R.C.P.(B.) On The
      International Situation[1]

Written: 6 May, 1918
First Published:  1929 in Lenin Miscellany XI; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, page 355 
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
      Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive March, 2002


      To yield to the German ultimatum. The British ultimatum to be
      rejected. (For war against Germany threatens greater losses and
      calamities than against Japan)

    

      In view of the obvious political alliance between the Ukrainian
      and Russian counter-revolution, martial law to be instituted
      against the bourgeoisie.

    

      Every effort to be exerted for defence of the Urals-Kuznetsk
      area and territory from both Japan and Germany. [Immediate evacuation to the Urals of everything
      in general and of the Stationery Office in particular.]


      Negotiations to be conducted with Mirbach to ascertain whether
      Finland and the Ukraine are being obliged to conclude peace with
      Russia, and to hasten this peace in every way, while recognising
      that It will bring about new annexations.

    

      Adopted in the C.C. on Monday, May 6, 1918,at night


Endnotes
[1]
      The international situation was discussed by the Central
      Committee of the Bolshevik Part in connection with the crisis
      caused by Germany, which was demanding the cession to Finland of
      Fort Ino (a fortification on the Russian frontier with Finland,
      which with Kronstadt formed an essential part of the Petrograd
      defence system), and also in connection with the continued
      British occupation of Murmansk in spite of the protests of the
      Soviet Government, and the occupying forces' preparations to
      penetrate into the hinterland. Lenin examined both these
      questions in detail at a joint meeting of the All-Russia
      C.E.C. and the Moscow Soviet on May 14, 1918
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Main Propositions of the
Decree on Food Dictatorship











 Main Propositions Of The Decree On Food Dictatorship



V. I. Lenin
Main Propositions Of The Decree On Food 
      Dictatorship[1]

Written: 8 May, 1918
First Published:  1931 in Lenin Miscellany XVIII Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 356-357 
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


      The draft decision to be revised in the following way: 

    
      1) delete the references to the international situation;

    
      2) insert that after peace with the Ukraine we shall be left with only just enough grain to save us from famine;

    
      3) insert that decisions of the dictator will be checked by his
      collegium, which has the right, without holding up
      implementation, to appeal to the Council of People's Commissars;

    
      4) insert that decisions which by their nature are connected
      with the Commissariat for Ways of Communication or the Supreme
      Economic Council are to be adopted by consultation with the
      appropriate departments;

    
      5) give a more precise legal formulation of the rights of the
      Commissar for Food;

    
      6) emphasise more strongly the basic idea of the necessity, for
      salvation from famine, of conducting and carrying through a
      ruthless and terrorist struggle and war against peasant or other
      bourgeois elements who retain surplus grain for themselves;

    
      7) lay down precisely that owners of grain who possess surplus
      grain and do not send it to the depots and places of grain
      collection will be declared enemies of the people and will be
      subject to imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years,
      confiscation of all their property and expulsion for ever from
      the community;

    
      8) insert an addition on the duty of working peasants who are
      propertyless and do not possess surpluses to join forces for
      ruthless struggle against the kulaks;

    
      9) define precisely the relation of the delegate committees to
      the gubernia food committees and the rights and duties of the
      former in carrying out food work.
    

Endnotes
[1]
      Lenin’s proposals werw endorse at a meeting of the Council
      of People’s Commissars on May 8, 1918, during the
      discussion on the report of the People’s Commissar for
      Food A. D. Tsyurupa and on the decree granting the Commissar
      emergency powers. The document is an instruction to the
      commission set up by the Council of People’s Commissars to
      revise decree submitted by the People’s Commissariat for
      Food Granting emergency powers.

      Based on Lenin’s propositions, the devree was approved on
      May 9, 1918 by the Council of People’s Commissars, and on
      May 13, by the All-Russia C.E.C. It was published on May 14, in
      Izvestia VTsIK No. 94 (see Decrees of the Soviet
      Government, Russian edition, Volume 2, 1959, pages
      261-266).


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Protest of the German
Government Against the Occupations of the
Crimea











Protest to the German Government: Against The Occupation Of The Crimea



V. I. Lenin
Protest to the German Government
Against the
    Occupation Of The Crimea[1]
May 11, 1918

Written: 11 May, 1918
First Published: Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 358-359
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

May 11, 1918
In connection with the wireless message from the Commander-in-Chief of the German troops
      in the East.
The People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs considers it necessary to express its
      emphatic protest to the German Government:
1) On no occasion nor in any document has the German Government made any
    statement to us alleging that our fleet has taken part in fighting against German troops in
    the Ukraine.
2) Consequently the statement to this effect in the wireless message of May
    11, 1918, is clearly untrue and is not confirmed in the acts of the German Government.
3) If part of the fleet considered itself attached to the Ukrainian fleet,
    it remained in Sevastopol.
3 his) If our fleet left Sevastopol this happened only after the
    Germans’ offensive and the attack on Sevastopol; consequently, in this case clearly the
    Brest Treaty was violated by the Germans and not by us.
4) The facts prove, therefore, that we firmly stand by the Brest Treaty,
    but that the Germans have violated it by occupying the entire Crimea.
5) They have occupied it solely with German troops, removing therefrom all
    Ukrainians.
6) They have ’occupied the Crimea after the German Government in its
    wireless message of the month of .... 1918,[2] had quite precisely stated that it considered the Crimea not to
    be part of the territory of the Ukraine.
7) The German Ambassador Mirbach has stated to our Commissar for Foreign
    Affairs that Germany is not claiming new territorial acquisitions.
8) If at the present time the German Government has adopted a different
    position and is presenting demands for the Crimea or part of the Crimea or other territorial
    acquisitions, we consider that complete clarity in this matter is absolutely necessary, and
    we state again officially that for our part we insist on the conclusion of a precisely
    formulated peace with Finland, the Ukraine and Turkey, which is waging war in defiance of the
    Brest Peace Treaty.
9) We once again insistently request the German Government to inform us
    whether it holds the view that peace with the Ukraine, Finland and Turkey is desirable, and
    what steps it has undertaken or will undertake with this aim.
10) On the question of the Black Sea fleet we agree to give any new
    guarantees of its non-intervention in the war or of its disarmament (concerning which
    Ambassador Mirbach made an official statement to us yesterday, May 10, 1918), provided the
    German Government informs us of the exact terms of a complete peace, i.e., peace with Finland
    and the Ukraine and Turkey, and provided this peace is concluded, on which we insist.
11) Nor do we in any way refuse to return the fleet to Sevastopol if this
    port-in accordance with Mirbach’s statement of May 10, 1918, in a conversation with the
    People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs-is not annexed in one form or another and is not
    occupied by Germany, and a clearly defined peace with the Germans, constituting part of the
    Finnish, Ukrainian and Turkish armies, is concluded.

Endnotes
[1] Protest to the German
    Government against the Occupation of the Crimea was written by Lenin in the spring of
    1918, when the German imperialist forces occupied the Ukraine and,in violation of the Brest
    Treaty, marched into the Crimea as far as Sevastopol, where the Black Sea fleet was
    stationed. On the instructions of the Soviet Government some of the ships were moved on April
    29-30 to a new base at Novorossiisk. Only the ships that refused to obey the inetruction to
    move and those that could not be moved for technical reasons remained in Sevastopol. On May
    11 the German Command sent an ultimatum demanding the return of the fleet to Sevastopol on
    the grounds that the withdrawal of the Black Sea fleet from Sevastopol was an infringement of
    the Brest Treaty, and threatening to continue its offensive along the Black Sea coast.
Lenin’s protest formed the basis of the Note sent by the
    People’s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs to the German Ministry for Foreign Affairs on
    May 13, 1918.
[2] This refers to the German
    Government’s radio-telegram of March 30, 1918, which declared that the Ukraine
    consisted of nine gubernias, including Taurida Gubernia but not the Crimea. The German
    occupation of the Crimea was therefore in contradiction to the official declaration of the
    German Government.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Theses on the Present
Political Situation











 Theses On The Present Political Situation



V. I. Lenin
Theses On The Present Political Situation.[1]

Written: May 12 or 13, 1918
First Published: In 1929 In Lenin Miscellany XI; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 360-364
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

I

      The extreme instability of the international situation of the
      Soviet Republic, surrounded as it is by imperialist powers, has
      been frequently pointed out in the Bolshevik press and has been
      admitted in the resolutions of the higher organs of Soviet
      power.

    
      During the past few days, i.e., the first ten days of May 1918,
      the political situation has become extremely critical owing to
      both external and internal causes:

    
      First, the direct offensive of the counter-revolutionary forces
      (Semyonov and others) with the aid of the Japanese in the Far
      East has been stepped up, and in connection with it there are a
      number of signs indicating the possibility of the entire
      anti-German imperialist coalition coming to an agreement on the
      presentation of an ultimatum to Russia either fight against
      Germany, or there will be a Japanese invasion aided by us.

    
      Secondly, since Brest the war party has gained the upper hand in
      German politics in general, and this party could now, at any
      moment, gain the upper hand on the question of an immediate
      general offensive against Russia, i.e., it could completely
      overcome the other policy of German bourgeois-imperialist
      circles that strive for fresh annexations in Russia but for the
      time being want peace with her and not a general offensive
      against her.

    
      Thirdly, the restoration of bourgeois-landowner monarchism in
      the Ukraine with the support of the Constitutional-Democratic
      and Octobrist elements of the bourgeoisie of all Russia arid
      with the aid of the German troops was bound to make the struggle
      against the counter-revolution in Russia more intense., was
      bound to encourage the plans and raise the spirit of our
      counter-revolutionaries.

    
      Fourthly, the disorganised food situation has become extremely
      acute and in many places has led to real hunger because we were
      cut off from Rostov-on-Don and because of the efforts of the
      petty bourgeoisie and the capitalists in general to sabotage the
      grain monopoly, accompanied by insufficiently firm, disciplined
      and ruthless opposition on the part of the ruling class, i.e.,
      the proletariat, to those strivings, efforts and attempts.
    
II

      The foreign policy of Soviet power must not be changed in any
      way. Our military preparations are not yet complete, and our
      general slogan. therefore, will remain as
      before—manoeuvre, withdraw, bide our time, and continue
      our preparations with all our. might.

    
      Although we do not ill general reject military agreements with
      one of the imperialist coalitions against the other ill those
      cases in which such an agreement could, without undermining the
      basis of Soviet power, strengthen its position and paralyze the
      attacks of any imperialist power, we cannot at the present
      moment enter into a military agreement with the Anglo-French
      coalition. For them, the importance of such an agreement would
      be the diversion of German troops from the West, i.e., by means
      of the advance of many Japanese army corps into the interior of
      European Russia, which is an unacceptable condition since it
      would mean the complete collapse of Soviet power. If the
      Anglo-French coalition were to present us with an ultimatum of
      this kind we should reject it, because the danger of the
      Japanese advance can more easily be paralysed (or can be delayed
      for a longer time) than the threat of the Germans occupying
      Petrograd, Moscow and a large part of European Russia.
    
III

      In considering the tasks of the foreign policy of Soviet power
      at the present moment, the greatest caution, discretion and
      restraint must be observed in order not to hel the extreme
      elements in the war parties of Japan and Germany by any
      ill-considered or hasty step.

    
      The fact of the matter is that the extreme elements in the war
      parties of both these countries favour an immediate general
      offensive against Russia for the purpose of occupying all her
      territory and overthrowing Soviet power. At any moment these
      extreme elements may gain the upper hand.

    
      On the other hand, however, it is an undoubted fact that the
      majority of the imperialist bourgeoisie in Germany are against
      such a policy and at the present moment prefer the annexationist
      peace with Russia to a continuation of the war for the simple
      reason that war would divert forces from the West and increase
      the instability of the internal situation in Germany that is
      already making itself felt; it would also make it difficult to
      obtain raw materials from places involved in insurrection or
      that are suffering from damage to railways, from failure to
      plant sufficient crops, etc., etc.

    
      The Japanese urge to attack Russia is being held back, first, by
      the danger of the movement and of revolts in China, and
      secondly, there is a certain antagonism on the part of America,
      the latter fearing the strengthening of Japan and hoping to
      obtain raw materials from Russia more easily under peaceful
      conditions.

    
      It goes without saying that it is quite possible for the extreme
      elements of the war parties in both Germany and Japan to gain
      the upper hand at any moment. There can be no guarantee against
      this until the revolution breaks out in Germany. The American
      bourgeoisie may plot together with the Japanese bourgeoisie, or
      the Japanese with the German. It is, therefore, our imperative
      duty to make the most energetic preparations for war.

    
      As long as there remains even a slight chance of preserving
      peace or of concluding peace with Finland, the Ukraine and
      Turkey, at the cost of certain new annexations or losses, we
      must not take a single step that might aid the extreme elements
      in the war parties of the imperialist powers.
    
IV

      The primary task in undertaking more energetic military
      training, as in the question of combating famine, is that of
      orgainsation.

    
      There cannot be any really serious preparation for war unless
      the food difficulties are overcome, unless the population is
      properly supplied with bread, unless the strictest order is
      introduced on the railways, unless truly iron discipline is
      established among the masses of the working people (and not only
      at the top). It is in this field that we are most backward.

    
      Guiltiest of all of a complete lack of understanding of this
      truth are the Left Socialist-Revolutionary and anarchist
      elements with their screaming about “insurrectionary
      committees” and their howls of “to arms”,
      etc. Such screams and howls are the quintessence of stupidity
      and are nothing but pitiful, despicable and disgusting
      phrase-making; it is ridiculous to talk about
      “insurrection” and “insurrectionary
      committees” when Soviet central power is doing its utmost
      to persuade the people to start military training and arm
      themselves, when we have more weapons than we can count and
      distribute, when it is precisely the economic ruin and the lack
      of discipline that prevent us from using the weapons available
      and compel us to lose valuable time that could be used for
      training.

    
      Intensified military training for a serious war cannot be done
      by means of a sudden impulse, a battle-cry, a militant slogan;
      it requires lengthy, intense, persistent and disciplined work on
      a mass scale. We must deal ruthlessly with the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary and anarchist elements that do not wish
      to understand this, and must not give them an opportunity to
      infect certain elements of our proletarian Communist Party with
      their hysteria.
    
V

      It is essential to wage a ruthless struggle against the
      bourgeoisie, which on account of the above circumstances has
      raised its head during the past few days, and to declare a state
      of emergency, close newspapers, arrest the leaders and so
      on. These measures are as necessary as the military campaign
      against the rural bourgeoisie, who are holding back grain
      surpluses and infringing the grain monopoly. There will he no
      salvation either from the counter-revolution or from famine
      without iron discipline on the part of the proletariat.

    
      In particular it must be borne in mind tat during the past few
      days the bourgeoisie have been making extremely skilful and
      cunning use of panic-spreading as a weapon against proletarian
      power. Some of our comrades, especially those who are less
      resolute in their attitude to the Left Socialist-Revolutionary
      and anarchist revolutionary phrases, have allowed themselves to
      be diverted, have got into a panic or have failed to observe the
      line that divides legitimate and necessary warning of the coming
      danger from the spreading of panic.

    
      The basic specific features of the entire present economic and
      political situation in Russia must be kept firmly in mind;
      because of these features our cause cannot be helped by
      outbursts. We must become firmly convinced ourselves and try to
      convince all workers of the truth that only restraint and
      patient creative work to establish iron proletarian discipline,
      including ruthless measures against hooligans, kulaks and
      disorganising elements, can protect Soviet power at this moment,
      one of the most difficult and dangerous periods of transition,
      unavoidable owing to the delay of the revolution in the West.
    
Endnotes
[1]
Theses on the Present Political Situation were drafted
      by Lenin on May 10, 1918 and discussed on the same day at a
      meeting of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Part
      (Bolsheviks). The final, edited version of the theses was
      approve by the Central Committee on May 13; all members of the
      Central Committee who attended the meeting voted in favour,
      except G. Y. Sokolnikov and J. V. Stalin. Later, the majority of
      members of the Central Committee living in Petrograd gave their
      support to the theses. The Central Committee entrusted Lenin
      with the task of making the reports to the Moscow City
      Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) and the Joint Meeting of the
      All-Russia C.E.C. and the Moscow Soviet, and of moving these
      theses as a resolution. The same day Lenin delivered a report
      based on the theses at the Moscow City Party Conference, which
      voted its approval. 


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Report on Foreign Policy
Delivered at a Joint Meeting of the All-Russia Central
Executive Committee and the Moscow Soviet, May 14,
1918











 Report On Foreign Policy Delivered At A Joint Meeting Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee And The Moscow Soviet 



V. I. Lenin

Report On Foreign Policy
 Delivered At A Joint Meeting Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee And The Moscow Soviet[1] May 14, 1918

Written: 14 May, 1918
First Published: May 15 and 16, 1918; Newspaper report published in Pravda Nos. 93 and 94, in Izvestia VTsIK No. 95 May 15, 1918; Published according to the text of the book: Minutes of the Sessions of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, 4th Convocation. Verbatim Report, Moscow, 1920, collated with the text of the newspaper Petrogradskaya Pravda No. 101 May 19, 1918 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 365-381 
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive March, 2002

Comrades, permit me to acquaint you with the
    present foreign policy situation. In the past few days our
    international position has in many respects become more
    complicated owing to the aggravation of the general
    situation. Because of this aggravation, the provocation, the
    deliberate panic-spreading by the bourgeois press and its echo,
    the socialist press, is again doing its dark and filthy work of
    repeating the Kornilov affair. 



 
      First, I shall draw your attention to the factors determining,
      in the main, the international position of the Soviet Republic
      in order to proceed to the outward legal forms determining this
      position, and, on the basis of this, describe again the
      difficulties which have arisen or, to be more precise, define
      the turning-point at which we have arrived and which forms the
      basis of the worsened political situation. 



      Comrades, you know, and your knowledge has been particularly
      reinforced by the experience of the two Russian revolutions,
      that economic interests and the economic position of the classes
      which rule our state lie at the root of both our home and
      foreign policy. These propositions which constitute the basis of
      the Marxist world outlook and have been confirmed for us Russian
      revolutionaries by the great experience of both Russian
      revolutions, must not be forgotten even for a moment if we are
      to avoid losing ourselves in the thickets, the labyrinth of
      diplomatic tricks, a labyrinth which at times is artificially
      created and made more intricate by people, classes, parties and
      groups who like to fish in muddy waters, or who are compelled to
      do so. 

    

 
      We recently experienced, and to a certain extent are
      experiencing now, a situation in which our
      counter-revolutionaries—the Constitutional-Democrats and
      their foremost yes-men, the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks—have been attempting to take advantage of the
      increased complexity of the international situation. 



 
      Basically, the position is that the Russian Socialist Soviet
      Republic, due to economic and political causes which we have
      described in the press on more than one occasion, and of which
      you are aware, due to a different rate of development, a basis
      of development different from that of the West, still remains a
      lone island in the stormy sea of imperialist robbery. The main
      economic factor in the West is that this imperialist war which
      has tortured and exhausted mankind has given rise to such
      complicated, such acute, such involved conflicts that again and
      again, at every step, the question of war and peace, the
      solution of the question to the advantage of one or other
      grouping, hangs by a thread. We have lived through precisely
      such a situation in the past few days. The contradictions that
      have arisen out of the frenzied struggle between the imperialist
      powers drawn into a war which is the result of the economic
      conditions of the development of capitalism over a number of
      decades, have made it impossible for the imperialists themselves
      to stop this war. 

    

 
      Owing to these contradictions, it has come about that the
      general alliance of the imperialists of all countries, forming
      the basis of the economic alliance of capitalism, an alliance
      whose natural and inevitable aim is to defend capital, which
      recognises no fatherland, and which has proved in the course of
      many major and important episodes in world history that capital
      places the safeguarding of the alliance of the capitalists of
      all countries against the working people above the interests of
      the fatherland, of the people or of what you will—that
      this alliance is not the moving force of politics. 




      
      
      Of course, as before, this alliance remains the main economic
      trend of the capitalist system, a trend which must ultimately
      make itself felt with inevitable force. That the imperialist war
      has divided into hostile groups, into hostile coalitions the
      imperialist powers which at the present moment, one may say,
      have divided up the whole world among themselves, is an
      exception to this main tendency of capitalism. This enmity, this
      struggle, this death grapple, proves that in certain
      circumstances the alliance of world imperialism is
      impossible. We are witnessing a situation in which the stormy
      waves of imperialist reaction, of the imperialist slaughter of
      nations, are hurling themselves at the small island of the
      socialist Soviet Republic, and seem about to sink it any minute,
      while actually these waves are only breaking against each
      other. 

    

 
      The basic contradictions between the imperialist powers have led
      to such a merciless struggle that, while recognising its
      hopelessness, neither the one, nor the other group is in a
      position to extricate itself at will from the iron grip of this
      war. The war has brought out two main contradictions, which in
      their turn have determined the socialist Soviet Republic’s
      present international position. The first is the battle being
      waged on the Western front between Germany and Britain, which
      has reached an extreme degree of ferocity. We have heard on more
      than one occasion representatives of the two belligerent groups
      promise and assure their own people and other peoples that all
      that is required is one more last effort for the enemy to be
      subdued, the fatherland defended and the interests of
      civilisation and of the war of liberation saved for all
      time. The longer this terrible struggle drags on and the deeper
      the belligerent countries become involved, the further off is
      the way out of this interminable war. And it is the violence of
      this conflict that makes extremely difficult, well-nigh
      impossible, an alliance of the great imperialist powers against
      the Soviet Republic, which in the bare half-year of Its
      existence has won the warm regard and the most whole-hearted
      sympathy of the class-conscious workers of the world. 

    

 
      The second contradiction determining Russia’s
      international position is the rivalry between Japan and
      America. Over several decades the economic development of these
      countries has produced a vast amount of inflammable material
      which makes inevitable a desperate clash between them for
      domination of the Pacific Ocean and the surrounding
      territories. The entire diplomatic and economic history of the
      Far East leaves no room for doubt that under capitalist
      conditions it is impossible to avert the imminent conflict
      between Japan and America. This contradiction, temporarily
      concealed by the alliance of Japan and America against Germany,
      delays Japanese imperialism’s attack on Russia, which was
      prepared for over a long period, which was a long time feeling
      its way, and which to a certain degree was started and is being
      supported by counter-revolutionary forces. The campaign which
      has been launched against the Soviet Republic (the landing at
      Vladivostok and the support of the Semyonov bands) is being held
      up because it threatens to turn the hidden conflict between
      Japan and America into open war. It is quite likely, of course,
      and we must not forget that no matter how solid the imperialist
      groupings may appear to be, they can be broken up in a few days
      if the interests of sacred private property, the sacred rights
      of concessions, etc., demand it. It may well be that the tiniest
      spark will suffice to blow up the existing alignment of powers,
      and then the afore-mentioned contradictions will no longer
      protect us. 

    

 
      At the moment, however, the situation we have described explains
      why it is possible to preserve our socialist island in the
      middle of stormy seas and also why its position is so unstable,
      and, at times, to the great joy of the bourgeoisie and the panic
      of the petty bourgeoisie, it seems that it may be engulfed by
      the waves at any minute. 



 
      The outer aspect, the external expression of this situation is
      the Brest Treaty on the one hand, and the customs and laws with
      regard to neutral countries on the other. 
      


 
      You know that treaties and laws are worth nothing but a scrap of
      paper in the face of international conflicts. 



 
      These words are usually recalled and quoted as an example of the
      cynicism of imperialist foreign policy; the cynicism, however,
      lies not in these words, but in the ruthless, the cruelly and
      agonisingly ruthless, imperialist war, in which all peace
      treaties and all laws of neutrality have been flouted, are
      flouted, and will be flouted, as long as capitalism exists. 



 
      That is why, when we come to the most important question for us,
      the Brest peace and the likelihood of its violation with all the
      possible consequences for us—if we want to stand firmly on
      our socialist feet and do not want to be overthrown by the plots
      and provocations of the counter-revolutionaries, no matter under
      what socialist labels they disguise themselves, we must not
      forget for a single moment the economic principles underlying
      all peace treaties, including that of Brest-Litovsk, the
      economic principles underlying all neutrality, including our
      own. We must not forget, on the one hand, the state of affairs
      internationally, the state of affairs of international
      imperialism in relation to the class which is growing, and which
      sooner or later, perhaps even later than we desire or expect,
      will nevertheless become capitalism’s heir and will defeat
      world capitalism. And on the other hand, we must not forget the
      relations between the imperialist countries, the relations
      between the imperialist economic groups. 
      


 
      Having clarified this situation, I think, comrades, we shall not
      find it difficult to understand the significance of those
      diplomatic particulars and details, at times even trifles, which
      have mainly occupied our attention during the past few days,
      which have been on our minds during the past few days. Clearly,
      the instability of the international situation gives rise to
      panic. This panic emanates from the Constitutional-Democrats,
      the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, who aid and
      abet the interests of those who want and who strive to sow
      panic. In no way closing our eyes to the full danger and tragedy
      of the situation, and analysing the economic relations on an
      international scale, we must say: yes, the question of war and
      peace hangs by a thread both in the West and in the Far East
      because two trends exist; one, which makes an alliance of all
      the imperialists inevitable; the other, which places the
      imperialists in opposition to each other—two trends,
      neither of which has any firm foundation. No, Japan cannot now
      decide to launch a full-scale attack, although with her
      million-strong army she could quite easily overrun obviously
      weak Russia. I do not know, nor can anyone know, when this is
      likely to take place. 



 
      The form of the ultimatum threatens war against the allies and a
      treaty with Germany, but this position can change in a few
      days. There is always the possibility of it changing, because
      the American bourgeoisie, now at logger-heads with Japan, can
      tomorrow come to terms with her, because the Japanese
      bourgeoisie are just as likely tomorrow to come to terms with
      the German bourgeoisie. Their basic interests are the same: the
      division of the world between themselves, the interests of the
      landowners, of capital the safeguarding (as they say) of their
      national self-respect and their national interests. This
      language is sufficiently familiar to those who have either the
      misfortune or the habit—I don’t know which—of
      reading newspapers like those of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. And when national self-respect begins
      to be mentioned frequently we all know, we know very well from
      the experience of 1914, what facts of imperialist robbery this
      is prompted by. In view of this relationship it is clear why the
      situation in the Far East is unstable. One thing must be said:
      we must have a clear understanding of these contradictions of
      capitalist interests, we must appreciate that the stability of
      the Soviet Republic is growing with every week, every month that
      passes, and that sympathy towards it among the working and
      exploited people of the world is growing at the same time. 



 
      And, at the same time, any day, any moment we must be prepared
      for and expect changes in international politics in favour of
      the policies of the extremist war parties. 



 
      The position of the German coalition is clear to us. At the
      present moment the majority of the German bourgeois parties
      stand for observing the Brest peace, but, of course, are very
      glad to “improve” on it and to receive a few more
      annexations at Russia’s expense. What makes them take this
      stand? The political and military considerations of German
      national interests—as they express it—of imperialist
      interests, make them prefer peace in the East, so that their
      hands may be free in the West, where German imperialism has
      promised an immediate victory on many occasions, and where every
      week or every month proves that this victory, the more the
      partial successes gained, recedes still further 



      into the distance. On the other hand, there is a war party
      which, during discussions on the Brest Treaty, showed its hand
      on a number of occasions, a party which naturally exists in all
      imperialist countries, a war party which says to itself: force
      must be used immediately, irrespective of possible
      consequences. These are the voices of the extremist war
      party. It has been known in German history since the time when
      overwhelming military victories became a feature history. It has
      been known since 1866, for instance, when the extremist war
      party of Germany achieved victory over Austria and turned this
      victory into a complete rout. All these clashes, all these
      conflicts are inevitable and lead to a situation where matters
      now hang by a thread, where, on the one hand, the bourgeois
      imperialist majority of the German parliament, the German
      propertied classes, the German capitalists prefer to stand by
      the Brest Treaty, while having, I repeat, no hesitation about
      improving on it. And on the other hand, any day, any moment we
      must be prepared for and expect changes in politics in the
      interests of the extremist war party. 



 
      This explains the instability of the international situation;
      this explains how easy it is in the circumstances to put the
      Party in one situation or another; this shows what prudence,
      caution, self-control and presence of mind is demanded of the
      Soviet government if it is to define its task clearly. Let the
      Russian bourgeoisie rush from a French to a German
      orientation. They like doing this. They have in several areas
      seen that German support is an excel lent guarantee against the
      peasants who are taking the land, and against the workers who
      are building the foundations of socialism. In the quite recent
      past, and over a long period, over a number of years they
      branded as traitors those who condemned the imperialist war and
      opened people’s eyes to its real nature, but now they are
      all prepared in a few weeks to change their political beliefs
      and to go over from an alliance with the British robbers to an
      alliance with the German robbers against Soviet power. Let the
      bourgeoisie of all shades, from the Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks to the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, rush this way and that. It suits
      their nature. Let them spread panic, for they are themselves in
      a panic. Let them rush to 

      and fro, unable to do otherwise, vacillating between the
      different orientations and between the absurd phrases that fail
      to take into consideration the fact that to deepen the effect of
      the revolution, when it has attained great proportions, one has
      to experience the most diverse groupings and transitions from
      one stage to another. We Russian revolutionaries have had the
      good fortune in the twentieth century to pass through two
      revolutions, each of which gave us a lot of experience, which
      has also stamped its impression on the lives of the people, of
      how a deep-going and effective revolutionary movement is
      prepared; how the different classes in this movement behave; by
      what difficult and exhausting path, sometimes by a long
      evolution, the maturity of new- classes comes about. 



 
      Remember how hard it was for the Soviets, created by the
      spontaneous outburst in 1905, how hard it was for them in 1917
      to take up the fight again, and how hard later, when they had to
      go through all the suffering of compromise with the bourgeoisie
      and with the hidden, most rabid enemies of the working class,
      who talked of the defence of the revolution, of the Red Flag,
      and committed the greatest of crimes in June 1917—now,
      when the majority of the working class supports us, remember
      what it cost after the great 1905 Revolution to emerge with
      Soviets of the working and peasant classes. Remember all this,
      and think of the mass scale on which the struggle against
      international imperialism is developing, think how difficult the
      transition to this situation is, and what the Russian Republic
      had to undergo when it found itself ahead of all the other
      contingents of the socialist army. 



 
      I know that there are, of course, wiseacres with a high opinion
      of themselves and even calling themselves socialists, who assert
      that power should not have been taken until the revolution broke
      out in all countries. They do not realise that in saying this
      they are deserting the revolution and going over to the side of
      the bourgeoisie. To wait until the working classes carry out a
      revolution on an international scale means that everyone will
      remain suspended in mid-air. This is senseless. Everyone knows
      the difficulties of a revolution. It may begin with brilliant
      success in one country and then go through agonising periods,
      since 



      final victory is only possible on a world scale, and only by the
      joint efforts of the workers of all countries. Our task consists
      in being restrained and prudent, we must manoeuvre and retreat
      until we receive reinforcements. A change over to these tactics
      is inevitable, no matter how much they are mocked by so-called
      revolutionaries with no idea of what revolution means. 



 
      Having dealt with the general questions I now want to examine
      the causes of the recent alarm and panic which have again
      enabled the counter-revolutionaries to start activities intended
      to undermine Soviet power. 



 
      I have already mentioned that the outward legal form and outer
      aspect of all international relations of the Soviet Socialist
      Republic are, on the one hand, the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, and, on
      the other, the general law and custom defining the status of a
      neutral country among other, belligerent countries; this status
      accounts for the recent difficulties. The conclusion of peace
      with Finland, the Ukraine and Turkey should have been the
      natural consequence of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, yet we are
      still at war with these countries, and this is not due to our
      internal development, but to the influence of the ruling classes
      of these countries. In these conditions the only temporary way
      out lay in the temporary breathing-space provided by the
      Brest-Litovsk Treaty, the breathing-space which provoked so many
      futile and unnecessary words about its being impossible but
      which nevertheless turned out to be possible and in two months
      brought results, made itself felt on the majority of Russian
      soldiers, enabled them to return home and see how things were
      going, to take advantage of the revolution’s gains, to
      work the land, to look around and draw new strength for the
      fresh sacrifices ahead. 
      


 
      Naturally, this temporary breathing-space appeared to be coming
      to an end when the situation worsened in Finland, the Ukraine
      and Turkey, when, instead of peace, we merely obtained a
      postponement of that selfsame acute economic problem: war or
      peace? And now are we to go to war once again, despite all the
      peaceful intentions of Soviet power and its absolute
      determination to sacrifice so-called Great Power status, i.e.,
      the right to conclude secret treaties, to conceal them from the
      people with the assistance 
      
      of the Chernovs, Tseretelis and Kerenskys, to sign secret
      predatory treaties and conduct an imperialist, predatory war?
      Indeed, instead of peace, all that we have obtained is a brief
      postponement of that selfsame pressing question of war or
      peace. 
      


 
      Here is the result of this situation, and you again clearly see
      where its final outcome lies—namely, in the question of
      what the results will be of the wavering among the two hostile
      groups of imperialist countries—the American conflict in
      the Far East, and the German-British conflict in Western
      Europe. It is clear how these contradictions have intensified
      over the conquest of the Ukraine, over the situation which the
      German imperialists, particularly their main war party,
      frequently viewed so optimistically looked upon as so easy, and
      which caused precisely this extremist German war party such
      fantastic difficulties. It was this situation which temporarily
      raised the hopes of the Russian Constitutional-Democrats,
      Mensheviks and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, who have fallen
      in love with what Skoropadsky is bringing the Ukraine, and who
      now hope that this will also be easily achieved in Russia. These
      gentlemen will be mistaken; their hopes will turn to dust
      because. . . (stormy applause ), because, I say, that
      same main war party in Germany, which is too accustomed to rely
      on the power of the sword, even this party in these particular
      circumstances has not been supported by the majority of the
      imperialists, those bourgeois imperialist circles who have seen
      unprecedented difficulties in the conquest of the Ukraine, in
      the struggle to subjugate a whole people, in the forced
      necessity of resorting to a terrible coup d’etat. 



 
      This main war party created unprecedented difficulties in
      Germany when, having promised its people and the workers supreme
      victories on the Western Front, this extremist war party was
      forced to recognise that it was faced with new, unbelievable
      economic and political difficulties with having to divert
      military forces to tasks which also at first seemed easy, and
      also with having to conclude a treaty with the Ukrainian
      Mensheviks and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, who were the
      signatories to the peace treaty. 



 
      The extremist war party in Germany reasoned: we shall send many
      troops and obtain grain, but then it became neces-
      

      sary to engineer a coup d’etat. That turned out to be
      easy, because the Ukrainian Mensheviks readily supported this
      move. But it then turned out that this coup d’etat created
      fresh and gigantic difficulties, because the grain and raw
      materials, without which Germany cannot exist, had to be fought
      for at every step, and their appropriation by military force in
      an occupied country involved too great an effort and too many
      sacrifices. 



 
   Such is the situation that has arisen in the Ukraine and that should have lent wings to the hopes of the Russian counter-revolution. It is clear that in this struggle, Russia, which has been unable to rebuild her army, has suffered and is suffering further losses. The peace talks have led to new, onerous conditions, to new open and concealed indemnities. Under what decree the Ukraine’s frontiers are to be determined is not clear. The Rada, [2] which signed the decree, has been removed. A landowner-hetman has been put in its place. Because of this uncertainty a whole number of problems have emerged which prove that the questions of war and peace remain as before. The partial armistice existing between the Russian and German troops in no way predetermines the general situation. The question hangs in the air. The same is true of Georgia, where we have a protracted counter-revolutionary struggle by the government of the Caucasian Mensheviks, a protracted struggle by counter-revolutionaries who call themselves Social-Democrats. And when the victory of Soviet power and the working people, having embraced the whole of Russia, has begun to draw in the non-Russian outlying areas, when it has become quite obvious and beyond all doubt that the victory of Soviet power, as has been admitted by the counter-revolutionary representatives of the Don Cossacks, cannot be delayed, when the Menshevik government in the Caucasus has begun to waver the government of Gegechkori and Jordania, who realised this too late and started to talk about finding a common language with the Bolsheviks when Tsereteli, aided by the Turkish troops, has shown his hand by advancing against the Bolsheviks—they will reap the same harvest as the Rada. (Applause.) 



 
   Remember, however, that if these bargainers of the Caucasian Rada receive the support of the German troops, 

as did the Ukrainian Rada, then there will no doubt be fresh difficulties for the Russian Soviet Republic, a new inevitability of war, new dangers and now uncertainties. There are people who refer to this uncertainty, to the strain of an uncertain situation (in fact such an uncertain situation is sometimes worse than any clearly defined one), and say that the uncertainty can be easily removed—you only have to demand openly that the Germans observe the Brest Treaty.



 
    I have heard such naïve people, who consider themselves to be on the left, but who in fact only reflect the narrow mindedness of our petty bourgeoisie. . . .[*] 



 
    They forget that you have first to be victorious before you can make demands. If you are not victorious the enemy can delay his reply or even make no reply at all to your demands. That is the law of imperialist war. 



 
    You don’t like it. Then be able to defend your homeland. The worker has every right to defend his homeland for the sake of socialism, for the sake of the working class. 



 
    I shall only add that this uncertain situation on the Caucasian border was a result of the quite unpardonable vacillation of the Gegechkori government which at first announced that it did not recognise the Brest peace, and then declared its independence without informing us of what territory this independence covered. We have sent innumerable radio-telegrams saying to them, please inform us of the territory you lay claim to. You have the right to claim independence, but since you speak of independence, you are bound to say what territory you are representing. That was a week ago. Countless radio-telegrams have been dispatched, but not a single reply has been received. German imperialism is taking advantage of this. This has made it possible for Germany, and Turkey, as a satellite state, to push farther and farther forward, making no replies, ignoring everything, stating: we shall take whatever we can, we are not infringing the Brest peace, because the Transcaucasian army does not recognise it, because the Caucasus is independent. 



 
    Of whom is the Gegechkori government independent? It is independent of the Soviet Republic, but it is dependent,  just a little, on German imperialism, and quite naturally so. (Applause.) 



 
   That is the situation which has developed, comrades—an acute aggravation of relations in the last few days—it is a situation which has once again, and fairly obviously, confirmed the correctness of the tactics which the vast majority of our Party, the Russian Communist Party of Bolsheviks, has employed and firmly insisted on during recent months. 



 
   We possess great revolutionary experience, which has taught us that it is essential to employ the tactics of merciless attack when objective conditions permit, when the experience of compromising has shown that the people’s indignation has been aroused, and that attack will express this change. But we have to resort to temporising tactics, to a slow gathering of forces when objective circumstances do not favour a call for a general merciless repulse. 



 
   Any person who does not shut his eyes to the facts, who is not blind, knows that we are merely repeating what we have said earlier, and what we have always said: that we do not forget the weakness of the Russian working class compared to other contingents of the international proletariat. It was not our own will, but historical circumstances, the legacy of the tsarist regime, the flabbiness of the Russian bourgeoisie, that caused this contingent to march ahead of the other contingents of the international proletariat; it was not because we desired it, but because circumstances demanded it. We must remain at our post until the arrival of our ally, the international proletariat, which will arrive and will inevitably arrive, but which is approaching at an immeasurably slower pace than we expect or wish. If we see that as a result of objective conditions the international proletariat moves too slowly, we must nevertheless stick to our tactics of temporising and utilising the conflicts and contradictions between the imperialists, of slowly accumulating strength; the tactics of preserving this island of Soviet power in the stormy imperialist sea, maintaining this island which now already attracts the gaze of the working people of all countries. That is why we tell ourselves that, if the extremist war party can at any moment defeat any imperialist coalition and build a new unexpected imperialist coalition against us, we at any rate will not make it any easier for them. And if they come against us—yes, we are now defencists—we shall do everything in our power, everything within the power of diplomatic tactics, we shall do everything to delay that moment, everything to make the brief and unstable respite, given us in March, last longer, for we are firmly convinced that behind us are tens of millions of workers and peasants who know that with every week and, even more so, with every month of this respite they gain new strength, they are consolidating Soviet power, making it firm and stable. They know that they are introducing a new spirit, and that after the attrition and weariness of this exhausting reactionary war, they will create firmness and readiness for the last and decisive battle should external forces attack the Socialist Soviet Republic. 



 
   We have been defencists since October 25, 1917; we have won the right to defend our native land. It is not secret treaties that we are defending, we have annulled and exposed them to the whole world. We are defending our country against the imperialists. We are defending and we shall win. It is not the Great Power status of Russia that we are defending—of that nothing is left but Russia proper—nor is it national interests, for we assert that the interests of socialism, of world socialism are higher than national interests, higher than the interests of the state. We are defenders of the socialist fatherland. 



 
   This is not achieved by issuing declarations, but only by overthrowing the bourgeoisie in one’s own country, by a ruthless war to the death begun in one’s own country; and we know that we shall win this war. Ours is a small island in the war that engulfs the imperialist world, but on this small island we have shown and proved to all what the working class can do. Everyone knows this and has acknowledged it. We have proved that we possess the right to defend our homeland. We are defencists and look upon our task with all the seriousness taught us by the four years of war, with all the seriousness and caution understood by every worker and peasant who has met a soldier and has learned what that soldier has lived through in these four years of war—the caution which may not be understood, which may be sneered at and regarded frivolously only by people who are revolutionaries in word but not in deed. It is just because we do support the defence of the fatherland that we tell ourselves: a firm and strong army and a strong rear are needed for the defence, and in order to have a firm and strong army we must in the first place ensure that the food supplies are on a sound basis. For this the dictatorship of the proletariat must be expressed not only centrally—that is the first step and only the first step—but there must be dictatorship throughout the whole of Russia—that is the second step and only the second step, which we have not yet carried out sufficiently. Proletarian discipline is essential and necessary for us; real proletarian dictatorship, when the firm and iron rule of class-conscious workers is felt in every remote corner of our country, when not a single kulak, not a single rich man, not a single opponent of the grain monopoly remains unpunished, but is found and punished by the iron hand of the disciplined dictators of the working class, the proletarian dictators. (Applause.) 



 
   We say to ourselves: our attitude to defence of the fatherland is a cautious one; it is our duty to do everything that our diplomacy can do to delay the moment of war, to extend the respite period; we promise the workers and peasants to do all we can for peace. This we shall do. And bourgeois gentlemen and their hirelings, who think that just as in the Ukraine, where a coup was brought about so easily, so in Russia it may be possible to give birth to new Skoropadskys, should not forget that the war party in Germany found it very difficult to effect a coup in the Ukraine, and will meet with plenty of opposition in Soviet Russia. Everything goes to prove this; Soviet power has pursued this line and has made every sacrifice to consolidate the position of the working people. 



 
   The situation with regard to peace with Finland may be summed up in
      the words: Fort Ino and Murmansk. Fort Ino, which defends
      Petrograd, lies geographically within the Finnish state. In
      concluding peace with the workers’ government of Finland
      we, the representatives of socialist Russia, recognised
      Finland’s absolute right to the whole territory, but it
      was mutually agreed by both governments that Fort Ino should
      remain in Russia’s hands “for the defence of the
      joint interests of the Socialist Republics”, as stated in
      the treaty that was concluded. [3] It is natural that our troops should conclude this peace in Finland, should sign these terms. It is natural that bourgeois and counter-revolutionary Finland was bound to raise a hue and cry against this. It is natural that the reactionary and counter-revolutionary Finnish bourgeoisie should lay claim to this stronghold. It is natural that, because of this, the issue should become acute on a number of occasions and should still remain acute. Matters hang by a thread. It is natural that the question of Murmansk, to which the Anglo-French have laid claim, should give rise to even greater aggravation, because they have spent tens of millions on the port’s construction in order to safeguard their military rear in their imperialist war against Germany. Their respect for neutrality is so wonderful that they make use of everything that is left unguarded. Furthermore, sufficient excuse for their grabbing is their possession of a battle ship, while we have nothing with which to chase it away. It is natural that all this should have aggravated the situation. There is an outer aspect, a legal expression resulting from the international position of the Soviet Republic, which presumes that it is impossible for armed forces of any belligerent state to set foot on neutral territory without being disarmed. The British landed their military forces at Murmansk, and we were unable to prevent this by armed force. Consequently, we are presented with demands almost in the nature of an ultimatum: if you cannot protect your neutrality, we shall wage war on your territory. 



 
   A worker-peasant army, however, has now been formed, it has rallied in the uyezds and gubernias the peasants who have returned to their land, land wrested from the landowners; they now have something to defend. An army has been formed which has started to build Soviet power, and which will become the vanguard if an invasion against Russia breaks out; we shall rise as one man to meet the enemy. 



 
   My time is up, and I want to conclude by reading a telegram received by radio from Comrade Joffe, Soviet Ambassador in Berlin. This telegram will show you that, on the one hand, you have confirmation from our Ambassador of whether my analysis of the international situation is correct and, on the other hand, that the foreign policy of our Soviet Republic is a responsible one—it is a policy of preparation for defence of our country, a steadfast policy, not allowing a single step to be taken that would aid the extremist parties of the imperialist powers in the East and West. This is a responsible policy with no illusions. There always remains the possibility that any day military forces may be thrown against us and we, the workers and peasants, assure ourselves and the whole world, and shall be able to prove, that we shall rise to a man to defend the Soviet Republic. I hope, therefore, that the reading of this telegram will serve as an appropriate conclusion to my speech and will show us the spirit in which the representatives of the Soviet Republic work abroad in the interests of the Soviets, of all Soviet institutions and the Soviet Republic. 


 
   “The latest radio-telegrams received today report that the German War Prisoners’ Commission is leaving on Friday, May 10. We have already received a Note from the German Government proposing the setting up of a special commission to consider all legal questions in regard to our possessions in the Ukraine and in Finland. I have agreed to such a commission and have asked you to send the appropriate military and legal representatives. Today I had a talk about further advances, demands for clearing Fort Ino, and the attitude of the Russians to Germany. Here is the reply: The German High Command states that there will be no further advances; Germany’s role in the Ukraine and Finland has ended. Germany is willing to assist our peace talks with Kiev and Helsingfors and is entering into negotiations with the governments concerned. As regards Fort Ino, in connection with the Finnish Peace talks: according to the treaty, the forts should be destroyed. Germany considers that when defining the frontiers the agreement with the Reds can be accepted; the Whites have not yet replied. The German Government declares officially: Germany abides firmly by the Brest Treaty, she wants peaceful relations with us, she has no aggressive plans and has no intention of attacking us in any way. It is promised that, in accordance with my request, Russian citizens in Germany will be treated on a par with other neutrals.” 




Endnotes
[1] Lenin’s report evoked bitter attacks from the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries,who tried to use the critical international and internal situation as a weapon against the Bolshevik Party and the Soviet government. Because Lenin had to leave the conference on urgent business the reply to the debate, by agreement with Lenin, was given by Y. M. Sverdlov, who made a resolute stand against the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary attacks. The meeting rejected the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary resolutions, demanding the convocation of the Constituent Assembly, denunciation of the Brest Treaty, and conclusion of an alliance with the Allied powers for continuation of the war against Germany. The Bolshevik resolution, written by Sverdlov, approving the policy of the Soviet Government, was carried by a majority. 


   The plan of Lenin’s report on foreign policy at the Joint Meeting of the All-Russia C.E.C. and the Moscow Soviet is published in Lenin Miscellany XI, p. 92. 

[2]
Rada—the Central Rada, a counter-revolutionary bourgeois nationalist government set up in April 1917 at the All-Ukraine National Congress in Kiev by a bloc of Ukrainian bourgeois and petty-bourgeois nationalist parties and groups. The chairman of the Rada was M. S. Grushevsky, ideologist of the Ukrainian bourgeoisie, the vice-chairman was V. K. Vinnichenko. Among its members were Petlyura, Yefremov, Antonovich and other nationalists. 


   After the victory of the October Revolution the Rada declared itself the supreme organ of the “Ukrainian People’s Republic”, opposed Soviet power and became one of the main centres of counter-revolution. 


   In December 1917, at the First All-Ukraine Congress of Soviets, which took place in Kharkov, the Ukraine was proclaimed a Soviet republic. The Congress also declared the power of the Central Rada overthrown. The Council of People’s Commissars of the R.S.F.S.R. recognised the Ukrainian Soviet Government as the sole legitimate government of the Ukraine and passed a decision that it should be given immediate assistance in its struggle against the counter-revolutionary Rada. In December 1917 and January 1918, armed uprisings against the Central Rada and for the establishment of Soviet power flared up in all parts of the Ukraine. In January 1918, Soviet troops in the Ukraine launched an offensive and on January 26 (February 8) occupied Kiev and deposed the bourgeois Rada.


   Driven out of the Soviet Ukraine, the Central Rada allied itself with the German imperialists in order to overthrow Soviet power and restore the bourgeois regime in the Ukraine. During the peace negotiations between the Soviet Republic and Germany the Rada sent its delegation to Brest-Litovsk and behind the back of the Soviet delegation concluded a separate peace with Germany, by which it undertook to supply Germany with Ukrainian grain, coal, and raw materials in return for military assistance against Soviet power. In March 1918 the Rada, now a puppet in the hands of the German and Austrian invaders, returned to Kiev. Realising that the Rada was incapable of crushing the revolutionary movement in the Ukraine and ensuring the delivery of supplies of food and raw materials, the Germans eventually abolished it.

[3]
 
      The reference is to the Treaty between Russia and Finnish
      Socialist Republics, which was endorsed in Petrograd on March 1,
      1918 (see Decrees of the Soviet Government, Russ. ed.,
      Vol. 1, 1957, pp. 505-10.
    
* A phrase that is not clearly
    written in the verbatim report has been
    omitted.—Editor.



Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Report on the Current
      Situation to the Moscow Regional Conference of the
      R.C.P.(B), May 15, 1918











 Report On The Current Situation To The Moscow Regional Conference Of The R.C.P.(B.)
May 15, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Report On The Current Situation
To The Moscow Regional Conference
Of The R.C.P.(B.) [1]
May 15, 1918
Brief Newspaper Report

Written: 15 May, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 95. May 17. 1918; Published according to the Pravda text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, page 382 
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


Lenin dealt first with the views of the “Lefts” on foreign policy and pointed out the tremendous propaganda value of the Brest negotiations, for the Western proletariat had been able to learn a lot, and to understand who the Bolsheviks were, and what the situation here was after the revolution, etc. Salvation now lay not in an open rupture of the Brest Treaty but in the ability to manoeuvre in the complex international situations that arose from the conflicting interests of the various imperialist countries. One had to take into account the relationship between Japan and America, Germany and Britain, the dissension in the German capitalist and war parties, and so on. The need in internal politics was for proletarian discipline, a struggle against the kulaks in the villages, the campaign for grain, a complete food dictatorship and dictatorship of the working class. Replying to the “Lefts” on the question of state capitalism, Lenin explained that this held no terror for us because in the agonising period of transition from capitalism to socialism that we had been going through the main thing was to save industry, and production could be got going and an exact account kept of production and consumption only by means of the large-scale organisation that was possible at present only under state capitalism, An essential condition for this was workers’ control, as an example Lenin mentioned the tanners, their sound organisation, and the workers’ control in private enterprises.

Endnotes
[1] Moscow Regional Conference of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks)  was held May 14-17, 1918. The conference heard reports from the provinces (Tyer, Vladimir and Yaroslavl gubernias) concerning the state of Party work, the growth of the Red Army and other questions, and discussed the reports of the Moscow Regional Bureau and the Moscow Committee of the Party, and also of the Moscow Area Party organisation. On May 15,. the conference discussed the current situation. A report sharply criticising the foreign policy of the Bolshevik Central Committee on behalf of the “Left Communists” was made by A. Lomov (G. I. Op- pokov). This report was followed by a report by Lenin. After the debate and replies to the debate by Lenin and Lemov the conference decided by 47 votes to 9 in favour of accepting as the basis for its resolution Lenin’s “Theses on the Present Political Situation” (see this volume, pp. 360-64). In reply to this, when a new Regional Bureau of the B.C.P.(B.) was elected, the “Left Communists” refused to join it.
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Report to the All-Russia
      Congress of Representatives of Financial Departments of
      Soviets, May 18, 1918











 Report To The All-Russia Congress Of Representatives Of Financial Departments Of Soviets 



V. I. Lenin
Report To The All-Russia
Congress Of Representatives
Of Financial Departments Of Soviets[1]
May 18, 1918

Written: 19 May, 1918
First Published: Newspaper report published in Izvestia VtsIK No. 99, May 19, 1913; Published according to the text or the book: Report on the Work of the First All-Russia Congress of Representatives of the Financial Departments of Regional, Gubernia and Uyezd Soviets, Moscow, 1918
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 383-387 
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


The country’s financial situation is critical, The problem of transforming the country on socialist lines offers many difficulties that al times appear insurmountable, but no matter how arduous the work that at every step meets with the resistance of the petty-bourgeoisie, the profiteers and propertied classes, I think we shall have to carry it out.

You experienced, practical people know better than anybody what difficulties have to be overcome in advancing from general assumptions and decrees to daily practice. We have tremendous work ahead of us, because the propertied classes will put up a desperate resistance, but the more difficult the task, the greater the benefits when we have conquered the bourgeoisie and subordinated them to the control of the Soviet authorities. Our tasks are such that it is worth while working and fighting the last decisive battle against the bourgeoisie, for the success of the socialist re-form of the country depends on the fulfilment of those tasks.


The basic tasks presented by the Soviet government in the field of finance must be immediately put into effect, and this meeting we are holding with you will help towards ensuring that our planned reforms do not remain mere declarations.


We must effect sound financial reforms at all costs, and we must remember that any radical reforms will he doomed to failure unless our financial policy is successful.


In the name of the Council of People’s Commissars I draw your attention to the tasks that have come to the fore at a large number of meetings and ask you to work out the details of their practical application. The tasks are the following.

Centralisation Of Finances

The centralisation of finances and the concentration of our forces are essential; unless these principles are applied in practice we shall be unable to carry out the economic reforms that will provide every citizen with enough to eat arid the possibility of satisfying his cultural needs.

The need for centralisation is now reaching the consciousness of the masses; this change is taking place slowly and for this reason it will be more extensive and more profound; an urge towards decentralisation is to be observed, but it is a disease of the transitional period, a disease due to growth, and is quite natural because the centralism of the tsar and the bourgeoisie engendered hatred of and disgust at all centralised authority among the masses.


I regard centralism as the means of providing a subsistence minimum for the working people. I am in favour of the broadest autonomy for local Soviet organisations but at the same time I believe that if our work of consciously transforming the country is to be fruitful, there must be a single, strictly defined financial policy, and that instructions must be carried out from top to bottom.


From you we expect a decree on the centralisation of the counlry’s finances.



Income And Property Taxation

The second task confronting us is the correct organisation of a progressive income and property tax. You know that all socialists are against indirect taxation because the only correct tax from the socialist point of view is the progressive income and property tax. I will not conceal the fact that we shall meet with tremendous difficulty in introducing this tax-the propertied classes will put up a desperate resistance.


The bourgeoisie are today evading taxation by bribery and through their connections; we must close all loopholes. We have many plans in this sphere and have cleared the ground on which to build the foundation, but the actual foundation of that building has not yet been built. The time for this has now come.


Decrees alone will be insufficient to put the income tax into effect; practical methods and experience will be needed.


We assume that we shall have to go over to the monthly collection of the income tax. The section of the population receiving its income from the state treasury is increasing, and measures must be taken to collect the income tax from these people by stopping it out of their wages.


All income and earnings, without exception, must be subject to income tax; the work of the printing press that has so far been practiced may be justified as a temporary measure, but it must give place to a progressive income and property tax that is collected at very frequent intervals.


I should like to ask you to work out this measure in detail and draw up practical and precise plans that can be incorporated in decrees and instructions in the shortest time.


On the question of indemnities, Lenin said:


I am not against indemnities in general; the proletariat could not destroy the bourgeoisie without resorting to indemnities; it was a correct measure in the period of transition, but now that period is past and the taxation of the propertied classes must be replaced by a single, centralised state tax.


There is no doubt that the bourgeoisie will try with every means in their power to evade our laws and indulge in petty frauds. We shall struggle against that and in the end we shall defeat what is left of the bourgeoisie.


Labour Conscription

The third aim of our financial policy is the introduction of labour conscription and the registration of the propertied classes.


The old capitalism, based on free competition, has been completely killed by the war-it has given way to state, monopolised capitalism. Because of the war, the advanced countries of Western Europe, Britain and Germany, have introduced strict accounting for, and control of, all production; they have introduced labour conscription for the propertyless classes but have left many loopholes open for the bourgeoisie. We must apply the experience of these countries, but must introduce labour conscription primarily for the propertied classes who have grown rich oil the war, and not for the poor people who have already made more than enough sacrifices on the altar of war.


The time has come to introduce labour taxation-’ budget books primarily for the bourgeoisie so that it will be possible to see what amount of work each of them devotes to the country. Control must be maintained by the local Soviets. This measure is at present quite superfluous as far as the poor are concerned since they already have to work enough; furthermore, the trade unions will adopt all the necessary measures to increase labour productivity and introduce labour discipline.


The registration of all propertied people and a law compelling rich people to have work, taxation and budget books-this is something we have to settle immediately. It must be worked out practically and concretely and is a measure that will enable us to place the burden of taxation on the rich, which is only just.


 New Currency

The fourth task of the moment is the substitution of new currency for the old. Money, banknotes-everything that is called money today-these titles to social well-being, have a disruptive effect and are dangerous in so far as the bourgeoisie, by hoarding these banknotes, retain economic power.


To reduce this effect we must undertake the strict registration of all banknotes in circulation in order to change all old currency for new. It is beyond all doubt that in putting this measure into effect we shall come up against terrific economic and political difficulties; the preparatory work must be thorough-several thousand millions in the new money must be ready; in every volost, in every block of every large town, we must have savings banks, but these difficulties will not make us hesitate. We shall announce a very short period in which everyone must declare the amount of money lie possesses and obtain new currency for it; if the sum is a small one he will get ruble for ruble; if it is above the established limit he will get only part of it. This is a measure that will undoubtedly meet with counteraction, not only on the part of the bourgeoisie, but also on the part of the kulaks in the countryside who have been growing rich on the war and burying thousands of banknotes in bottles. We shall come face to face with the class enemy. It will be an arduous but rewarding struggle. Among us there is no doubt as to whether we have to take upon ourselves the full burden of this struggle, since it is necessary and inevitable. Tremendous preparatory work will be necessary to effect this measure; we must draw up a type of declaratory leaflet, we must develop propaganda in the localities, fix a time for the exchange of old money for new, etc. We shall, however, do it. It will be the last decisive battle with the, bourgeoisie and will enable us to pay temporary tribute to foreign capital-until the hour of the social revolution strikes in the West-and carry out the necessary reforms in the country.


In conclusion Lenin, speaking in the name of the Council of People’s Commissars, wished the Congress success in its work. (Lenin’s speech was interrupted more than once by enthusiastic applause.)


Endnotes
[1] First All-Russia Congress of Representatives of the Financial Departments of the Regional, Gubernia and Uyezd Soviets was held in Moscow, May 17-21, 1918. It was attended by 230 delegates. The following subjects were on the agenda: reports from the provinces; general financial policy; local finances; banks, treasury and tax inspection; correct use of credits; organisational problems.

Lenin spoke at the evening session on May 18. The propositions in his report on the tasks of Soviet financial policy formed the basis of the resolution moved by the Communist group at the Congress; the resolution was accepted by the majority. of delegates. The Left Socialist-Revolutionaries moved a resolution of their own but after the debate withdrew it and voted for the communist resolution. The Congress gave a commission of six people the task of drawing up together with the Commissariat for Finances as quickly as possible a number of decisions: on a progressive income tax and a general property tax "on the basis of Comrade Lenin’s theses"; on a system of indirect taxes based on state monopolies; on centralisation of taxation and banking; on reform of the currency; on the "uniform centralised organisation of the whole (local and central) apparatus of financial administration".
      


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Letter Addressed to the
Conference of Representatives of Enterprises to be
Nationalized, May 18, 1918











 Letter Addressed To The Conference Of Representatives Of Enterprises To Be Nationalised 



V. I. Lenin
Letter Addressed To The Conference Of Representatives Of Enterprises To Be Nationalised[1]
May 18, 1918

Written: 19 May, 1918
First Published: Izvestia VTsIK  No. 99. May 19, 1918; Published according to the Izvestia text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 388-389 
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive March, 2002


Having heard the statement made by the comrades elected as the workers’ delegation at the conference of representatives of large metalworks, and bearing in mind the resolution adopted by the conference, I am able to say that in my opinion the Council of People’s Commissars will certainly be unanimously in favour of immediate nationalisation if the conference exerts every effort to secure planned and systematic organisation of work and increased productivity.

Hence, it is desirable that the conference: I) Should immediately elect a Provisional Council to prepare for the amalgamation of the works; 2) Should authorise the Central Committee of the Metalworkers’ Union, in agreement with the Supreme Economic Council, to change the form of and to add members to this Provisional Council for the purpose of transforming it into a Management Board of a single union (or amalgamation) of all the nationalised works; 3) Should approve, or by means of a resolution legalise, the factory regulations on the model of the Bryansk regulations,[2] for the purpose of creating strict labour discipline; 4) Should nominate candidates from among specialists, engineers and organisers of large-scale production, for the purpose of participating in the management, or authorise the Supreme Economic Council to seek for and appoint such; 5) It is desirable that workers from the best organised works, or those having most experience in managing large-scale production, shall be sent (by the Provisional Council or by the Central Committee of the Metalworkers’ Union) to assist in organising affairs properly at the less successful works; 6) By keeping the strictest account and control of all materials with reference to the productivity of labour, we must achieve, and we can achieve, enormous economies in raw materials and labour.

I think that if the conference and the bodies it sets up work energetically, it will be possible for the Council of People’s Commissars to pass the nationalisation decree within the next few days.


Endnotes
[1]
Conference of Representatives of the Metal Works Due for Nationalisation was held in Moscow, May 12-18, 1918. It was attended by 6 representatives from each works: 3 workers, 2 engineers and one representative from the Managerial side. The conference cussed the problems involved in nationalising large works like these at Bryansk, Kolomna, Sormovo, Byeleretsk, Zlatoust, Tver and the Baltic Works in Petrograd.

Before the conference took place, the subject had been discussed by various economic and trade union bodies and by the Council of People’s Commissars. During this discussion the proposal (known as the Meshchersky plan) put forward by the capitalists and bourgeois experts to amalgamate the big machine-building works in a capitalist joint-stock company controlled by the state was rejected and it was decided that these enterprises should be nationalised. On May 17, the conference came out in favour of nationalisation. Only the group of bourgeois experts, who had a voice but no vote, defended the Meshchersky plan.

Lenin’s letter which was read out at the morning session on May 18, was greeted with loud applause. As Lenin proposed, the conference elected a temporary committee to organise the amalgamation of the state metal works under the Supreme Economic Council, confirmed the Regulations on the Committee, and also the instructions on the management of nationalised enterprises.

The share companies of the Sormovo and Byeloretsk iron works and the Kelomna machine-building works and others were nationalised on June 18, 1918. They were amalgamated as the Temporary Central Beard of the Sormovo-Kolomna Amalgamated National Machine-Building Works. When the Bryansk, Mytishchi, Tver and other machine-building works were added to this organisation, it became known as the State Amalgamation of Machine Building Works. 
      
[2] The Bryansk Regulations-the Provisiona—Regulations of Internal Management drawn up by the factory trade union committee and the workers’ management of the nationalised Bryansk Rail-rolling, Ironmaking and Machine Works in Bezhitsa (now the Krasny Prefixtern Works). On May 9, 1918 they were published as an order signed by the works trade union committee and the director of the works. The Regulations were drawn up on the basis of the Statute on Labour Discipline, which had been passed by the All-Russia

Central Council of Trade Unions on April 3, 1918. They instituted
a firm system of discipline at the works and helped to strengthen
one-man management in industry.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Draft of Telegram to the
      Petrograd Workers, May 21, 1918











 Draft Of A Telegram To The Petrograd Workers, May 21, 1918 



V. I. Lenin
Draft Of A Telegram To The Petrograd Workers
May 21, 1918[1]

Written: 22 May, 1918
First Published: Petrogradskaya Pravda No. 103,May 22, 1918 Published according to  the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 388-389 
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive March, 2002


The Soviet system can be upheld, the victory of the toilers and exploited over the landowners and capitalists can be upheld and consolidated only by the stern, iron rule of the class-conscious workers. Only such a system can attract and rally around it all the toiling people, all the poor.


Comrades, workers, remember that the revolution is in a critical situation! Remember that you alone can save the revolution, nobody else can.


What we need is tens of thousands of picked, politically advanced workers, loyal to the cause of socialism, incapable of succumbing to bribery and the temptations of pilfering, and capable of creating an iron force against the kulaks, profiteers, racketeers, bribe-takers and disorganisers.


That is what we urgently and insistently need.


Failing that, famine, unemployment and the destruction of the revolution are inevitable.


The strength of the workers and their salvation lie in organisation. Everybody knows that. Today what we need is a special kind of organisation of the workers, the organisation of the iron rule of the workers in order to vanquish the bourgeoisie. Comrades, workers, the cause of the revolution, the salvation of the revolution, is in your hands!

Time is short: an intolerably difficult May will be followed by an even more difficult June and July, and perhaps even part of August.


Endnotes
[1] This was written by Lenin at a meeting of the Council of People's Commissars on May 20, 1918. It formed the basis of the final text of an appeal telegraphed to the Petrograd Party Committee with the following instruction attached: “Publish the following appeal at all mills and factories and take steps for the immediate organisation of enrolment in the food detachments”. On May 22, 1918, this appeal was published over the signature of Lenin and A. D. Tsyurupa in the newspaper Petrogrodskaya Pravda No. 103, and on May 29, in Izvestia VtsIK No. 107 and in other newspapers.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## On the Famine. Letter to
      Workers of Petrograd











On The Famine A Letter To The Workers Of Petrograd



V. I. Lenin
On The Famine
A Letter To The Workers Of Petrograd[1]
22 May, 1918


Written: 22 May, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 101, May 24, 1918; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 391-398 
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive March, 2002



Comrades, the other day your delegate, a Party comrade, a worker in the Putilov Works, called on me. This comrade drew a detailed and extremely harrowing picture of the famine in Petrograd. We all know that the food situation is just as acute in many of the industrial gubernias, that famine is knocking just as cruelly at the door of the workers and the poor generally.

And side by side with this we observe an orgy of profiteering in grain and other food products. The famine is not due to the fact that there is no grain in Russia, but to the fact that the bourgeoisie and the rich generally are putting up a last decisive fight against the rule of the toilers, against the state of the workers, against Soviet power, on this most important and acute of issues, the issue of bread. The bourgeoisie and the rich generally, including the rural rich, the kulaks, are thwarting the grain monopoly; they are disrupting the distribution of grain undertaken by the state for the purpose and in the interests of supplying bread to the whole of the population, and in the first place to the workers, the toilers, the needy. The bourgeoisie are disrupting the fixed prices, they are profiteering in grain, they are making a hundred, two hundred and more rubles’ profit on every pood of grain; they are disrupting the grain monopoly and the proper distribution of grain by resorting to bribery and corruption and by deliberately supporting everything tending to destroy the power of the workers, which is endeavouring to put into effect the prime, basic and root principle of socialism: “He who does not work, neither shall he eat.”
“He who does not work, neither shall he eat”—every toiler understands that. Every worker, every poor and even middle peasant, everybody who has suffered need in his lifetime, everybody who has ever lived by his own labour, is in agreement with this. Nine-tenths of the population of Russia are in agreement with this truth. In this simple, elementary and perfectly obvious truth lies the basis of socialism, the indefeasible source of its strength, the indestructible pledge of its final victory.

But the whole point is that it is one thing to subscribe to this truth, to swear one’s allegiance to it, to give it verbal recognition, but it is quite different to be able to put it into effect. When hundreds of thousands and millions of people are suffering the pangs of hunger (in Petrograd, in the non-agricultural gubernias, and in Moscow) in a country where millions upon millions of poods of grain are being concealed by the rich, the kulaks, and the profiteers-in a country which calls itself a socialist Soviet Republic-there is something to which every conscious worker and peasant must give serious and profound thought.

“He who does not work, neither shall he eat”—how is this to be put into effect? It is as clear as daylight that in order to put it into effect we require, first, a state grain monopoly, i.e., the absolute prohibition of all private trade in grain, the compulsory delivery of all surplus grain to the state at a fixed price, the absolute prohibition of all hoarding and concealment of surplus grain, no matter by whom. Secondly, we require the strictest registration of all grain surpluses, faultless organisation of the transportation of grain from places of abundance to places of shortage, and the building up of reserves for consumption, for processing, and for seed. Thirdly, we require a just and proper distribution of bread, controlled by the workers’ state, the proletarian state, among all the citizens of the state, a distribution which will permit of no privileges and advantages for the rich.

One has only to reflect ever so slightly on these conditions for coping with the famine to see the abysmal stupidity of the contemptible anarchist windbags, who deny the necessity of a state power (and, what is more, a power ruthless in its severity towards the bourgeoisie and ruthlessly firm towards disorganisers of government) for the transition from capitalism to communism and for the ridding of the working people of all forms of oppression and exploitation. It is at this moment, when our revolution has directly, concretely, and practically approached the tasks involved in the realisation of socialism-and therein lies its inestimable merit-it is at this moment, and exactly in connection with this most important of issues, the issue of bread, that the need becomes absolutely clear for an iron revolutionary rule, for a dictatorship of the proletariat, for the organisation of the collection of food products, their transportation, and distribution on a mass, national scale, taking into account the requirements of tens and hundreds of millions of people, calculating the conditions and the results of production for a year and many years ahead (for there are sometimes years of crop failure, sometimes land improvements essential for increasing grain crops require years of work, and so forth).

Romanov and Kerensky left to the working class a country utterly impoverished by their predatory, criminal, and most terrible war, a country picked clean by Russian and foreign imperialists. Bread will suffice for all only if we keep the strictest account of every pood, only if every pound is distributed absolutely evenly. There is also an acute shortage of bread for machines, i.e., fuel; the railways and factories will come to a standstill, unemployment and famine will bring ruin on the whole nation, if we do not bend every effort to establish a strict and ruthless economy of consumption and proper distribution. We are faced by disaster, it is very near. An intolerably difficult May will be followed by a still more difficult June, July and August.

Our state grain monopoly exists in law, but in practice it is being thwarted at every step by the bourgeoisie. The rural rich, the kulak, the parasite who has been robbing the whole neiglibourliood for decades, prefers to enrich himself by profiteering and illicit distilling.. it is so good for his pocket, and he can throw the blame for the famine on Soviet power. That, too, is the line of the political defenders of the kulak-the Constitutional-Democrats, the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, and the Mensheviks-who are overtly and covertly “working” against the grain monopoly and against Soviet power. The party of the spineless, i.e., the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, are displaying their spinelessness here too: they are yielding to the covetous howls and outcries of the bourgeoisie, they are crying out against the grain monopoly, they are “protesting” against the food dictatorship, they are allowing themselves to be intimidated by the bourgeoisie, they are afraid to fight the kulak, and are flapping about hysterically, recommending that the fixed prices be raised, that private trading be permitted, and so forth.

This party of the spineless reflects in politics something akin to what takes place in ordinary life when the kulak incites the poor peasants against the Soviets, bribes them by, say, letting some poor peasant have a pood of grain not for six, but for three rubles, so that the poor peasant, thus corrupted, may himself “make a bit” by profiteering, may “turn a penny” by selling that pood of grain at a profiteering price of one hundred and fifty rubles, and himself become a decrier of the Soviets, which have prohibited private trading in grain.

Anyone who is capable of reflecting, anyone who is willing to reflect ever so little, will see clearly what line this fight has taken.

Either the advanced and class-conscious workers triumph and unite the poor peasant masses around themselves, establish rigorous order, a mercilessly severe rule, a genuine dictatorship of the proletariat-either they compel the kulak to submit, and institute a proper distribution of food and fuel on a national scale; or the bourgeoisie, with the help of the kulaks, and with the indirect support of the spineless and muddle-headed (the anarchists and the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries), will overthrow Soviet power and set up a Russo-German or a Russo-Japanese Kornilov, who will present the people with a sixteen-hour working day, an ounce of bread per week, mass shooting of workers and torture in dungeons, as has been the case in Finland and the Ukraine.
Either—or.

There is no middle course.

The situation of the country is desperate in the extreme.

Anyone who reflects upon political life cannot fail to see that the Constitutional-Democrats,. the Right SocialistRevolutionaries, and the Mensheviks are coming to an understanding about who would be “pleasanter”, a RussoGerman or a Russo-Japanese Kornilov, about who would crush the revolution more effectively and reliably, a crowned or a republican Kornilov.

It is time all class-conscious and advanced workers came to an understanding. It is time they bestirred themselves and realised that every minute’s delay may spell ruin to the country and ruin to the revolution.

Half-measures will be of no avail. Complaining will lead us nowhere. Attempts to secure bread or fuel “in retail fashion”, “each man for himself”, i.e., for “o-ur” factory, “our” workshop, are only increasing the disorganisation and facilitating for the profiteers their selfish, filthy, and blackguardly work.

That is why, comrades, workers of Petrograd, I have taken the liberty of addressing this letter to you. Petrograd is not Russia. The Petrograd workers are only a small part of the workers of Russia. But they are one of the best, the advanced, most class-conscious, most revolutionary, most steadfast detachments of the working class and of all the working people of Russia, and one of the least liable to succumb to empty phrases, to spineless despair and to the intimidation of the bourgeoisie. And it has frequently happened at critical moments in the life of nations that even small advanced detachments of advanced classes have carried the rest with them, have fired the masses with revolutionary enthusiasm, and have accomplished tremendous historical feats.

“There were forty thousand of us at the Putilov Works,” the delegate from the Petrograd workers said to me. “But the majority of them were ’temporary’ workers, not proletarians, an unreliable, flabby lot. Now there are fifteen thousand left, but these are proletarians, tried and steeled in the fight.”

That is the sort of vanguard of the revolution-in Petrograd and throughout the country-that must sound the call, must rise together, must understand that the salvation of the country is in their hands, that from them is demanded a heroism no less than that which they displayed in January and October 1905 and in February paid October 1917, that a great “crusade” must be organised against the grain profiteers, the kulaks, the parasites, the disorganisers and bribetakers, a great “crusade” against the violators of strictest state order in the collection, transportation, and distribution of bread for the people and bread for the machines.

The country and the revolution can be saved only by the mass effort of the advanced workers. We need tens of thousands of advanced and steeled proletarians, class-conscious enough to explain matters to the millions of poor peasants all over the country and to assume the leadership of these millions, resolute enough to ruthlessly cast out of their midst and shoot all who allow themselves to be “tempted” as indeed happens-by the temptations of profiteering and turn from fighters for the cause of the people into robbers; we need proletarians steadfast enough and devoted enough to the revolution to bear in an organised way all the hardships of the crusade and take it to every corner of the country for the establishment of order, for the consolidation of the local organs of Soviet power, and for the exercise of control in the localities over every pood of grain and every pood of fuel.

It is rather more difficult to do this than to display heroism for a few days without leaving one’s accustomed place, without joining in a crusade, confining oneself to an impulsive uprising against the idiot monster Romanov or the fool and braggart Kerensky. Heroism displayed in prolonged and persevering organisational work on a national scale is immensely more difficult than, but at the same time immensely superior to, heroism displayed in an uprising. But the strength of working-class parties, the strength of the working class has always been that it looks danger boldly, squarely and openly in the face, that it does not fear to admit danger and soberly weighs the forces in “our”  camp and in “the other” camp, the camp of the exploiters. The revolution is progressing, developing, and growing. The tasks we face are also growing. The struggle is broadening and deepening. Proper distribution of bread and fuel, their procurement in greater quantities and the very strict account and control of them by the workers on a national scale-that is the real and chief prelude to socialism. That is no longer a “general revolutionary” task but a communist task, a task which requires that the working people and the poor engage capitalism in a decisive battle.

And this battle is worth giving all one’s strength to it; the difficulties are grea’c, but so is the cause of the abolition of oppression and exploitation for which we are fighting.

When the people are starving, when unemployment is becoming ever more terrible, anyone who conceals an extra pood of grain, anyone who deprives the state of a pood of fuel is an out-and-out criminal.

At such a time-and for a genuinely communist society, it is always true-every pood of grain and fuel is veritably sacred, much more so than the sacred things which priests use to confuse the minds of fools, promising them the kingdom of heaven as a reward for slavery on earth. And in order to rid this genuinely sact.ed thing of every remnant of the “sacredness” of the priests, we must take possession of it practically, we must achieve its proper distribution in practice, we must collect the whole of it without exception; every particle of surplus grain must be brought into the state stores, the whole country must be swept clean of concealed or ungarnered grain surpluses; we need the firm hand of the worker to harness every effort to increase the output of fuel and to secure the greatest economy of fuel, the greatest efficiency in its transportation and consumption.

We need a mass “crusade” of the advanced workers to every centre of production of grain and fuel, to every important centre of supply and distribution-a mass “crusade” to increase the intensity of work tenfold, to assist the local organs of Soviet power in the matter of accounting and control, and to eradicate profiteering, graft, and slovenliness by armed force. This is not a new task. History, properly speaking, is not advancing new tasks-all it is doing is to increase the size and scope of old tasks as the scope of the revolution, its difficulties, and the greatness of its worldhistoric aim increase.

One of the greatest and indefeasible accomplishments of the October Revolution-the Soviet revolution-is that the advanced worker, as the leader of the poor, as the leader of the toiling masses of the countryside, as the builder of the state of the toilers, has “gone among the people.”

Petrograd and other proletarian centres have given thousands upon thousands of their best workers to the countryside. The detachments of fighters against the Kaledins and Dutoys, and the food detachments, are nothing new. Only the proximity of disaster, the acuteness of the situation compel us to do ten times more than before.

When the worker became the vanguard leader of the poor he did not thereby become a saint. He led the people forward, but he also became infected with the diseases of petty-bourgeois disintegration. The fewer the detachments of best organised, of most class-conscious, and most disciplined and steadfast workers were, the more frequently did these detachments degenerate, the more frequently did the small-proprietor instincts of the past triumph over the proletarian-communist consciousness of the future.

Having begun the communist revolution, the working class cannot instantly discard the weaknesses and vices inherited from the society of landowners and capitalists, the society of exploiters and parasites, the society based on the filthy selfishness and personal gain of a few and the poverty of the many. But the working class can vanquish the old world—and in the end will certainly and inevitably vanquish it—with its vices and weaknesses, if against the enemy are brought ever greater detachments of workers, ever more enlightened by experience and tempered by the hardships of the struggle.

Such and only such is the state of affairs in Russia today. Single-handed and disunited, we shall not be able to cope with famine and unemployment. We need a mass “crusade” of advanced workers to every corner of this vast country. We need ten times more iron detachments of the proletariat, class-conscious and boundlessly devoted to communism. Then we shall triumph over famine and unemployment. Then we shall make the revolution the real prelude to socialism, and then, too, we shall be in a position to conduct a victorious war of defense against the imperialist vultures.


May 22, 1918 
N. Lenin

Endnotes
[1] On the Famine (A Letter to the Petrograd Workers) was written by Lenin after a conversation with A. V. Ivanov, chairman of the Putilov (now Kirov) Works purchasing commission. Lenin paid close attention to what the Putilov workers’ representative had to say, then asked him to tell the Petrograd workers that the Government was “taking resolute measures to improve the country’s food situation” and handed him a copy of a decree to pass on to the Putilov workers. The decree gave the People’s Commissar for Food emergency powers to fight the famine. In a letter to A. D. Tsyurupa, Lenin wrote of his conversation with Ivanov: “I told him my opinion: if the best Petrograd workers do not create a picked, reliable workers’ army” for a campaign against the rural bourgeoisie, “famine and the destruction of the revolution are inevitable” (Lenin Miscellany XVIII, p. 163). Lenin told the People’s Commissariat for Food to give every assistance to the Petrograd workers’ detachments.
 
At the beginning of June 1918, the Petrograd workers sent off
their first food detachment of 400 men.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech at the Second
      All-Russia Congress of Commissars for Labour, May 22,
      1918











Speech At The Second All-Russia Congress Of Commissars For Labour



V. I. Lenin
Speech At The 
Second All-Russia Congress Of Commissars For Labour[1] May 22, 1918


Delivered: 23 May, 1918

First Published: Izvestia VtsIK No. 102, May 23. 1918 and 
Pravda No. 101, May 24, 1918 Published according to the Pravda text, collated 
with the Izvestia text 

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 399-403 

Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish

Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala

Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive March, 2002



Comrades, permit me first of all to greet the Congress of Commissars for Labour in the name of the Council of People’s Commissars. (Enthusiastic applause.)


At yesterday’s session of the Council of People’s Commissars, Comrade Shlyapnikov reported that your Congress had subscribed to the resolution of the trade unions on labour discipline and production rates. Comrades, I believe you have taken an important step in passing this resolution, which not only deals with the productivity of labour and production conditions, but is also a very important step in principle from the standpoint of the present situation in general. Your contact with the broad masses of the workers is constant and a matter of business and not merely a casual contact, and you know that our revolution is experiencing one of the most important and critical moments of its development.


You are fully aware that our enemies, the Western imperialists, are lying in wait for us, and that there may perhaps come a time when they will turn their hordes loose on us. That external enemy is now being joined by another dangerous enemy-the internal enemy-the disruption, chaos and disorganisation that are being intensified by the bourgeoisie in general and by the petty bourgeoisie in particular, and by various yes-men and hangers-on of the bourgeoisie. You know, comrades, that after the most brutal war, in which we were involved by the tsarist regime and by the collaborators headed by Kerensky, we were left with a heritage of disruption and extreme economic ruin. We now have to face the most critical moment, when hunger and unemployment are knocking at the door of an increasing number of workers, when hundreds and thousands of people are suffering the pangs of hunger, when the situation is being aggravated by there being no bread when there could be bread, when we know that the proper distribution of bread depends on proper transport of grain. The shortage of fuel since we have been cut off from the rich fuel regions, the catastrophic condition of the railways that may possibly be threatened with a stoppage of trafficsuch are the conditions that breed difficulties for the revolution and fill with joy the hearts of the Kornilovites of all kinds and colours. They are now daily, hourly, perhaps, discussing how to take advantage of the difficulties of the Soviet Republic and proletarian power, how to again place a Kornilov on the throne. They are now arguing about what nationality the new Kornilov is to be-it must be someone who suits the bourgeoisie, whether he wears a crown or is a republican Kornilov. The workers now know what the matter is, and after what the Russian revolution has experienced since Kerensky, they are not a bit surprised. But the strength of the working-class organisation, of the working-class revolution, lies in our not closing our eyes to the truth, in our realising the exact state of affairs.


We have said that the war, such is its scale and incredible brutality, threatens the complete destruction of European civilisation. The only possible salvation is for the workers to take over power and establish strict law and order. Since 1905 the proletariat of Russia has for a certain time moved far ahead of the other international armies of the proletariat because of the course taken by the Russian revolution and a special historical situation. We have now reached the stage when the revolution is maturing in all West-European countries, when it is becoming clear that the situation of the armies of German workers is hopeless. We know that over there in the West, the working people are not confronted with the rotten regime of Romanov and empty boasters but by a bourgeoisie that is fully organised and can rely on all the achievements of modern civilisation and engineering. That is why it was so easy for us to start the revolution and more difficult to continue it, and why over there in the West it will be more difficult to start and easier to continue. Our difficulty is that everything has to be done by the efforts of the proletariat of Russia alone, and that we have to maintain our position until our ally, the international proletariat of all countries, grows strong enough. Every day impresses it on us that there is no other way out. Our position is made more difficult because, without reinforcements, we are faced with disorganisation on the railways, with transport and food disruptions. There the question must be presented in a way that is clear to everyone.


I hope that the Congress of Commissars for Labour, which is in more immediate contact with the workers than anybody else-that this Congress will not only mark a stage in the direct improvement of those labour arrangements which we must make the basis of socialism, but that it will also serve to clear the minds of the workers in respect of the situation we are at present experiencing. The working class is confronted with a difficult but honourable task on which the fate of socialism in Russia depends, and probably in other countries, too. That is why a resolution on labour discipline is so important.


Now that power is firmly in the hands of the workers, everything depends on proletarian discipline and proletarian organisation. It is a question of discipline and the dictatorship of the proletariat, a question of iron rule. The type of government that meets with the warmest sympathy and very determined support of the poor must be as strong as iron, because incredible calamities are advancing upon us. A large section of the workers are living under the impression of the old and hope that we shall somehow manage to get out of the present situation.


Every day, however, these illusions are being shattered, and it is becoming more and more obvious that the world war threatens whole countries with famine and decay if the working class does not overcome the economic ruin by means of its organisational ability. Side by side with the politically conscious section of the working class whose entire activity is devoted to making the new discipline of comradeship the basis of everything, we see the many millions of petty property-owners, the petty-bourgeois element, who look at everything from the standpoint of their own narrow interests. We cannot fight against the famine an disaster that are approaching, other than by establishing the iron discipline of the politically conscious workers-without it we can do nothing. Because of the huge extent of Russia we are living under conditions in which there is a lot of bread at one end of the country and none at the other. It is no use consoling ourselves with the thought that the war of defence that may be forced on us will not take place. It must not be thought that the towns and the huge industrial centres can be fed if food is not delivered regularly. Every pood of grain must be recorded so that not a single pood is wasted. We know, however, that no such record is really made, except on paper. In real life the petty profiteers are only corrupting the village poor by impressing on them that private trading can make up for their shortages. We cannot get out of the crisis under those conditions. In Russia there can be enough bread for the people and enough bread, i.e., fuel, for industry, only if everything we have is strictly divided among all citizens so that nobody can take an extra pound of bread and not a single pound of fuel can remain unused. That is the only way to save the country from famine. That is a lesson in communist distribution everything accounted for, so that there is enough bread for the people and enough fuel for industry—and it is not a lesson taken from a book, it is one we have arrived at through bitter experience.


The broad masses of the workers may not immediately realise that we are face to face with disaster. What is needed is a workers’ crusade against disorganisation and against the concealment of grain. And a crusade is needed to establish throughout the country the labour discipline you have passed a resolution on and have been talking about within the limits of the factories; the masses must be made to understand that there is no other way out. In the history of our revolution, the strength of the politically conscious workers has always been their ability to look the most bitter and dangerous reality straight in the face, to harbour no illusions but calculate their forces exactly. We can count on the politically conscious workers alone; the remaining mass, the bourgeoisie and the petty proprietors, are against us; they do not believe in the new order and take advantage of every opportunity to worsen the plight of the people. What we see in the Ukraine and in Finland may serve as an example: the incredible atrocities and the seas of blood in which the bourgeoisie and its supporters, from the Constitutional-Democrats to the Socialist-Revolutionaries, are drowning the towns they conquer with the aid of their allies. All this goes to show what awaits the proletariat in the future if it does not fulfil its historic task. We know how small is the section of advanced and politically conscious workers in Russia. We also know the plight of the people and know that the broad masses are certain to realise that we cannot get out of the situation by half-measures, that there will have to be a proletarian revolution. We live at a time when countries are being ruined and millions of people are doomed to perish or subjected to military slavery. Hence, the revolution that history has forced on us, not by the evil will of individuals, but because the entire capitalist system is breaking up, because its foundations are cracking.


Comrades, Commissars for Labour, make use of every meeting you hold at any factory, of your talks with delegations of workers, make use of every opportunity to explain the situation, so that the workers know that we are faced with either destruction or self-discipline, organisation and the possibility to defend ourselves. Let them know that we are faced with a return of the Kornilovs—Russian, German or Japanese Kornilovs—who will bring a ration of an ounce of bread a week if the politically conscious workers, at the head of all the poor, do not organise a crusade against the chaos and disorganisation which the petty bourgeoisie are everywhere intensifying, and which we must put down. It is a question of every politically conscious worker feeling that he is not only the master in his own factory but that he is also a representative of the country, of his feeling his responsibility. The politically conscious worker must know that he is a representative of hiselass. He must win if he takes the lead in the movement against the bourgeoisie and the profiteers. The politically conscious worker will understand what the main task of the socialist is, and then we shall win. Then we shall find the forces and shall be able to fight. (Loud, prolonged applause.) 


Endnotes

[1] The Second All-Russia Congress of Commissars for Labour took place in Moscow, May 18-25, 1918. It was attended by representatives of the regional, gubernia, and uyezd commissariats for labour, labour exchanges, hospital and insurance funds and associations, unemployment funds, the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions and other organisations—about 600 people in all. The agenda included the following items: report of the People’s Commissariat for Labour; the situation in industry; labour discipline and the raising of labour productivity; standards of payment and standards of productivity; the economic position of the working class. The Congress worked in five committees (commissars for labour, labour exchanges, protection of labour, insurance, and statistics).The Congress approved the Statute of the A.C.C.T.U. of April 3, 1918, on Labour Discipline and the Statute on Rate Fixing; on the basis of these statutes, resolutions were passed on labour discipline, wages policy, the economic position of the working class and other matters. The Congress also passed a law on protection of labour and a decision on the setting up in the provinces of bureaus for fixing wages and work quotas.



Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive



 


 


 




==========

## The Socialist Academy of
      Social Sciences











The Socialist Academy Of Social Sciences Draft Decision Of The Council Of People’s Commissars



V. I. Lenin
The Socialist Academy Of Social Sciences
Draft Decision Of The Council Of People’s Commissars[1]


Written: 25 May, 1918

First Published: First published in 1933 In Lenin Miscellany XXI 
Published according to the manuscrlpt

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, page 404 

Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish

Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala

Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive March, 2002



The Council of people’s Commissars, fully approving and welcoming the idea underlying the draft for the foundation of the Socialist Academy, instructs the Commissariat for Education to remake this draft on the following bases:


1)—a publishing society of a Marxist trend to be made the cornerstone;


2)—Marxist forces abroad to be enlisted in especially large numbers;


3)—a series of social investigations to be made one of the primary tasks;


4)—immediate measures to be taken to ascertain, assemble and utilise Russian personnel available for lecturing.



Endnotes

[1] The question of
      founding a Socialist Academy of Social Sciences was discussed by
      the Council of People’s Commissars on May 25, 1918. The
      draft statute for the Academy submitted by the People’s
      Commissariat for Education did not satisfy Lenin and he drew up
      the proposals published here; aEparently they were written
      during the meeting. They were su sequently approved by the
      C.P.C.

    
      On June 7, the Government considered the Statute of the
      Social-ist Academy which had been revised on the basis of
      Lenin’s proposals. The Decree (Statute) of the All-Russia
      C.E.C. on the Socialist Academy of Social Sciences was published
      on July 12, 1918, in the newspaper Izvestia VTsNC No. 145 (see
      Decrees of the Soviet Gouernment, Russ. ed., Vol. 2, 1959,
      pp. 468-79). The Academy was officially opened on October 1,
      1918. 
    


Collected Works Volume 27

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive


       
    

       
    

       
    







==========

## Theses on the Current
      Situation











Theses On The Current Situation



V. I. Lenin
Theses On The Current Situation[1]

Written: 26 May, 1918
First Published: 1933 In Lenin Miscellany XVII;
    Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 406-407
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

1) The Commissariat for War to be converted into a Com-missariat for War and
      Food-i.e., 9/10 of the work of the Commissariat for War to be concentrated on reorganising
      the army for the war for grain and on waging this war-for three months: June-August.r
2) Martial law to be declared throughout the country during this period.
3) The army to be mobilised, selecting its sound elements, and 19-year-olds to be called
      up, at any rate in certain regions, for systematic military operations to fight for, win,
      collect and transport grain and fuel.
4) Shooting for indiscipline to be introduced.
5) The success of detachments to be measured by success in obtaining grain and by
      practical results in collecting grain surpluses.
6) The tasks of the military campaign should be formulated as fdllows:
a) the collection of stocks of grain for feeding the popu-lation;
b) ditto-for three months' food reserve for war;
c) safeguarding stocks of coal, collecting them and increas-ing output.
7) The detachments of the active army (active against kulaks, etc.) to consist of from
      one-third to one-half (in each detachment) of workers and poor peasants of the
      famine-stricken gubernias.
8) Each detachment to be issued two kinds of instruction:
a) ideological-political, on the importance of victory over famine and the kulaks, on the
      dictatorship of the proletar-iat as the working people's power;
b) military-organisational, on the internal organisation of the detachments, on
      discipline, on control and written documents of control for each operation, etc.
9) A collective liability of the whole detachment to be Introduced, for example the threat
      of shooting every tenth man-for each case of plunder.
10) All means of transport belonging to rich persons in the towns to be mobilised
      for work In transporting grain; well-to-do classes to be mobilised to act as clerks and
      stewards.
11) If signs of demoralisation of the detachments become threateningly frequent, the
      "sick" detachments to be sent back after a month, i.e., exchanged, to the place from which
      they came, for report and "treatment".
12) The following to be adopted both in the Council of People's Commissars and In the
      Central Executive Commit-tee:
(a) declaration that the country is in a state of 
      grave danger as regards food;
(b) martial law;
(c) mobilisation of the army, together with its reorganisation as mentioned above, for the
      campaign for grain;
(d) in each uyezd and volost with grain surpluses, immediate compilation of a
      list of rich owners of land (kulaks), grain traders, etc., making them personally
      responsible for the collection of all grain surpluses;
(e) the appointment to each military detachment-at the rate of at least one out of
      approximately ten men-of er-sons with a party recommendation of the R.C.P., the Eeft
      Socialist-Revolutionaries or the trade unions.
13) In implementing the grain monopoly the most vig-orous measures for assistance to the
      rural poor to be made obligatory without shrinking from any financial sacrifices, and
      measures for free distribution among them of part of the grain surpluses collected from the
      kulaks, side by side with ruthless suppression of kulaks who withhold grain surpluses.

Endnotes
[1]
Theses on the Current Situation were written when the
      country was undergoing a very serious food shortage. The Council
      of People's Commissars was guided by these theses on May 28,
      1918, when it passed a decision on food policy (see Lenin
      Miscellany XVIII, p. 95) instructing the People’s
      Commissariat for Food to draw up by the following day an appeal
      to the workers and peasants on the organisation of armed
      detachments to be used in the campaign for grain. The appeal,
      which was drawn up on the basis of Lenin’s theses, was
      approved by the Government on May 29 and published in the
      newspapers on May 31 on behalf of the Council of People’s
      Commissars.
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Speech at the First Congress
      of Economic Councils, May 26, 1918











Speech At The First Congress Of Economic Councils



V. I. Lenin
Speech At The First
Congress Of Economic Councils[1]
May 26, 1918


Delivered: May 26, 1918
First Published: Newspaper report published In Izvestia 
VTsIK No. 106, May 28,  Published according to the text of the book: Transactions of 
the First All-Russia Congress of the Economic Councils. Verbatim Report, Moscow, 1918
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 408-415
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


Comrades, permit me first of all to greet the Congress of Economic Councils in the name of the Council of People’s Commissars. (Applause.)

Comrades, the Supreme, Economic Council now has a difficult, but a most rewarding task. There is not the slightest doubt that the further the gains of the October Revolution go, the more profound the upheaval it started becomes, the more firmly the socialist revolution’s gains become established and the socialist system becomes consolidated, the greater and higher will become the role of the Economic Councils, which alone of all the state institutions are to endure. And their position will become all the more durable the closer we approach the establishment of the socialist system and the less need there will be for a purely administrative apparatus, for an apparatus which is solely engaged in administration. After the resistance of the exploiters has been finally broken, after the working people have learned to organise socialist production, this apparatus of administration in the proper, strict, narrow sense of the word, this apparatus of the old state, is doomed to die; while the apparatus of the type of the Supreme Economic Council is destined to grow, to develop and become strong, performing all the main activities of organised society.



That is why, comrades, when I look at the experience of our Supreme Economic Council and of the local councils, with the activities of which it is closely and inseparably connected, I think that, in spite of much that is unfinished, incomplete and unorganised, we have not even the slightest grounds for pessimistic conclusions. For the task which the Supreme Economic Council sets itself, and the task which all the regional and localcouncils set themselves, is so enormous, so all embracing, that there is absolutely nothing that gives rise to alarm in what we all observe. Very often—of course, from our point of view, perhaps too often—the proverb “measure thrice and cut once” has not been applied. Unfortunately, things are not so simple in regard to the organisation of the economy on socialist lines as they are expressed in that proverb.



With the transition of all power—this time not only political and not even mainly political, but economic power, that is, power that affects the deepest foundations of everyday human existence—to a new class, and, moreover, to a class which for the first time in the history of humanity is the leader of the overwhelming majority of the population, of the whole mass of the working and exploited people—our tasks become more complicated.



It goes without saying that in view of the supreme importance and the supreme difficulty of the organisational tasks that confront us, when we must organise the deepest foundations of the existence of hundreds of millions of people on entirely new lines, it is impossible to arrange matters as simply as in the proverb “measure thrice and cut once”. We, indeed, are not in a position to measure a thing innumerable times and then cut out and fix what has been finally measured and fitted. We must build our economic edifice as we go along, trying out various institutions, watching their work, testing them by the collective common experience of the working people, and, above all, by the results of their work. We must do this as we go along, and, moreover, in a situation of desperate struggle and frenzied resistance by the exploiters, whose frenzy grows the nearer we come to the time when we can pull out the last bad teeth of capitalist exploitation. It is understandable that if even within a brief period we have to alter the types, the regulations and the bodies of administration in various branches of the national economy several times, there are not the slightest grounds for pessimism in these conditions, although, of course, this gives considerable grounds for malicious outbursts on the part of the bourgeoisie and the exploiters, whose best feelings are hurt. Of course, those who take too close and too direct a part in this work, say, the Chief Water Board, do not always find it pleasant to alter the regulations, the norms and the laws of administration three times; the pleasure obtained from work of this kind cannot be great. But if we abstract ourselves somewhat from the direct unpleasantness of extremely frequent alteration of decrees, and if we look a little deeper and further into the enormous world historic task that the Russian proletariat has to carry out with the aid of its own still inadequate forces, it will become immediately understandable that even far more numerous alterations and testing in practice of various systems of administration and various forms of discipline are inevitable; that in such a gigantic task, we could never claim, and no sensible socialist who has ever written on the prospects of the future ever even thought, that we could immediately establish and compose the forms of organisation of the new society, according to some predetermined instruction and at one stroke.



All that we knew, all that the best experts on capitalist society, the greatest minds who foresaw its development, exactly indicated to us was that transformation was historically inevitable and must proceed along a certain main line, that private ownership of the means of production was doomed by history, that it would burst, that the exploiters would inevitably be expropriated. This was established with scientific precision, and we knew this when we grasped the banner of socialism, when we declared ourselves socialists, when we founded socialist parties, when we transformed society. We knew this when we took power for the purpose of proceeding with socialist reorganisation; but we could not know the forms of transformation, or the rate of development of the concrete reorganisation. Collective experience, the experience of millions can alone give us decisive guidance in this respect, precisely because, for our task, for the task of building socialism, the experience of the hundreds and hundreds of thousands of those upper sections which have made history up to now in feudal society and in capitalist society is insufficient. We cannot proceed in this way precisely because we rely on joint experience, on the experience of millions of working people.



We know, therefore, that organisation, which is the main and fundamental task of the Soviets, will inevitably entail a vast number of experiments, a vast number of steps, a vast number of alterations, a vast number of difficulties, particularly in regard to the question of how to fit every person into his proper place, because we have no experience of this; here we have to devise every step ourselves, and the more serious the mistakes we make on this path, the more the certainty will grow that with every increase in the membership of the trade unions, with every additional thousand, with every additional hundred thousand that come over from the camp of working people, of exploited, who have hitherto lived according to tradition and habit, into the camp of the builders of Soviet organisations, the number of people who should prove suitable and organise the work on proper lines is increasing.



Take one of the secondary tasks that the Economic Council—the Supreme Economic Council—comes up against with particular frequency, the task of utilising bourgeois experts. We all know, at least those who take their stand on the basis of science and socialism, that this task can be fulfilled only when that this task can be fulfilled only to the extent that international capitalism has developed the material and technical prerequisites of labour, organised on an enormous scale and based on science, and hence on the training of an enormous number of scientifically educated specialists. We know that without this socialism is impossible. If we reread the works of those socialists who have observed the development of capitalism during the last half-century, and who have again and again come to the conclusion that socialism is inevitable, we shall find that all of them without exception have pointed out that socialism alone will liberate science from its bourgeois fetters, from its enslavement to capital, from its slavery to the interests of dirty capitalist greed. Socialism alone will make possible the wide expansion of social production and distribution on scientific lines and their actual subordination to the aim of easing the lives of the working people and of improving their welfare as much as possible. Socialism alone can achieve this. And we know that it must achieve this, and in the understanding of this truth lies the whole complexity and the whole strength of Marxism.



We must achieve this while relying on elements which are opposed to it, because the bigger capital becomes the more the bourgeoisie suppresses the workers. Now that power is in the hands of the proletariat and the poor peasants and the government is setting itself tasks with the support of the people, we have to achieve these socialist changes with the help of bourgeois experts who have been trained in bourgeois society, who know no other conditions, who cannot conceive of any other social system. Hence, even in cases when these experts are absolutely sincere and loyal to their work they are filled with thousands of bourgeois prejudices, they are connected by thousands of ties, imperceptible to themselves, with bourgeois society, which is dying and decaying and is therefore putting up furious resistance.



We cannot conceal these difficulties of endeavour and achievement from ourselves. Of all the socialists who have written about this, I cannot recall the work of a single socialist or the opinion of a single prominent socialist on future socialist society, which pointed to this concrete, practical difficulty that would confront the working class when it took power, when it set itself the task of turning the sum total of the very rich, historically inevitable and necessary for us store of culture and knowledge and technique accumulated by capitalism from an instrument of capitalism into an instrument of socialism. It is easy to do this in a general formula, in abstract reasoning, but in the struggle against capitalism, which does not die at once but puts up increasingly furious resistance the closer death approaches, this task is one that calls for tremendous effort. If experiments take place in this field, if we make repeated corrections of partial mistakes, this is inevitable because we cannot, in this or that sphere of the national economy, immediately turn specialists from servants of capitalism into servants of the working people, into their advisers. If we cannot do this at once it should not give rise to the slightest pessimism, because the task which we set ourselves is a task of world-historic difficulty and significance. We do not shut our eyes to the fact that in a single country, even if it were a much less backward country than Russia, even if we were living in better conditions than those prevailing after four years of unprecedented, painful, severe and ruinous war, we could not carry out the socialist revolution completely, solely by our own efforts. He who turns away from the socialist revolution now taking place in Russia and points to the obvious disproportion of forces is like the conservative “man in a muffler” who cannot see further than his nose, who forgets that not a single historical change of any importance takes place without there being several instances of a disproportion of forces. Forces grow in the process of the struggle, as the revolution grows. When a country has taken the path of profound change, it is to the credit of that country and the party of the working class which achieved victory in that country, that they should take up in a practical manner the tasks that were formerly raised abstractly, theoretically. This experience will never be forgotten. The experience which the workers now united in trade unions and local organisations are acquiring in the practical work of organising the whole of production on a nationial scale cannot betaken away,no matter how difficult the vicissitudes the Russian revolution and the international socialist revolution may pass through. It has gone down in history as socialism’s gain, and on it the future world revolution will erect its socialist edifice.



Permit me to mention another problem, perhaps the most difficult problem, for which the Supreme Economic Council has to find a practical solution. This is the problem of labour discipline. Strictly speaking, in mentioning this problem, we ought to admit and emphasise with satisfaction that it was precisely the trade unions, their largest organisations, namely, the Central Committee of the Metalworkers’ Union and the All-Russia Trade Union Council, the supreme trade union organisations uniting millions of working people, that were the first to set to work independently to solve this problem and this problem is of world-historic importance. In order to understand it we must abstract ourselves from those partial, minor failures, from the incredible difficulties which, if taken separately, seem to be insurmountable. We must rise to a higher level and survey the historical change of systems of social economy. Only from this angle will it be possible to appreciate the immensity of the task which we have undertaken. Only then will it be possible to appreciate the enormous significance of the fact that on this occasion, the most advanced representatives of society, the working and exploited people are, on their own initiative, taking on them selves the task which hitherto, in feudal Russia, up to 1861, was solved by a handful of landed proprietors, who regarded it as their own affair. At that time it was their affair to bring about state integration and discipline.



We know how the feudal landowners created this discipline. It was oppression, humiliation and the incredible torments of penal servitude for the majority of the people. Recall the whole of this transition from serfdom to the bourgeois economy. From all that you have witnessed—although the majority of you could not have witnessed it—and from all that you have learned from the older generations, you know how easy, historically, seemed the transition to the new bourgeois economy after 1861, the transition from the old feudal discipline of the stick, from the discipline of the most senseless, arrogant and brutal humiliation and personal violence, to bourgeois discipline, to the discipline of starvation, to so-called free hire, which in fact was the discipline of capitalist slavery. This was because mankind passed from one exploiter to another; because one minority of plunderers and exploiters of the people’s labour gave way to another minority’, who were also plunderers and exploiters of the people’s labour; because the feudal landowners gave way to the capitalists, one minority gave way to another minority, while the toiling and exploited classes remained oppressed. And even this change from one exploiter’s discipline to another exploiter’s discipline took years, if not decades, of effort; it extended ever a transition period of years, if not decades. During this period the old feudal landowners quite sincerely believed that everything was going to rack and ruin, that it was impossible to manage the country without serfdom; while the new, capitalist boss encountered practical difficulties at every step and gave up his enterprise as a bad job. The material evidence, one of the substantial proofs of the difficulty of this transition was that Russia at that time imported machinery from abroad, in order to have the best machinery to use, and it turned out that no one was available to handle this machinery, and there were no managers. And all over Russia one could see excellent machinery lying around unused, so difficult was the transition from the old feudal discipline to the new, bourgeois, capitalist discipline.



And so, comrades, if you look at the matter from this angle, you will not allow yourselves to be misled by those people, by those classes, by those bourgeoisie and their hangers-on whose sole task is to sow panic, to sow despondency, to cause complete despondency concerning the whole of our work, to make it appear to be hopeless, who point to every single case of indiscipline and corruption, and for that reason give up the revolution as a bad job, as if there has ever been in the world, in history, a single really great revolution in which there was no corruption, no loss of discipline, no painful experimental steps, when the people were creating a new discipline. We must not forget that this is the first time that this preliminary stage in history has been reached, when a new discipline, labour discipline, the discipline of comradely contact, Soviet discipline, is being created in fact by millions of working and exploited people. We do not claim, nor do we expect, quick successes in this field. We know that this task will take an entire historical epoch. We have begun this historical epoch, an epoch in which we are breaking up the discipline of capitalist society in a country which is still bourgeois, and we are proud that all politically conscious workers, absolutely all the toiling peasants are everywhere helping this destruction; an epoch in which the people voluntarily, on their own initiative, are becoming aware that they must not on instructions from above, but on the instructions of their own living experience change this discipline based on the exploitation and slavery of the working people into the new discipline of united labour, the discipline of the united, organised workers and working peasants of the whole of Russia, of a country with a population of tens and hundreds of millions. This is a task of enormous difficulty, but it is also a thankful one, because only when we solve it in practice shall we have driven the last nail into the coffin of capitalist society which we are burying. (Applause.)

    

Endnotes
[1]
The First All-Russia Congress of Economic Councils was held May 26 to June 4, 1918, in Moscow; it was attended by 252 delegates representing 5 regional, 30 gubernia and a considerable number of nyezd economic councils, and also departments of the Supreme Economic Council, trade union organisations and factory trade union committees.
    
Lenin took a direct part in preparing the Congress. At a meeting of the Presidium of the Supreme Economic Council, which was held in the Kremlin onMay 23, and attended by Lenin, matters connected with the Congress were examined in detail; the agenda was decided upon and the theses of a number of reports were approved with alterations and ainendments. During the discussion of the theses of G. D. Veinberg’s report on the management of the nationalised enterprises Lenin moved that the system of managing nationalised enterprises should be cut down to include only factory management beards on the spot and a central managing board-the production department of the Supreme Economic Council-all intermediate boards being eliminated. Other items included in the Congress agenda were: the economic consequences of the Brest Treaty; Russia’s general economic position and economic policy; the work of the Supreme Economic Council; Russia’s financial position; the state budget; foreign trade; the Committee of State Construction; reports from the provinces. Some of the questions were examined by the committees on the organisation of production, labour, trade and agriculture.
    
At the opening session of the Congress Lenin made a speech outlining the immediate tasks of economic construction and the organisation of management of the nationalised economy. Lenin’s plan for the organisation of socialist production and management on the principle of democratic centralism was opposed at the Congress by the “Left Communists”, the anarcho-syndicalists, the Mensheviks and the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. The Statute drawn up under Lenin’s direction was passed by the Congress. The Congress also took important decisions on other questions, following the principles set out by Lenin. These were on the need for carrying out further socialist nationalisation, on trade between town and country, and on the reorganisation of the Supreme Eco- nomic Council. The Congress worked out measures for improving labour discipline and raising the productivity of labour and declared the production of agricultural machines and implements to be a matter of primary state importance.
      


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Appeal to Railway, Water
      Transport and Metal Workers











Appeal To Railway, Water Transport And Metal Workers



V. I. Lenin
Appeal To Railway, Water Transport And Metal Workers[1]


Delivered: May 29, 1918
First Published: 
First published in 1931 in Lenin Miscellany XVIII Published according to the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 416-417
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


      Having heard the representatives of the railway and water
      transport organisations, and the representatives of workers of
      metallurgical factories and the trade union of railway workers,

    
      and having heard the proposal of these comrades to permit their
      organisations, the Central Food Bureau of the Commissariat for
      Ways of Communication, the Food Commission of the Chief Water
      Board of the Commissariat for Ways of Communication, etc., to
      carry out independent procurements,

    
      the Council of
      People’s Commissars insistently calls the at-tention of
      all organised, class-conscious and thinking workers and working
      peasants to the obvious unreasonableness of such proposals. It
      is clear to everyone that permitting the Central Food Bureau of
      the Commissariat for Ways of Com-munication, and food
      commissions of the Chief Water Board, of the Chief Metal Board
      and of the Chief Rubber Board, etc., to carry out separate
      independent procure-ments would completely ruin the whole food
      undertaking, would destroy every and any state organisation of
      workers and poor peasants and clear the way for the victory of
      the kulaks and Skoropadskys.

    
      All workers and starving peasants must understand that only by
      joint efforts, by organising hundreds and thousands of the best
      workers in common food detachments, only by throwing the united,
      combined, common, mass forces of the workers into the struggle
      for order, for bread, is it pos-sible to overcome famine and
      disorder, and defeat the profiteers and kulaks.

    
      It is foolish to believe those who request independent
      procni.cnien,t.,3 for the Central Food Bureau of the
      Commissariat for Ways of Communication, for the Food Commission
      of the Chief Water Board, heedless of the fact that in each
      uyezd of the non-agricultural gubernias there are tens and
      hundreds of thousands of starving peasants who for months have
      received no grain at all.

    
      Does it not spell ruin if the peasants in each uyezd are allowed
      separate procurements? Is it really fair to give the Central
      Food Bureau of the Commissariat for Ways of Cow-munication, as
      it wants, 60 millions for independent pro-curements, without
      giving each famine-stricken uyezd ten millions, without giving
      it independent procurements?

    
      Each railway workshop, every thousand office workers or water
      transport workers or factory workers should put forward a
      detachment of the best and most reliable persons in order by
      their joint, combined efforts to promote the general
      workers’ and peasants’ cause, that of salvation from
      famine, of victory over famine.

    
      Separate, independent procurements spell the ruin of the whole
      food undertaking, the ruin of the revolution, collapse and
      disintegration.

    
      Enlisting the best and most devoted workers from each thousand
      workers and office employees into detachments to form a general
      working-class fighting force for inculcating order, for aid in
      supervising, for collecting all grain sur-pluses, for complete
      victory over profiteers-in that alone is salvation.

    

Endnotes
[1]
      This document was written by Lenin in connection with requests
      from various organisations to be allowed to procure food
      independeiitly. On May 29, 1918, the appeal to workers and
      peasants on the organisation of armed grain detachments, based
      on Lenin’s Theses on the Current
      Situation, was discussed at a meeting of the Council of
      People’s Commissars in the presence of representatives of
      these organisations. During the discussion, Lenin wrote the
      People’s Commissar for Food A. D. Tsyurupa the following
      note: “Is there going to he a struggle over
      ’independent procuring’? Perhaps not? Shall we
      publish the attached in the newspapers, and in whose
      name?” (Lenin Miscellany XVIII, p. 106). To this
      Tsyurupa replied: “There will be a struggle. The attached
      should be published in the name of the Council of People’s
      Commissars.” “The attached” was the draft
      appeal published liere. It was passed with slight amendments on
      June 1 as a decision of the Council of People’s Commissars
      and published on June 4 in the newspaper Izvestia VTsIK No . 112
      under the heading “Decision of the Council of
      People’s Commissars on theQuestion of Independent
      Procuring”.
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Joint Session of the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet
      of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies
      and the Trade Unions, June 4, 1918











Joint Session of the All-Russian  Entral Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet of Workers', Peasants' and Red Army Deputies and the Trade Unions



V. I. Lenin
Joint Session of the All-Russian  Entral Executive Committee,
      the Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red
      Army Deputies and the Trade 
      Unions[1]
June 4, 1918

Written: 4 June, 1918
First Published: Newspaper reports
      published on June 5, 1918 in Pravda No. 111 and
      Izvestia VTsIK No. 113; Published according to the text
      of the book: Minutes of the Sessions of the All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee, 4th Convocation. Verbatim
      Report, Moscow, 1920, collated with
      the shorthand report and the text of the pamphlet N. Lenin,
      The Struggle for Grain, Moscow, 1918

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 419-444
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002



Part I: Report On Combating The Famine


Part II: Reply To The Debate On The Report On Combating  The Famine


Part III: Draft Resolution On The Report On Combating The Famine

Endnotes


 Part I
Report On Combating The Famine
    June 4, 1918


 
  Comrades, the subject I am about to speak of today is the great crisis which has overtaken all modern countries and which perhaps weighs most heavily on Russia, or, at any rate, is being felt by her far more severely than by other countries. I must speak of this crisis, the famine which has afflicted us, in conjunction with the problems that confront us as a result of the general situation. And when we speak of the general situation, we cannot of course confine ourselves to Russia, particularly as all countries of modern capitalist civilisation are now bound. together more painfully and more distressingly than ever before. 



 
   Everywhere, both in the belligerent countries and in the neutral countries, the war, the imperialist war between two groups of gigantic plunderers, has resulted in an utter exhaustion of productive forces. Ruin and impoverishment have reached such a pitch that the most advanced, civilised and cultured countries, which for decades, nay for centuries, had not known what famine means, have been brought by the war to the point of famine in the genuine and literal sense of the term. It is true that in the advanced countries, especially in those in which large-scale capitalism has long since trained the population to the maximum level of economic organisation possible under that system, they have succeeded in properly distributing the famine, in keeping it longer at bay and in rendering it less acute. But Germany and Austria, for example, not to speak of the countries that have been defeated and enslaved, have for a long time been suffering from real starvation. We hardly a single issue of a newspaper without coming across numerous reports from a number of the advanced and cultured countries—not only belligerent, but also neutral countries, such as Switzerland and certain of the Scandinavian countries—regarding the famine and the terrible hardships that have overtaken humanity as a result of the war. 



 
   Comrades, for those who have been following the development of European society it has for long been indisputable that capitalism cannot end peacefully, and that it must lead either to a direct revolt of the broad masses against the yoke of capital or to the same result by the more painful and bloody way of war. 



 
   For many years prior to the war the socialists of all countries pointed out, and solemnly declared at their congresses, that not only would a war between advanced countries be an enormous crime, that not only would such a war, a war for the partition of the colonies and the division of the spoils of the capitalists, involve a complete rupture with the latest achievements of civilisation and culture, but that it might, that, in fact, it inevitably would, undermine the very foundations of human society. Because it is the first time in history that the most powerful achievements of technology have been applied on such a scale, so destructively and with such energy, for the annihilation of millions of human lives. When all means of production are being thus devoted to the service of war, we see that the most gloomy prophecies are being fulfilled, and that more and more countries are falling a prey to retrogression, starvation and a complete decline of all the productive forces. 



 
   I am therefore led to recall how justified Engels, one of the great founders of scientific socialism, was, when in 1887, thirty years before the Russian revolution, he wrote that a European war would not only result, as he expressed it, in crowns falling from crowned heads by the dozen without anybody to pick them up, but that this war would also lead to the brutalisation, degradation and retrogression of the whole of Europe; and that, on the other hand, war would result either in the domination of the working class or in the creation of the conditions which would render its domination indispensable.[2] On this occasion the co-founder of Marxism expressed himself with extreme caution, 



for he clearly saw that if history took this course, the result would be the collapse of capitalism and the extension of socialism, and that a more painful and severe transition period, greater want and a severer crisis, disruptive of all productive forces, could not be imagined. 



 
   And we now clearly see the significance of the results of the imperialist slaughter of the peoples which has been dragging on for more than three years, when even the most advanced countries feel that the war has reached an impasse, that there is no escape from war under capitalism, and that it will lead to agonising ruin. And if we, comrades, if the Russian revolution—which is not due to any particular merit of the Russian proletariat but to the general course of historical events, which by the will of history has temporarily placed that proletariat in a foremost position and made it for the time being the vanguard of the world revolution—if it has befallen us to suffer particularly severe and acute agony from the famine, which is afflicting us more and more heavily, we must clearly realise that these misfortunes are primarily and chiefly a result of the accursed imperialist war. This war has brought incredible misfortunes on all countries, but these misfortunes are being concealed, with only temporary success, from the masses and from the knowledge of the vast majority of the peoples. 



 
   As long as military oppression continues, as long as the war goes on, as long as, on the one hand, it is accompanied by hopes of victory and a belief that this crisis may be resolved by the victory of one of the imperialist groups, and, on the other hand, an unbridled military censorship prevails and the people are intoxicated by the spirit of militarism, as long as this continues the mass of the population of the majority of the countries, will be kept in ignorance of the abyss into which they are about to fall and into which half of them have already fallen. And we are feeling this with particular intensity now, because nowhere but in Russia is there such a glaring contrast to the vastness of the tasks the insurgent proletariat has set itself, realising that it is impossible to end the war, the world war between the world’s most powerful imperialist giants, that this war cannot be ended without a mighty proletarian revolution, also embracing the whole world. 




 
  And since the march of events has placed us in one of the most prominent positions in this revolution and forced us to remain for a long time, at least since October 1917, an isolated contingent, prevented by events from coming quickly enough to the aid of other contingents of international socialism, the position we find ourselves in is now ten times more severe. Having done all that can be done by the directly insurgent proletariat, and the poor peasantry supporting it, to overthrow our chief enemy and to protect the socialist revolution, we find nevertheless that at every step oppression by the imperialist predatory powers surrounding Russia and the legacy of the war are weighing on us more and more heavily. These consequences of the war have not yet made themselves fully felt. We are now, in the summer of 1918, facing what is perhaps one of the most difficult, one of the most severe and critical transitional stages of our revolution. And the difficulty is not confined to the international arena, where our policy is inevitably bound to be one of retreat as long as our true and only ally, the international proletariat, is only preparing, is only maturing, for revolt, but is not yet in a position to act openly and concertedly, although the whole course of events in Western Europe, the furious savagery of the recent battles on the Western front, the crisis which is growing increasingly acute in the belligerent countries, all go to show that the revolt of the European workers is not far off, and that although it may be delayed it will inevitably come. 



 
   It is in a situation like this that we have to experience enormous internal difficulties, owing to which considerable vacillations have been caused mainly by the acute food shortage, by the agonising famine which has overtaken us and which compels us to face a task demanding the maximum exertion of effort and the greatest organisation, and which at the same time cannot be tackled by the old methods. We shall undertake the solution of this problem together with the class that was with us in opposing the imperialist war, the class together with which we overthrew the imperialist monarchy and the imperialist republican bourgeoisie of Russia, the class that must forge its weapons, develop its forces and create its organisation in the midst of increasing difficulties, increasing tasks and the increasing scope of the revolution. 



 
   We are now facing the most elementary task of human society—to vanquish famine, or at least to mitigate at once the direct famine, the agonising famine which has afflicted both our two principal cities and numerous districts of agricultural Russia. And we have to solve this problem in the midst of a civil war and the furious and desperate resistance of the exploiters of all ranks and colours and of all orientations. Naturally, in such a situation those elements in the political parties which cannot break with the old and cannot believe in the new find themselves in a state of war, which is being exploited for only one aim—to restore the exploiters. 



 
   The news we are receiving from every corner of Russia demands that we shall face this question, the connection between the famine and the fight against the exploiters, against the counter-revolution which is raising its head. The task confronting us is to vanquish the famine, or at least to mitigate its severities until the new harvest, to defend the grain monopoly and the rights of the Soviet state, the rights of the proletarian state. All grain surpluses must be collected; we must see to it that all stocks are brought to the places where they are needed and that they are properly distributed. This fundamental task means the preservation of human society; at the same time it involves incredible effort, it is a task which can be performed in only one way—by general and increased intensification of labour. 



 
   In the countries where this problem is being solved by means of war, it is being solved by military servitude, by instituting military servitude for the workers and peasants; it is being solved by granting new and greater advantages to the exploiters. In Germany, for instance, where public opinion is stifled, where every attempt to protest against the war is suppressed, but where a sense of reality, of socialist hostility to the war nevertheless persists, you will find no more common method of saving the situation than the rapid increase in the number of millionaires who have grown rich on the war. These new millionaires have been enriching themselves fantastically. 




 
   In all the imperialist countries the starvation of the masses offers a field for the most furious profiteering; incredible fortunes are being amassed on poverty and starvation.



 
   This is encouraged by the imperialist countries, e.g., Germany, where starvation is organised best of all. And not without reason is it said that Germany is a centre of organised starvation, where rations and crusts of bread are distributed among the population better than anywhere else. We see there that new millionaires are a common feature of the imperialist state; indeed, they know no other way of combating starvation. They permit twofold, threefold and fourfold profits to be made by those who possess plenty of grain and who know how to profiteer and to turn organisation, rationing, regulation and distribution into profiteering. We do not wish to follow that course, no matter who urges us to do so, whether wittingly or unwittingly. We say that we have stood and shall continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with the class together with which we opposed the war, together with which we overthrew the bourgeoisie and together with which we are suffering the hardships of the present crisis. We must insist on the grain monopoly being observed, not so as to legitimise capitalist profiteering, large or small, but so as to combat deliberate racketeering. 



 
   And here we see greater difficulties and greater dangers than those that faced us when we were confronted by tsarism armed to the teeth against the people; or when we were confronted by the Russian bourgeoisie, which was also armed to the teeth, and which in the offensive of last June did not consider it a crime to shed the blood of hundreds of thousands of Russian workers and peasants while it kept in its pocket the secret treaties providing it with a share in the spoils, but which does consider it a crime for the toilers to wage war against the oppressors, the only just and sacred war, the war of which we spoke at the very outset of the imperialist slaughter and which events at every step are now inevitably associating with the famine. 



 
   We know that the tsarist autocracy from the very beginning instituted fixed prices for grain and raised those prices. Why not? It remained faithful to its allies, the grain merchants, the profiteers and the banking magnates who made millions out of it. 



 
   We know how the compromisers of the Constitutional Democratic Party—together with the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks—and Kerensky introduced a grain monopoly, because all Europe was saying that without a monopoly they could not hold out any longer. And we know how this same Kerensky in August 1917 evaded the democratic law of the time. That is what democratic laws and artfully interpreted regimes are for—to be evaded. We know that in August Kerensky doubled those prices and that at that time socialists of every shade and colour protested against and resented this measure. There was not a single newspaper at the time that was not outraged by Kerensky’s conduct and that did not expose the fact that behind the republican Ministers, behind the Cabinet of Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, were the manipulations of the profiteers, that the doubling of grain prices was a concession to the profiteers, that the whole business was nothing but a concession to the profiteers. We know that story. 



 
   We can now compare the course of the grain monopoly and of the fight against the famine in European capitalist countries with the course taken in our country. We see what use the counter-revolutionaries are making of these events. They are a lesson from which we must draw definite and rigorous conclusions. The crisis, having reached the pitch of a severe famine, has rendered the civil war still more acute. It has led to the exposure of parties like the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, who differ from that avowed capitalist party, the Constitutional Democrats, only in that the Constitutional-Democratic Party is an open party of the Black Hundreds. The Constitutional Democrats have nothing to say and are not obliged to address themselves to the people, they are not obliged to conceal their aims, whereas these parties, who compromised with Kerensky and shared power and the secret treaties with him, are obliged to address themselves to the people. (Applause.) And so they are from time to time forced to expose themselves, despite their wishes and their plans. 



 
   When, as a result of the famine, we see on the one hand an outbreak of uprisings and revolts of starving people and on the other a series of counter-revolutionary rebellions spreading like fire from one end of Russia to the other, obviously fed with funds from the Anglo-French imperialists, and aided by the efforts of the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, we say to ourselves the picture is clear and we leave it to whoever so desires to dream of united fronts. 



 
   And we now see very clearly that after the Russian bourgeoisie was defeated in open military conflict, all the open collisions between the revolutionary and counter-revolutionary forces in the period from October 1917 to February and March 1918 proved to the counter-revolutionaries, even to the leaders of the Don Cossacks, in whom the greatest hopes had been placed, that their cause was lost, lost because everywhere the majority of the people were opposed to them. And every new attempt, even in the most patriarchal districts, where the agriculturists are most wealthy and most socially isolated, from the outside world, as, for instance, the Cossacks—every new attempt without exception has resulted in new sections of the oppressed toilers actually rising against them. 



 
   The experience of the civil war in the period from October to March has shown that the masses of the working people, the Russian working class and the peasants who live by their own labour and not by exploiting others, are all over Russia, the vast majority of them, in favour of Soviet power. But those who thought that we were already on the path of greater organic development have been obliged to admit that they were mistaken. 



 
   The bourgeoisie saw that it was defeated. . . . Then there came a split among the Russian petty bourgeoisie. Some of them are drawn towards the Germans, others towards the Anglo-French orientation, while both have this in common, that they are united by the famine orientation. 



 
   In order that it may be clear to you, comrades, that it is not our Party but its enemies and the enemies of Soviet power who are reconciling the German orientation and the Anglo-French orientation and uniting them on a common programme, viz., to overthrow the Soviet power as the result of famine—in order to make it clear how this is taking  place, I will take the liberty of briefly quoting from the report of the recent conference of the Mensheviks.[3] This report appeared in the newspaper Zhizn.[4] (Commotion and applause.) 



 
   From this report, printed in No. 26 of Zhizn, we learn that Cherevanin, who made a report on economic policy, criticised the policy of the Soviet government and proposed a compromise solution of the problem—to enlist the services of representatives of merchant capital, as practical businessmen, to act as commission agents on terms which would be very favourable for them. We learn from this report that the chairman of the Northern Food Board, Groman, who was present at the conference, announced the following conclusions, which he had arrived at, so that report states, on the basis of a vast store of personal and of all sorts of other observations—observations, I would add, made entirely in bourgeois circles. “Two methods,” he said, “must be adopted: the first is that present prices must be raised; the second, that a special reward must be offered for prompt deliveries of grain,” etc. (Voice : “What is wrong with that?") Yes, you will hear what is wrong with that, although the speaker, who has not been given the floor, but has taken it from that corner over there (applause ), thinks he can convince you that there is nothing wrong with it. But he has presumably forgotten the course the Menshevik conference took. This same paper, Zhizn, states that Groman was followed by the delegate Kolokolnikov, who said the following: “We are being invited to participate in the Bolshevik food organisations.” Very wrong, is it not? That is what we have to say, recalling the interjection of the previous speaker. And if this speaker, who refuses to calm down and is taking the floor although he has not been granted it, cries out that it is a lie and that Kolokolnikov did not say that, I take note of the statement and request you to repeat that denial coherently and so that all may hear you. I take the liberty of recalling the resolution proposed at the conference by Martov, who is not unknown to you, and which on the question of the Soviet government literally says the same thing, although in different terms and phrases. (Commotion, shouting.) Yes, you may laugh, but the fact remains that in connection with a report on the food situation Menshevik representatives say that the Soviet government is not a proletarian organisation, that it is a useless organisation. 



 
   And at such a time, when counter-revolutionary uprisings are breaking out owing to the famine, and taking advantage of the famine, no denials and no tricks will avail, for the fact is obvious. We see the policy on this question effectively developed by Cherevanin, Groman and Kolokolnikov. The Civil War is reviving, counter-revolution is raising its head, and I am convinced that ninety-nine per cent of the Russian workers and peasants have drawn—although not everybody yet knows this—are drawing and will draw their conclusion from these events, and that this conclusion will be that only by smashing counter-revolution, only by continuing a socialist policy over the famine, to combat the famine, shall we succeed in vanquishing both the famine and the counter-revolutionaries who are taking advantage of the famine. 



 
   Comrades, we are in fact approaching a time when Soviet power, after a long and severe struggle against numerous and formidable counter-revolutionary enemies, has defeated them in open conflict, and, having overcome the military resistance of the exploiters and their sabotage, has come to grips with the task of organisation. This difficult struggle with famine, this tremendous problem is actually explained by the fact that we have now come directly face to face with a task of organisation. 



 
   Success in an uprising is infinitely more easy. It is a million times easier to defeat the resistance of counter-revolution than to succeed in the sphere of organisation. This particularly applies to the cases when we dealt with a task in which the insurgent proletarian and the small property-owner, i.e., the broad sections of the petty bourgeoisie, among whom there were many general-democratic and general-labour elements, could to a considerable extent act together. We have now passed from this task to another serious famine has driven us to a purely communist task. We are being confronted by a revolutionary socialist task. Incredible difficulties face us here. 



 
   We do not fear these difficulties. We were aware of them. We never said that the transition from capitalism to socialism would be easy. It will involve a whole period of violent civil war, it will involve taking painful measures, when the contingent of the insurgent proletariat in one country is joined by the proletariat of another country in order to correct their mistakes by joint efforts. The tasks that face us here are organisational tasks, concerned with articles of general consumption, concerned with the deepest roots of profiteering, which are connected with the upper strata of the bourgeois world and of capitalist exploitation, and which cannot be so easily removed by mere mass pressure. We have to deal here with the roots and runners of bourgeois exploitation, the shallow ones and those that have taken a deep or shallow hold in all countries in the form of the small property-owners, their whole system of life, and in the habits and sentiments of the small property-owner and the small master; we have to deal here with the small profiteer, with his unfamiliarity with the new system of life, his lack of faith in it and his despair. 



 
   For it is a fact that when they sensed the tremendous difficulties that confront us in the revolution, many members of the working masses gave way to despair. We do not fear that. There never has been a revolution anywhere in which certain sections of the population were not overcome by despair. 



 
   When the masses put up a certain disciplined vanguard, and that vanguard knows that this dictatorship, this firm government, will help to win over all the poor peasants—this is a long process, involving a stern struggle—it is the beginning of the socialist revolution in the true sense of the term. But when we see that the united workers and the mass of poor peasants, who were about to organise against the rich and the profiteers, against the people to whom intellectuals like Groman and Cherevanin are wittingly or unwittingly preaching profiteers’ slogans, when these workers, led astray, advocate the free sale of grain and the importing of freight transport, we say that this means helping the kulaks out of a hole! That path we shall never take. We declare that we shall rely on the working elements, with the help of whom we achieved the October victory, and that only together with our own class, and only by establishing proletarian discipline among all sections of the working population, shall we be able to solve the historic tasks now confronting us. 



 
   We have vast difficulties to overcome. We shall have to gather up all surpluses and stocks, properly distribute them and properly organise transportation for tens of millions of people. We shall have to see that the work proceeds with the regularity of clockwork. We shall have to overcome the disruption which is being fostered by the profiteers and by the doubters, who are spreading panic. This task of organisation can be accomplished only by the class-conscious workers, meeting the practical difficulties face to face. It is worth devoting all one’s energies to this task; it is worth engaging in this last, decisive fight. And in this fight we shall win. (Applause.) 



 
   Comrades, the recent decrees on the measures taken by the Soviet government[5] show us that the path of the proletarian dictatorship, as every socialist who is a real socialist can see, will obviously and undoubtedly involve severe trials. 



 
   The recent decrees deal with the fundamental problem of life—bread. They are all inspired by three guiding ideas. First, the idea of centralisation: the uniting of everybody for the performance of the common task under leadership from the centre. We must prove that we are serious and not give way to despondency, we must reject the services of the bag-traders and merge all the forces of the proletariat; for in the struggle against the famine we rely on the oppressed classes and we see the solution only in their energetic resistance to all exploiters, in uniting all their activities. 



 
   Yes, we are told that the grain monopoly is being undermined by bag-trading and profiteering on every hand. We frequently hear the intellectuals say that the bag-traders are helping us, are feeding us. Yes, but the bag-traders are feeding us on kulak lines: they are doing just what is needed to establish, strengthen and perpetuate the power of the kulaks, to enable those who have power to extend that power over those around them with the help of their profits and through various individuals. And we assert that if the forces of those whose chief sin at the present moment is their lack of belief were to be united, the fight would he considerably easier. If there ever existed a revolutionary who hoped that we could pass to the socialist system with out difficulties, such a revolutionary, such a socialist, would not be worth a brass farthing. 



 
   We know that the transition from capitalism to socialism is a struggle of an extremely difficult kind. But we are prepared to overcome a thousand difficulties, we are prepared to make a thousand attempts; and having made a thousand attempts we shall go on to the next attempt. We are now enlisting all the Soviet organisations in this new creative life, we are getting them to display new energies. We count on overcoming the new difficulties with the help of new strata, by organising the poor peasants. and now I shall pass to the second main task. 



 
   I have said that the first idea that runs through all these decrees is that of centralisation. Only by collecting all the grain in common bag shall we be able to overcome the famine. And even then grain will barely suffice. Nothing is left of Russia’s former abundance, and all minds must be deeply imbued with communism, so that everybody regards surplus grain as the property of the people and is alive to the interests of the working people. And this can be achieved only by the method proposed by the Soviet government. 



 
   When they tell us of other methods, we reply as we did at the session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee.[see Report on Foreign Policy Delivered at a Joint Meeting of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee and the Moscow Soviet] When they talked of other methods, we said: Go to Skoropadsky, to the bourgeoisie. Teach them your methods, such as raising grain prices or forming a bloc with the kulaks. There you will find willing ears. But the Soviet government says only one thing, that the difficulties are immense and you must respond to every difficulty by new efforts of organisation and discipline. Such difficulties cannot be overcome in a single month. There have been cases in the history of nations when decades were devoted to overcoming smaller difficulties, and these decades have gone down in history as great and fruitful decades. You will never cause us to despond by referring to the failures of the first half year or the first year of a great revolution. We shall continue to utter our old slogan of centralisation, unity and proletarian discipline on an all-Russia scale. 
 




 
  When they say to us, as Groman says in his report, that “the detachments you have sent to collect grain are taking to drink and are themselves becoming moonshiners and robbers”, we reply that we are fully aware how frequently this is the case. We do not conceal such facts, we do not whitewash them, we do not try to avoid them with pseudo-Left phrases and intentions. No, the working class is not separated by a Chinese wall from the old bourgeois society. And when a revolution takes place, it does not happen as in the case of the death of an individual, when the deceased is simply removed. When the old society perishes, its corpse cannot be nailed up in a coffin an lowered into the grave. It disintegrates in our midst; the corpse rots and infects us.



 
   No great revolution has ever proceeded otherwise; no great revolution can proceed otherwise. The very things we have to combat in order to preserve and develop the sprouts of the new order in an atmosphere infested with the miasmas of a decaying corpse, the literary and political atmosphere, the play of political parties, which from the Constitutional-Democrats to the Mensheviks are infested with these miasmas of a decaying corpse, are all going to be used against us to put a spoke in our wheel. A socialist revolution can never be engendered in any other way; and not a single country can pass from capitalism to socialism except in an atmosphere of disintegrating capitalism and of painful struggle against it. And so we say that our first slogan is centralisation and our second slogan is the unity of the workers. Workers, unite and unite again! That is not new, it may not sound sensational or novel. It does not promise the specious successes with which you are being tempted by people like Kerensky, who in August 1917 doubled prices, just as the German bourgeois has raised them to twice and even ten times their level. These people promise you direct and immediate successes, as long as you offer new inducements to the kulaks. Of course that is not the road we shall follow. We say that our second method may be an old method, but it is a permanent method: Unite! (Applause.)



 
   We are in a difficult situation. The Soviet Republic is perhaps passing through one of its most arduous periods. New strata of workers will come to our aid. We have no police, we shall not have a special military caste, we have no other apparatus than the conscious unity of the workers. They will save Russia from her desperate and tremendously difficult situation. (Applause.) The workers must unite, workers’ detachments must be organised, the hungry people from the non-agricultural districts must be organised—it is to them we turn for help, it is to them our Commissariat for Food appeals, it is they we call upon to join the crusade for bread, the crusade against the profiteers and the kulaks and for the restoration of order. 



 
   A crusade used to be a campaign in which physical force was supplemented by faith in something which centuries ago people were compelled by torture to regard as sacred. But we desire, we think, we are convinced, we know that the October Revolution has led the advanced workers and the advanced representatives of the poor peasants to regard the preservation of their power over the landowners and capitalists as sacred. (Applause.) They know that physical force is not enough to influence the masses of the population. We need physical force because we are building a dictatorship, we are applying force to the exploiters, and we shall cast aside with contempt all who fail to understand this, so as not to waste words in talking about the form of socialism. (Applause.) 



 
   We say that a new historical task is confronting us. We must get the new historical class to understand that we need detachments of agitators from among the workers. We need workers from the various uyezds of the non-producing gubernias. We need them to go thence as conscious advocates of Soviet power; they must sanctify and legitimise our food war, our war against the kulaks, our war against disorders; they must make possible the carrying on of socialist propaganda; they must establish in the countryside the distinction between the poor and the rich, which every peasant can understand and which is a profound source of our strength. It is a source which it is difficult to get to flow at full pressure, because the exploiters are numerous. And these exploiters resort to the most varied methods in order to subjugate the masses, such as bribing the poor peasants by permitting the latter to make money out of illicit distilling or to make a profit of several rubles on every ruble by selling at profiteering prices. Such are the methods to which the kulaks and the rural bourgeoisie resort in order to establish their hold over the masses. 



 
   We cannot blame the poor peasants for this, for we know that they have been enslaved for hundreds, thousands of years, that they have suffered from serfdom and from the system which was left by serfdom in Russia. Our approach to the poor peasants must consist not only in the guns directed against the kulaks, but also in the propaganda of enlightened workers who bring the strength of their organisation into the countryside. Representatives of the poor, unite!—that is our third slogan. This is not making advances to the kulaks, and it is not the senseless method of raising prices. If we were to double prices, they would say: “They are raising prices. They are hungry. Wait a bit, they will raise prices still higher.” 



 
   It is a well-trodden path, this path of playing up to the kulaks and profiteers. It is easy to take this path and to hold out tempting prospects. Intellectuals, who call themselves socialists, are quite prepared to paint such prospects for us; and the number of such intellectuals is legion. But we say to you: “You who wish to follow the Soviet government, you who value it and regard it as a government of the working people, as a government of the exploited class, on you we call to follow another path”. This new historical task is a difficult thing. If we accomplish it, we shall raise a new stratum, give a new form of organisation to those sections of the working and exploited people, who are mostly downtrodden and ignorant, who are least united and have still to be united. 



 
   All over the world the foremost contingents of the workers of the cities, the industrial workers, have united, and united unanimously. But hardly anywhere in the world have systematic, supreme and self-sacrificing attempts been made to unite those who are engaged in small-scale agricultural production and, because they live in remote out-of-the-way places and in ignorance, have been stunted by their conditions of life. The task that faces us here unites for a single purpose both the fight against the food shortage and the fight for the profound and important system of socialism. The fight for socialism which faces us now is one to which it is worth devoting all our energies, for which it is worth 



staking everything, because it is a fight for socialism (applause ), because it is a fight for the state power of the working and exploited people. 



 
   In following this path we shall regard the working peasants as our allies. Solid achievements await us along this path, not only solid, but inalienable. That is our third significant slogan! 



 
   Such are the three fundamental slogans: centralisation of food work, unity of the proletariat and organisation of the poor peasants. And our appeal, the appeal of our Commissariat for Food, to every trade union, to every factory committee, says: Life is hard for you, comrades; then help us, join your efforts to ours, punish every breach of the regulations, every evasion of the grain monopoly. It is a difficult task; but fight bag-trading, profiteering and the kulaks, again and again, a hundred times, a thousand times, and we shall win. For this is the path on to which the majority of the workers are being led by the whole course of their lives and by the severity of our failures and trials in the matter of food supply. They know that, whereas when there was still no absolute shortage of grain in Russia the shortcomings of the food supply organisations were corrected by individual and isolated actions, this can no longer be the case now. Only the joint effort and the unity of those who are suffering most in the hungry cities and gubernias can help us. That is the path the Soviet government is calling on you to follow—unity of the workers, of their vanguard, for the purpose of carrying on agitation in the villages and of waging a war for grain against the kulaks. 



 
   According to the calculations of the most cautious experts, not far from Moscow, in gubernias quite close by—Kursk, Orel and Tambov—there is still a surplus of up to ten million poods of grain. We are very far from being able to collect this surplus for the common state fund. 



 
   Let us set about this task energetically. Let an enlightened worker go to every factory where despair is temporarily in the ascendant, and where, driven by hunger, people are prepared to accept the specious slogans of those who are reverting to the methods of Kerensky, to an increase of the fixed prices, and let him say: “We see people who are despairing of the Soviet government. Join our detachments of militant agitators. Do not be dismayed by the many cases in which these detachments have disintegrated and turned to drink. We shall use every such example to show not that the working class is not fit, but that the working class has still not rid itself of the shortcomings of the old predatory society and cannot rid itself of them at once. Let us unite our efforts, let us form dozens of detachments, let us combine their activities, and in this way we shall get rid of our shortcomings.” 



 
   Comrades, allow me in conclusion to draw your attention to some of the telegrams which are being received by the Council of People’s Commissars and particularly by our Commissariat for Food. 



 
   Comrades, in this matter of the food crisis, of the torments of hunger that are afflicting all our cities, we observe that, as the proverb says, ill news hath wings. I should like to read you certain documents which were received by Soviet government bodies and institutions after the issue of the decree of May 13 on the food dictatorship, in which it is stated that we continue to rely only on the proletariat. The telegrams indicate that in the provinces they have already started to organise the crusade against the kulaks and to organise the rural poor, as we proposed. The telegrams we have received are proof of this. 



 
   Let the Cherevanins and the Gromans blow their trumpets, let their raucous voices sow panic and demand the destruction and abolition of the Soviet government! Those who are hard at work will be least disturbed by this; they will see the facts, they will see that the work is progressing and that new ranks are forming and uniting. 



 
   A new form of struggle against the kulaks is emerging, namely, an alliance of the poor peasants, who need assistance and who need to be united. It is proposed that awards be given for deliveries of grain, and we must help. We are willing to make such awards to the poor peasants, and we have already begun to do so. But against the kulaks, the criminals who are subjecting the population to the torments of hunger, and on account of whom millions of people are suffering, against them we shall use force. We shall give every possible inducement to the rural poor, for they are entitled to it. The poor peasant has for the first time 



obtained access to the good things of life, and we see that he is living more meagerly than the worker. We shall encourage and give every possible inducement to the poor peasants and shall help them if they help us to organise the collection of grain, to secure grain from the kulaks. We must spare no resources to make that a reality in Russia. 



 
   We have already adopted this course, and it will be still further developed by the experience of every enlightened worker and by the new detachments. 



 
   Comrades, the work has been started and is progressing. We do not expect dazzling success, but success there certainly will be. We know that we are now entering a period of new destruction, one of the most severe and difficult periods of the revolution. We are not in the least surprised that counter-revolution is raising its head, that the number of waverers and despairers in our ranks is growing. We say: stop your wavering; abandon your despair, of which the bourgeoisie will take advantage, because it is in its interests to sow panic; get to work; with our food decrees and our plan based on the support of the poor peasants we are on the only right road. In the face of the new historical tasks we call upon you to make a new exertion of effort. This task is an infinitely difficult one, but, I repeat, it is an extremely rewarding one. We are here fighting for the basis of communist distribution and for the actual creation of the foundations of a communist society. Let us all set to work. We shall vanquish the famine and achieve socialism. (Applause.) 

      
Part II
Reply To The Debate On The Report On Combating The Famine
June 4, 1918


 
  Comrades, the speeches of the representatives of the various groups have, in my opinion, shown what might have been expected. 



 
   Notwithstanding the differences that exist between the Bolsheviks and certain other parties and groups, we have convinced ourselves that the tremendous enthusiasm of the masses is uniting them in the struggle against the famine, and not only the Bolshevik organisations. And we have no doubt that the further the struggle against the famine proceeds and the more the counter-revolutionaries hiding behind the Czechoslovak and other bands show their faces, the more actively will the supporters of the Bolsheviks—the workers and the working peasant masses—dissociate themselves from those enemies, whatever they may call themselves, whose arguments we are disputing. These enemies go on using the old, hackneyed arguments about the Brest peace and the civil war, as though during the three months that have elapsed since the Brest peace was concluded events had not convincingly borne out the views of those who said that only the tactics of the Communists could bring the people peace and leave them free for the work of organising and uniting their forces in preparation for the new and great wars which are now about to take place, this time under different conditions. The events fully show that the European proletariat, which at that time was not yet in a position to come to our aid, is now with every month—that can be said today without exaggeration—approaching 



      the point when the necessity for revolt will be fully realised
      and revolt become inevitable. Events have fully shown that we
      had only one choice, namely, to accept a forced and predatory
      peace. 
      

      Every thinking person felt that the resolution moved by the
      Right Socialist-Revolutionaries at the Fourth Congress of
      Soviets was counter-revolutionary[6]; and every thinking
      person must feel the same about the resolution of the
      Mensheviks, who to this day keep crying, “Down with the
      Brest peace!" and who pretend they do not know that in doing so
      they actually want to embroil us in a war with the German
      bourgeoisie through the Czechoslovak mutineers[7] and
      agents hired for the purpose. 

    
      It is not worth while dwelling on the accusations that the
      Communists are responsible for the famine. We had the same thing
      during the October Revolution. No socialist or anarchist, call
      him what you will, who has not taken leave of his senses will
      venture to get up at any meeting and assert that socialism can
      be reached without civil war. 

    
      You may examine all the publications of all the more or less
      responsible socialist parties, factions and groups, and you will
      not find a single responsible and serious socialist saying
      anything so absurd as that socialism can ever come except
      through civil war, or that the landowners and capitalists will
      voluntarily surrender their privileges. That would be naïve
      to the point of stupidity. And now, after the bourgeoisie and
      its supporters have suffered a number of defeats, we hear
      admissions like that of Bogayevsky, for example, who on the Don
      had the best soil in Russia for counter-revolution, but who has
      also admitted that the majority of the people are against
      them—and therefore no subversive activities of the
      bourgeoisie will be of any avail without the aid of foreign
      bayonets. Yet the Bolsheviks are being attacked here for the
      civil war. That is tantamount to going over to the
      counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, no matter what slogans are
      used to mask the fact. 

    
      As before the revolution, so now, we say that when international
      capital throws war on to the scales of history, when hundreds of
      thousands of people are perishing, and when war is remoulding
      people’s habits and accustoming them to 

      settle issues by armed force, to think that we can emerge from
      the war in any other way than by converting it into a civil war
      is more than strange. And what is brewing in Austria, in Italy,
      in Germany shows that civil war in those countries will assume
      even keener forms, will be even more acute. There is no other
      way for socialism; and whoever wages war on socialism, betrays
      socialism completely. 
 
    
      As to food measures, it has been said that I have not dwelt on
      them in detail. But that was not part of my task. The report on
      the food question has been made by my colleagues,[8] who have
      been specially working on that problem, and doing so not for
      months but for years, studying it not only in the offices of
      Petrograd and Moscow, but in the provinces, and making a
      practical study of how to store grain, how to fit up the
      granaries, and so on. These reports were made to the All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee and to the Moscow Soviet, and there
      you will find the material on the subject. As to specific
      criticism and practical recommendations, that was not part of my
      task. My task was to outline the principles of the problem that
      faces us, and I have not heard here any criticism worthy of any
      attention or any sensible objection worthy of examination from
      the standpoint of principle. And let me say in conclusion,
      comrades, that I am convinced, in fact I am sure, that this will
      be the conviction of the vast majority, for the purpose of our
      meeting is not to adopt a definite resolution—although, of
      course, that, too, is important, because it will show that the
      proletariat is capable of uniting its forces; but this is not
      enough, it is very, very far from enough—what we have to
      do now is to tackle practical problems. 

    
      We know, and our worker comrades know it especially, that at
      every step in practical life, in every factory, at every
      meeting, at every chance gathering in the streets, this same
      question of the famine is brought up, and in ever more acute
      forms. And therefore our chief task should be to make this
      meeting, too, where we have assembled with representatives from
      the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet
      and the trade unions, the starting-point for a radical change in
      all our practical work. Everything else must be entirely
      subordinated to the success of our propaganda, agitation and
      organisational work in combating famine, that must be put before
      everything else and completely merged with the proletarian and
      ruthlessly firm war on the kulaks and profiteers. 

    
      Our Commissariat for Food has already appealed to the factory
      committees, the trade unions and the big proletarian centres,
      where we are operating directly, to those close and numerous
      links which unite the Moscow workers with hundreds of thousands
      of organised factory workers in all the big industrial
      districts. 

    
      All the more must we make use of them. 

    
      The situation is critical. Famine is not only threatening, it is
      already upon us. Every worker, every Party functionary must at
      once make it his practical job to change the fundamental trend
      of his activities. 

    
      Out into the factories, among the masses, all of you! Tackle the
      practical job at once! It will give us a host of practical hints
      as to far more fertile methods, and at the same time will help
      to discover and promote new forces. With the aid of these new
      forces we shall launch the work on a broad scale, and we are
      firmly convinced that the three months, which will be far more
      difficult than the preceding ones, will serve to steel our
      forces and will lead us to complete victory over famine and help
      to realise all the plans of the Soviet
      government. (Applause.) 
      

Part 3
Draft Resolution On The Report  On Combating The Famine
June 4, 1918[9]

      This joint meeting draws the attention of all workers and
      working peasants to the fact that the famine which has overtaken
      many parts of the country demands of us the most vigorous and
      determined measures to combat this calamity. 

    
      The enemies of Soviet power, the landowners, capitalists and
      kulaks and their numerous hangers-on, want to take advantage of
      the calamity to engineer revolts, aggravate the chaos and
      disorder, overthrow the Soviet government, resurrect the old
      system of servitude and slavery for the working people, and
      restore the power of the landowners and capitalists, as has been
      done in the Ukraine. 

    
      Only the utmost exertion of all the efforts of the working class
      and the working peasantry can save the country from famine and
      safeguard the gains of the revolution from the attacks of the
      exploiting classes. 

    
      This joint meeting considers that the firm policy pursued by the
      Soviet government in combating the famine is an absolutely
      correct policy and the only correct one. 

    
      Only the strictest revolutionary order in every sphere of
      activity, and especially on the railways and in the water
      transport system, only the strictest discipline among the
      workers, and their self-sacrificing aid in the form of
      detachments of agitators and fighters against the bourgeoisie
      and the kulaks, and only the independent organisation of the
      rural poor can save the country and the revolution. 

    
      This joint meeting urgently appeals to all workers and peasants
      to set about this work, and by concerted and united effort to
      vanquish chaos, disorder and unco-ordinated effort. 
      


Endnotes
[1] The
    Joint Session of the All-Russia C.E.C., the Moscow Soviet of
    Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies, the
    A.C.C.T.U. and the trade unions, factory committees and other
    workers’ organisations was held on June 4, 1918 in the
    Bolshoi Theatre. There was only one question on the
    agenda—the struggle against famine in connection with the
    general situation. Opening the session, Y. M. Sverdlov, Chairman
    of the All-Russia C.E.C., said that such a widely representative
    meeting had been called in view of the extreme urgency of the
    problem and in order to draw all the workers of Moscow into an
    energetic campaign against famine. The report at the session was
    delivered by Lenin. Left and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and
    Mensheviks made sharp attacks on the Soviet Government and
    criticised its food policy. The resolution moved by the Bolshevik
    group, which was based on Lenin’s draft, was passed by a
    majority vote. 
 
    [2] 
      Lenin is expounding an idea expressed by Engels in his
      Einleitung zu Sigismund Borkheims Broschüre zur
      Erinnerune für die deutschen Mordspatrioten. 1886-1887
      (Marx/Engels, Werke, Band 21, S. 346 51). 

    [3]
    Lenin has in mind the All-Russia Conference of Mensheviks (held in
    Moscow, May 21-27, 1918), which showed up the
    counter-revolutionary nature of the Mensheviks’ activity. In
    their speeches N. Cherevanin, V. G. Groman and other Mensheviks
    tried to exploit the country’s food difficulties for
    anti-Soviet purposes. They described the organisation of food
    detachments and the “crusade” for grain which Lenin
    was urging upon the workers as “the last convulsive
    efforts” of Soviet power to save itself.

    [4]
Zhizn (Life )—a newspaper published in
    Moscow from April 23 to July 6, 1918 under the editorship of the
    anarchistic writers A. Borovoi and Y. Novomirsky. Made use of by
    various anti-Soviet elements, it was eventually banned along with
    other counter-revolutionary newspapers. 
 
    [5]
      Lenin is referring to the All-Russia C.E.C. decrees: On the
      Emergency Powers of the People’s Commissar for Food of May
      13 (The Food Dictatorship Decree) and On the Reorganisation of
      the Commissariat for Food and Local Food Bodies of May 27, 1918
      (see Decrees of the Soviet Government, Russ. ed.,
      Vol. 2, 1959, pp. 261-64 and 307-12) These decrees instituted
      complete centralisation of food supply, both procuring and
      distribution; they also envisaged measures for the organisation
      of a workers’ grain campaign and help for the poor in
      their struggle against the kulaks. 

    [6]
    Lenin has in mind a resolution moved at the Extraordinary Fourth
    All-Russia Congress of Soviets by the Right and Centre S.R.s, in
    which they expressed strong opposition to the Peace Treaty of
    Brest and demanded the immediate abolition of Soviet power and the
    holding of a Constituent Assembly. 
 
    [7]
      The reference is to the counter-revolutionary armed revolt of
      the Czechoslovak Army Corps organised by the imperialists of the
      Entente with the active connivance of Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. The Czechoslovak corps had been
      formed in Russia before the victory of the Great October
      Socialist Revolution out of Czech and Slovak
      prisoners-of-war. By the summer of 1918 it numbered over 60,000
      men (the total number of Czech and Slovak war prisoners in
      Russia was nearly 200,000). After the setting up of Soviet power
      the financing of the corps was taken over by the countries of
      the Entente, which had decided to use it against the Soviet
      Republic. T. Massarik, leader of the Czech bourgeois
      nationalists and president of the Czechoslovak National Council,
      declared the corps to be part of the French army and the
      representatives of the Entente raised the question of its
      evacuation to France. The Soviet Government agreed to the
      evacuation of the Czechoslovaks on condition that the Russian
      soldiers in France were sent home. By the agreement of March 26,
      1918 the corps was granted permission to quit Russia via
      Vladivostok on condition that they handed in their arms and
      deposed their counter-revolutionary commanders, who were Russian
      officers. But the counter-revolutionary commanders of the corps
      treacherously broke the agreement with the Soviet Government on
      the surrendering of arms and, on instructions from the
      imperialists of the Entente instigated an armed revolt at the
      end of May. The governments of the United States, Britain and
      France openly and whole-heartedly supported the revolt and
      French officers took a direct part in it. Operating in close
      contact with the whiteguards and the kulaks, the corps occupied
      a large part of the Urals, the Volga area and Siberia,
      everywhere restoring the rule of the bourgeoisie. With the
      support of Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries whiteguard
      governments were set up in the occupied areas. A Siberian
      government was set up in Omsk, a Committee of Members of the
      Constituent Assembly in Samara, and so forth. 
 
      Soon after the revolt started, on June 11, the Central Executive
      Committee of the Czechoslovak Communist groups in Russia issued
      a manifesto to the soldiers of the corps, exposing the
      counter-revolutionary nature of the revolt and appealing to
      these Czech and Slovak workers and peasants to put a stop to it
      and join the Czechoslovak units of the Red Army. The majority of
      the Czech and Slovak prisoners-of-war were sympathetic towards
      Soviet power and refused to be taken in by the anti-Soviet
      propaganda of the reactionary clique in command. Realising that
      they were being tricked, many of the rank and file left the
      corps and refused to fight against Soviet power. Nearly 12,000
      Czechs and Slovaks served in the ranks of the Red Army. 
 
      The Volga area was liberated by the Red Army in the autumn of
      1918 and the whiteguard Czechoslovaks were finally defeated
      during the victorious campaign against Kolchak. 


    [8]
      The reference is to the reports delivered at the All-Russia C
      E.C. meetings by the People’s Commissar for Food
      A. D. Tsyurupa (May 9, 1918) and A. I. Svidersky (May 27) on
      reorganisation of the food bodies and the system of food
      supply. 

    [9]
      This draft resolution formed the basis of the resolution
      submitted by the Bolshevik group at the meeting of June 4,
      1918. It was accepted by a joint meeting of the All-Russia
      C.E.C., the Moscow Soviet and the Trade Unions, which rejected
      the Left S.R. resolution aimed against organisation of the poor,
      against fixed prices for grain and other measures initiated by
      the Soviet Government.
 
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech Delivered at the First
      All-Russia Congress of Internationalist Teachers, June 5,
      1918











Speech Delivered At The First All-Russia Congress Of Internationalist Teachers



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At The First All-Russia
Congress Of Internationalist Teachers[1]
June 5, 1918
Brief Report

Delivered: 4 June, 1918
First Published: Newspaper report published on June 6, 1918 in
    Izvestia VTsIK No. 114; Published according to the text of the Transctions of
    the All-Russia Union of Internationalist Teachers No. 1, 1918
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 445-446
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

(The Congress gave Lenin a rousing welcome.) Lenin greeted the
    Congress on behalf of the Council of People’s Commissars and said that the teachers, who 
had at first been rather slow in making up their minds to work with the So-viet government, were
    now growing more and more convinced that such collaboration was essential. Such cases of
    con-version from opposition to support of the Soviet government were very numerous among
    other sections of society too.
The army of teachers must set themselves tremendous tasks in the educational sphere, and
    above all must form the main army of socialist education. Life and knowledge must be
    liberated from the sway of capital, from the yoke of the bourgeoisie. The teachers must not
    confine themselves to narrow pedagogical duties. They must join forces with the entire body
    of the embattled working people. The task of the new pedagogics was to link up teaching
    activities with the socialist organisation of society.
It had to be admitted that the majority of the intellec-tuals of the old Russia were
    downright opponents of the Soviet regime, and there was no doubt that it would be not at all
    easy to overcome the difficulties this involved. The process of fermentation among the broad
    mass of the teachers had only just begun, and no schoolteacher who had the welfare of the
    people sincerely at heart could confine himself to the All-Russia Teachers’ Union, but must
    confidently carry his propaganda among the masses. This road would lead to a joint struggle
    of the proletariat and the teachers for the victory of socialism. (Lenin left the hail
    amidst general applause.)

Endnotes
[1] Union of Internationalist
    Teachers was set up at the beginning of December 1917 in opposition to the
    counter-revolutionary All-Russia Union of Teachers. The new union was for teachers who had
    come over to the side of Soviet power. It set itself the aim of rallying democratic teachers
    and winning over the waverers. In a manifesto published in Pravda on December 6 (19) the
    union appealed to teachers to join the union and work with the people to "create a new,
    socialist gehool". The response was immediate and by the spring of 1918 the Union had 12,000
    members. It formed the nucleus of the Union of Educational Workers that was set up in August
    1919.
The First All-Russia Congress of Internationalist Teachers was held in
    Moscow June 2-6, 1918; it was attended by 150 dele-gates with the right to vote. The Congress
    heard and discussed the following reports.. tasks of the Union of Internationalist Teachers;
    reform of the schools; general plan for the reorganisation of public education; polytechnical
    education; organisational and propaganda tasks of the new teacher; teachers’ living
    standards; draft rules for the Union of Internationalist Teachers; report by N. K. Krupskaya
    “The School and the State#8221;, and others. The first speaker at the Congress was A. V.
    Lunacharsky, People’s Commissar for Education, who outlined the role of the Soviet teacher 
 in the sphere of public edueation. In its resolutions the Congress called for “energetic 
support of the power of the workers and peasants in their struggle to consolidate 
socialism“, defined the tasks of the Soviet school as polytechnical and based on 
initiative and productive labour, approved the rules of the Union, and proposed to the 
People’s Commissariat for Education that a Pedagogical Academy should be founded. Lenin 
spoke at the fourth session of the Congress.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## The Socialist Academy of
      Social Sciences











The Socialist Academy Of Social Sciences rirectives For The Commission



V. I. Lenin
The Socialist Academy Of Social Sciences
IIDirectives For The Commission


Written: 25 May, 1918

First Published: First published in 1933 In Lenin Miscellany XXI; Published accordlng to the manuscript

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, page 405 

Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish

Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala

Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive March, 2002



The Commission is to be instructed:

1)to make a detailed examination of the Rules of the Socialist Academy of Social Sciences for submission to the Council of People’s Commissars and then to the C.E.C.;

2) to begin immediately an exchange of opinions on this question, and also on the question of membership, with non-Russian and foreign Marxists;

3) to compile and discuss a list of suitable and willing candidates as foundation members, and as teachers, for submission of this list to the Council of People’s Commissars and the C.E.C.[1]


Endnotes

[1] Lists of Members of the Socialist Academy of Social 
Sciences and teachers at the Academy, which had been approved by the All-Russia C.E.C., were 
published on August 9, 1918, in the newspaper Izvestia VTsIK No. 169.



On February 5, 1922, Lenin was elected a member of the Social-ist Acadoiny. When he was informed 
of his election by the Pre-sidium of the Academy, Lenin replied with the following note: 
“I ant very grateful. Unforttinately, I am not well enough to be able to perform even the 
smallest fraction of the duties of a member of the Socialist Academy. I do not want to be a 
fictitious member. I therefore request you to remove my name from the list of members or not to 
include it in the list” (Lenin Miscellany XXXIV, p. 432).




Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive



 


 


 








==========

## Telegram to J. V. Stalin and
      A. G. Shlypnikov











Telegram To J. V. Stalin and A. G. Shlyapnikov



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. Stalinand A. G. Shlyapnikov
Tsaritsyn To People’s Commissars Stalin and Shlyapnikov

Written: 11 June, 1918
First Published: 1931 in Lenin Miscellany XVIII
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, page 447
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


I have received Stalin’s third telegram and note. We are taking all measures. Tsyurupa says money will be sent tomorrow without fail, and orders have been given for the goods to be loaded today. Send through trains with a triple guard. Arrest saboteurs and hooligans and send them here.

Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars
Lenin


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Food Detachments. Speech at
      Workers’ Meetings in Moscow, June 20, 1918.











Food Detachments. Speech at a Workers' Meeting in Moscow



V. I. Lenin
Food Detachments[1]
Speech At Workers’ Meetings In Moscow
June 20, 1918

Brief Newspaper Report

Delivered: 20 June, 1918
First Published: 21 June, 1918, Bednota No. 69; Published according to the Bednota text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 448-449
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


From my visits to working-class areas in Moscow I have gained the firm conviction that the idea of the need to form food detachments has spread through the entire mass of the workers. A “distrustful” attitude is shown only by the print workers, who usually live better than the other workers, paid for by the bourgeoisie which is poisoning the minds of the poor with its newspaper slanders. The class-conscious attitude of the broad mass of the workers to such a basic issue of the Russian revolution as the struggle against famine gives me grounds for believing that socialist Russia will successfully survive all temporary failures and the devastation of the old regime. Even if we do not succeed in speedily dealing with the Czechoslovaks (which is most improbable), the large stocks of grain hidden by the kulaks in Voronezh, Orel and Tambov gubernias will enable us to get through the last two difficult months before the new harvest. The food problem is the most urgeiit problem of our revolution. All workers without exception must understand that the struggle for grain is their own vital concern.

The task undertaken by the food detachments is only that of helping to collect grain surpluses from the kulaks, and not (as our enemies are trying in advance to frighten the countryside into believing) to plunder all and sundry in the countryside .... Manufactured goods, thread and household and agricultural articles will definitely be provided in return for grain.

Steps will be taken to iiial(e it impossible for the detach-ments sent to the countryside to be joined by hooligans and swindlers, who always endeavour to fish in muddy waters. It is better to send fewer people, but ones who are suitable for the job.

It is true there have been cases of detachments being infiltrated by unstable, weak-willed workers, whom the kulaks have bribed with home-distilled vodka. But atten-tion has been paid tothis .... It is necessary to have accurate information of the past history of every worker going with a detachment. Inquiries must be made in the factory coramittee, the trade union and also in Party cells, as to the person-al character of everyone whom the working class entrusts with such an important task.

Party comrades in many factories are unwilling to accept non-Party” people in the detachment. This is quite wrong. A person who is “non-Party”, but completely honest and with no stain on his reputation, can be a very valuable com-rade in the starving people’s campaign for grain.

To class-conscious detachments of this kind the Council of People’s Commissars will give the broadest assistance by providing money and manufactured goods, and also arms.

What matters is that the workers should actively and with the utmost speed take up their own vital cause-the struggle against famine!...


Endnotes
[1] Lenin delivered this speech on the food detachments to workers’ meetings in Moscow and it was published in Bednota (The Poor), a daily newspaper issuied by the C.C. of the R.C.P.(B.). The first food detachments were sent out from Petrograd and Moscow to the grain-growing provinces in November 1917. Mass recruiting for the detachments among the advanced workers began in the sum-mer of 1918, when the food crisis was at its height. The food detach-ments were formed by the Party, Soviet and trade union organisations of Petrograd, Moscow and other industrial centres. There were about 3,000 people in them by June 15, and by the end of August the number had risen to nearly 17,000. In 1918 there were 122 detachments and in 1919, more then 1,000, with an enrolment of about 30,000 men. These workers’ food detachments plaed a big part in procuring food for the population and the Red Arm in fighting the kulaks and rallying the rural poor.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Speech Delivered at a Public
      Meeting in the Sokolniki Club. June 21, 1918











Speech Delivered At A Public Meeting In The Sokolniki Club, June 21, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At A Public Meeting In The Sokolniki Club
June 21, 1918
Brief Newspaper Report

Delivered: 20 June, 1918
First Published: Izvestia VTsIK Nos. 127 and 128, June 22 and 
23. 1918; Pravda No. 126. June 23, 1918; Published according to the Izvestia text. 
Collated with the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 450-453
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


Our Party has decided to hold as many public meetings today in Moscow as possible with the object of drawing the attention of the working class to the situation in which the Soviet government is placed and to the efforts it will have to make in order to cope successfully with the present situation.

You know that in these past few months, and even weeks, counter-revolution has raised its head. The Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks are accusing the Soviet government of betraying Russia to the German imperialists.

However, we are perfectly aware of what has been taking place in the Caucasus, where the Caucasian Mensheviks have concluded an alliance with the Turkish imperialists, and in the Ukraine, where the Ukrainian Right Socialist-Revolutionaries have concluded an alliance with the German imperialists. And what is more, comrades, not only have they reduced all the achievements of Soviet power to naught in these regions, not only are they arresting and shooting workers, not only have they deprived them of all their gains, but they have even set a Skoropadsky in the saddle. These measures, of course, will not win them the sympathy of the working class. That is why the counter-revolutionaries are now trying to make the most out of the fatigue of the Russian people, out of the famine. They are making a last attempt to overthrow the Soviet government.

Now they are clutching at the Czechoslovaks, who, it should be said, are by no means hostile to the Soviet government. It is not the Czechoslovaks, but their counter-revolutionary officers who are hostile to the Soviet government. With the help of these officers, the imperialists are trying to drag Russia into the world slaughter which is still going on.

And it is a characteristic thing that wherever the power passes into the hands of the Mensheviks and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, we at once find that they want to bestow upon us some Skoropadsky or other. And as soon as the masses realise where the Mensheviks and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries have led them, the latter are left without the support of the masses.

They are left without support. Then, as a last hope, they begin to speculate on famine, and when that too fails, they do not shrink even from treacherous assassination.

You all know that Comrade Volodarsky, an old Party worker, who paid for his convictions by suffering and hardships, has been assassinated. It is quite possible of course that they may succeed in assassinating a few more active members of the Soviet government, but that will only serve to anchor it in the affections of the masses and rouse us to hold on even more firmly to our gains.

Today there are two factors which render the position of the Soviet Republic particularly grave: famine and the international situation.

The international situation is grave because the German, French and British imperialists are only waiting for an opportune moment to fling themselves once more on the Soviet Republic. The task of our Party is to throw off the yoke of capitalism; this can only be done by an international revolution. But, comrades, you must realise that revolutions are not made to order. We realise that the position of the Russian Republic is that the Russian working class has been the first to succeed in throwing off the yoke of capital and the bourgeoisie, and we realise that it has succeeded in this, not because it is more advanced and perfect tlian others, but because our country is a most backward one.

Capitalism will be finally overthrown when at least a few other countries join in this assault. And we know that in all countries, in spite of a most rigorous censorship, we have succeeded in this much, that at all meetings the mere mention of the Communist Party and of the Russian Republic
evokes an outburst of enthusiasm. (Loud applause.)

And we say that as long as the world carnage continues over there in the West, we are secure. Whatever the consequences of the war may be, it is bound to call forth revolution, which will be, and is, our ally.

After describing the grave position of Soviet Russia, surrounded as it is by enemies without and attacked by counter-revolution at home, Lenin passed to the subject of the famine.

Our revolution strikes terror into the imperialist classes, for they are clearly aware that their existence depends on whether their capitalism manages to hold on or not, and we must therefore stand fast and march shoulder to shoulder with the class with which we won the October Revolution.

It is with this same class that we are marching in the fight against the famine.

From now on, for one, one and a half or two months—the most difficult of all—we must exert all our strength and energies.

There have been moments in the lives of nations before now when state power passed into the hands of the working class; but it was never able to retain it. We, however, can retain it, for we have our Soviet government, which unites a working class that has taken its cause into its own hands.

However grave our position may be, whatever plots the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Czechoslovaks may hatch, we know that there is grain available even in the provinces surrounding the capital. And we must secure this grain by preserving and strengthening the alliance between the working class and the poor peasants.

Detachments of Red Army men leave the capital with the best intentions in the world, but, on arriving at their destination, they sometimes succumb to the temptations of looting and drunkenness. For this we have to blame the four years of carnage, which kept men in the trenches for so long and compelled them to slaughter each other like wild beasts. This bestiality is to be observed in all countries. Years will pass before men cease to act like beasts and resume human shape.

We appeal to the workers to let us have men.

When I read a report to the effect that in Usman Uyezd, Tambov Gubernia, a food detachment turned over to the poor peasants 3,000 of the 6,000 poods of grain it had requisitioned, I declare that even if you were to prove to me that to this day there has been only one such detachment in Russia, I should still say that the Soviet government is doing its job."&38217; For in no other country in the world will you find such a detachment! (Loud applause.)

The bourgeoisie is fully conscious of its interests and is doing its utmost to safeguard them. It knows that if this autumn, for the first time in many centuries, the peasants reap the fruits of their owii labour in the shape of the crop, and keep the working class of the towns supplied, all its hopes of restoration will collapse and the Soviet government will be strengthened. That is why the bourgeoisie is now displaying such feverish activity.

We must bend all our efforts to combat the rich peasants, the profiteers and the urban bourgeoisie.

One of the greatest drawbacks of our revolution is the timidity of our workers, who are still convinced that the only people capable of governing the state are their “betters”—their betters in the art of robbery.

But there are fine workers in every mill and factory. No matter if they do not belong to the Party—you must weld them together and unite them, and the state will do everything in its power to help them in their difficult work. (Loud applause.)



Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Organization of Food
      Detachments











Organisation Of Food Detachments



V. I. Lenin
Organisation Of Food Detachments[1]


Written: 27 June, 1918
First Published: Published on July 1918 in the magazine Bulletin of the People’s Commissariat for Food No. 10-11; Published according to the magazine text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 454-456
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


      In view of the fact that it is too late to send a delegate from
      the Commissariat for Food to the Congress, I request you to
      bring the following to the attention of the Congress. Delegates
      to the Congress who support the Soviet government should
      remember, firstly, that the grain monopoly is being enforced
      simultaneously with a monopoly on textiles and on other staple
      articles of general consumption, and, second-ly, that the demand
      for the abolition of the grain monopoly is a political move on
      the part of counter-revolutionary strata, who are endeavouring
      to wrench from the hands of the revolutionary proletariat the
      system of monopoly regu-lation of prices, one of the most
      important implements for the gradual transition from capitalist
      exchange of commodi-ties to socialist exchange of
      products. Explain to the Con-gress that as a method of combating
      the food shortage the abo-lition of the monopoly would be not
      only useless but harmful, as is shown by the Ukraine, where
      Skoropadsky has abol-ished the grain monopoly and as a result
      profiteering in grain has within a few days achieved such
      proportions that the Ukrainian proletariat is now suffering from
      famine far more acutely than under the monopoly.

    
      Point out that the only effective method of increasing bread
      rations is contained in the decision of the Council of
      People’s Commissars to requisition grain forcibly from the
      kulaks and to distribute it among the poor of the cities and the
      countryside. This requires that the poor shall much more rapidly
      and resolutely enlist in the food army which is being created by
      the People’s Commissariat for Food.

    
      Propose that the Congress immediately start agitating among the
      workers to enlist in the food army formed by the Penza Soviet of
      Deputies and to abide by the following rules:

    
      1) Every factory shall provide one person for every twenty-five
      of its workers.

    
      2) Registration of those desiring to enlist in the food army
      shall be conducted by the factory committee, which shall draw up
      a list of the names of those mobilised, in two copies, one of
      which it shall deliver to the People’s Commis-sariat for
      Food while retaining the other.

    
      3) To the list must be attached a guarantee given by the factory
      committee, or by the trade union organisation, or by a Soviet
      body, or by responsible representatives of Soviet organisations,
      testifying to the personal honesty and revolutionary discipline
      of every candidate. Members of the food army must be selected so
      that there will not in future be a single stain on the names of
      those who are setting out for the villages to combat the handful
      of predatory kulaks and save millions of toilers from
      starvation.

    
      Comrades, workers, only if this condition is observed will it be
      obvious to all that the requisition of grain from the kulaks is
      not robbery but the fulfilment of a revolution-ary duty to the
      worker and peasant masses who are fighting for socialism!

    
      4) In every factory those mobilised shall elect a
      rep-resentative from their midst to perform all the
      organisation-al measures necessary for the actual enrolment of
      the can-didates of the factory as members of the food army by
      the People’s Commissariat.

    
      5) Those enrolled in the army shall receive their former pay as
      well as food and equipment from the date of actual enlistment.

    
      6) Those enrolled in the army shall give a pledge that they will
      unreservedly carry out any instructions that may be given by the
      People’s Commissariat for Food they detachments leave for
      their place of operation, and that they will obey the commissars
      of the detachments.

    
      I am certain that if convinced socialists loyal to the October
      Revolution are placed at the head of the food requisition
      detachments, they will be able to organise Poor
      Peasants’ Committees and by their concerted action
      succeed in taking grain from the kulaks even without resort to
      armed force.
    

      Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars
      
      Lenin
    

      June 27, 1918
    

Endnotes
[1] This
      telegram was sent to the Second Gubernia Congress of Soviets in
      Penza in reply to a letter from the Chairman of the Penn Gubernia
      Soviet A. Y. Minkin. When the Congress opened on June 24, 1918, it
      elected Lenin its honorary chairman. 
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Fourth Conference of Trade
      Unions and Factory Committees of Moscow, June 27, July 28,
      1918.






 Organisation Of Food Detachments








V. I. Lenin

      Fourth Conference Of 
Trade Unions andFactory Committees Of

      Moscow[1]

June 27-July 2, 1918


Written: 27
      June, 1918

      
First Published:Brief reports
      published on June 28 . 1918 ln Pravda No. 130 and Izvestia VTsIK
      No. 132 Full report published 1n 1918 in the book: Minutes of
      the Fourth Conference of Factory Committees and Trade Unions of
      Moscow, A.C.C.T.U. Publishers Published according to the text of
      the book, collated with the verbatim report

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
      Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages
      457-491

      
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by
      Robert Daglish

      
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
      Cymbala

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive March, 2002
    

I
Report On The Current Situation
June 27, 1918





      Comrades, you all know, of course, of the great disaster that
      has befallen our country, namely, famine. Before discussing the
      measures to be adopted to combat this disas-ter, which has now
      become more acute than ever, we must first of all discuss its
      main causes. In discussing this ques-tion we must say to
      ourselves, and remember, that this disaster has befallen not
      only Russia, but all, even the most cultured, advanced and
      civilised countries.

    
      In Russia, where the overwhelming majority of the peasantry
      were ruined and oppressed by the yoke of the tsars, the
      landowners and capitalists, famine more than once in the past
      few decades affected whole regions of our agrarian country. And
      it has affected us particularly now, during the revolution. But
      this disaster reigns also in the West-European countries. Many
      of these countries had not known what famine was for decades and
      even centuries, so highly was agriculture developed there, and
      to such an extent were those European countries which 

      



      could not produce

      a sufficient supply of grain of their own assured of an enormous
      quantity of imported grain. But now, in the twentieth century,
      side by side with still greater progress in technology, side by
      side with wonderful inventions, side by side with the wide
      application of machinery and electricity, of modern internal
      combustion engines in agriculture, side by side with all this we
      now see this same disaster of famine advancing upon the people
      in all European countries without exception. It would seem that
      despite civilisation, despite culture, the countries are once
      again returning

      

      to primitive savagery, are again experiencing a situation when
      morals deteriorate and people become brutalised in the struggle
      for a crust of bread. What has caused this return to savagery in
      a number of European countries, in the majority of them? We all
      know that it has been caused by the imperialist war, by the war
      which has been torturing humanity for four years, a war which
      has already cost the peoples more, far more than ten million
      young lives, a war which was called forth by the avarice of the
      capitalists, a war which is being waged to decide which of the
      great rob-bers-the British or the German-shall rule the world,
      acquire colonies and strangle the small nations.

    
      This war, which has affected almost the whole of the globe,
      which has destroyed not less than ten million lives, not
      counting the millions of maimed, crippled and sick, this war
      which, in addition, has torn millions of the health-iest and
      best forces from productive labour-this war has reduced humanity
      to a state of absolute savagery. What numerous socialist writers
      foresaw as the worst, most pain-ful and most unbearable end of
      capitalism has come to pass. They said: capitalist society,
      based on the private owner-ship of the land, the factories and
      tools by a handful of capitalists, of monopolists, will be
      transformed into social-ist society, which alone is capable of
      putting an end to war, because the “civilised”,
      “cultured”  capitalist world is heading for
      unprecedented bankruptcy, which is capable of undermining and
      will inevitably undermine all the founda-tions of cultured
      life. I repeat, we see famine not only in Russia, but in the
      most cultured, advanced countries, like Germany, where the
      productivity of labour is incomparably greater, which can supply
      the world with more than a sufficiency of technical appliances,
      and which, still maintain-ing free intercourse with remote
      countries, can supply her population with food. The famine there
      is incomparably better “organised”, it is spread
      over a longer period than in Russia, but it is famine
      nevertheless, still more severe and more painful than
      here. Capitalism has led to such a severe and painful disaster
      that it is now perfectly clear to all that the present war
      cannot end without a number of most severe and bloody
      revolutions, of which the Russian revolution was only the first,
      only the beginning.

    


      You have iiow received news to the effect. that in Virnns, for
      example, an Arbeiterrat has been established for the second
      time, and for the second time the working population have come
      out on an almost general mass strike.[2] We hear that in
      cities like Berlin, which up to now have been models of
      capitalist order, culture and civilisation, it is becoming
      dangerous to go out into the street after dark, because, in
      spite of the very severe measures and the very strict guard that
      is kept, the war and famine have reduced people to such a state
      of absolute savagery, have led to such anarchy, have roused such
      indignation, that not merely the sale, but downright looting, an
      actual war for a crust of bread, is becoming the order of the
      day in all cultured, civilised countries.

      Hence, ’comrades, since a painful and difficult situation
      has been created in our country as a consequence of the famine,
      we must explain to the few absolutely blind and ignorant people
      (though few, they do still exist) the main and principal causes
      of the famine. We can still meet people in our country who argue
      in this way: but under the tsar we had bread; the revolution has
      come and there is no bread. Naturally, it is quite possible that
      for some old village women the development of history during the
      past ten years is summed up entirely by the fact that formerly
      there was bread and now there is none. This is comprehensible,
      because famine is a disaster which sweeps away all other
      questions, which takes its place as the cornerstone, and
      overrules everything else. But it goes without saying that our
      task, the task of the class-conscious workers, is to explain to
      the broad masses, to explain to all the representatives of the
      working masses in town and country the principal cause of the
      famine; for unless we explain this we shall not be able to
      create a proper attitude either among ourselves or among the
      representatives of the working masses, we shall not be able to
      create a proper understanding of its harmfulness and we shall
      not be able to create that firm determination and temper that is
      required to combat this disaster. If we remember that this
      disaster was caused by the imperialist war, that today even the
      richest countries are experiencing unprecedented food shortages
      and that the o,,,erwlielrriing majority of the working masses
      are suffering incredible torture; if

      

      we remember that for four years already this imperialist war has
      been compelling the workers of the various countries to shed
      their blood for the benefit of the greedy capitalists, and if we
      remember that the longer the war lasts, the fewer become the
      ways out of it, we will understand what gigantic, immense forces
      will have to be set moving.

    
      The war has lasted nearly four years. Russia has come out of the
      war, and owing to the fact that she has come out of the war
      alone she has found herself between two gangs of imperialist
      plunderers, each of which is clutching at her, strangling her
      and taking advantage of her temporary defencelessness and lack
      of arms. The war has already lasted four years. The German
      imperialist plunderers have achieved a number of victories and
      continue to deceive their workers, a section of whom, bribed by
      the bourgeoisie, have deserted to the side of the German
      imperialists and continue to repeat the despicable lie about the
      defence of the fatherland when as a matter of fact the German
      soldiers are defending the selfish predatory interests of the
      German capitalists who have promised them that Germany will
      bring peace and prosperity. Actually we see that the more
      extensive Germany’s victories become the more the
      hopelessness of her position is revealed.

    
      When the forced, exploiters’ peace of Brest, a peace based
      upon violence and the oppression of peoples, was concluded,
      Germany, the German capitalists boasted that they would give the
      workers bread and peace. But now they are reducing the bread
      ration in Germany. It is universally admitted that the food
      campaign in the rich Ukraine has been a failure. In Austria the
      situation has again reached the stage of hunger riots, of
      nation-wide outbursts of indignation, because the more Germany
      is victorious the clearer it becomes to all, even to many
      representatives of the big bourgeoisie in Germany, that the war
      is hopeless. They are beginning to realise that even if the
      Germans are able to maintain their resistance on the Western
      front it will not bring the end of the war any nearer but will
      create another enslaved country which will have to be occupied
      by German troops and make it necessary to continue the war; and
      this will lead to the disintegration of the German army, which
      is being transformed from an army into a gang of plunderers

      

      violating foreign peoples, unarmed peoples, and extracting from
      their countries the last remnants of food supplies and raw
      materials in the face of tremendous resistance from the
      population. The closer Germany approaches the outer frontiers of
      Europe the clearer it becomes that she is confronted by Britain
      and America, which are far more developed than she is, which
      have greater productive forces, which have had time to dispatch
      tens of thousands of the best new forces to Europe, and to
      transform all their machines and factories into instruments of
      destruction. The war is receiving fresh fuel, and that means
      that every year, nay every month, sees the further extension of
      this war. There is no other way out of this war except
      revolution, except civil war, except the transformation of the
      war between capitalists for profits, for the sharing of the
      loot, for the strangulation of small countries, into a war of
      the oppressed against the oppressors, a war which always
      accompanies not only great revolutions but every serious
      revolution in history, a war which is the only war that is
      legitimate and just, a holy war from the point of view of the
      interests of the working people, of the oppressed and of the
      exploited masses. (Applause.) Without such a war there can be no
      liberation from imperialist slavery. We must be perfectly clear
      in our minds about the new disasters that civil war brings for
      every country. The more cultured a country is the more serious
      will be these disasters. Let us picture to ourselves a country
      possessing machinery and railways in which civil war is raging,
      and this civil war cuts off communication between the various
      parts of the country. Picture to yourselves the condition of
      regions which for decades have been accustomed to living by the
      interchange of manufactured goods and you will understand that
      every civil war brings fresh disasters, which the great
      socialists foresaw. The imperialists doom the working class to
      disaster, suffering and extinction. Intolerable and painful as
      all this may be for the whole of mankind, it is becoming clearer
      and clearer every day to the new socialist society that the
      imperialists will not be able to put an end to the war which
      they started; other classes will end it—the working class,
      which in all countries is becoming more and more active every
      day, more and more angry and indignant, and which, irrespective

      

      of sentiments and moods, the force of circumstances is
      compelling to overthrow, the rule of the capitalists. We, in
      Russia, are particularly affected by the disaster of famine and
      are passing through a period more difficult than has ever been
      experienced by any revolution, and we cannot count on immediate
      aid from our West-European comrades. The whole difficulty of the
      Russian revolution is that it was much easier for the Russian
      revolutionary working class to start than it is for the
      West-European classes, but it is much more difficult for us to
      continue. It is more difficult to start a revolution in
      West-European countries because there the revolutionary
      proletariat is opposed by the higher thinking that comes with
      culture, and the working class is in a state of cultural
      slavery.

    
      Meanwhile, because of our international position, we must pass
      through an incredibly difficult time, and we representatives of
      the working masses, we workers, class-conscious workers, in all
      our agitation and propaganda, in every speech we deliver, in
      every appeal we issue, in our talks in the factories and at
      every meeting with peasants, must explain that the disaster,
      that has befallen us is an international disaster and that there
      is no other way out of it except world revolution. Since we must
      pass through such a painful period in which we temporarily stand
      alone, we must exert all our efforts to bear the difficulties of
      this period staunchly, knowing that in the last analysis we are
      not alone, that the disaster which we are experiencing is
      creeping upon every European country, and that not one of these
      countries will be able to extricate itself except by a series of
      revolutions.

    
      Russia has been afflicted by famine, which has been made more
      acute by the fact that the imposed peace has deprived her of the
      most fertile grain-bearing gubernias, and it has also been made
      more acute by the fact that the old food campaign is drawing to
      a close. We still have several weeks to go before the next
      harvest, which will undoubtedly be a rich one; and these few
      weeks will be a very difficult period of transition which, being
      a difficult one generally, is rendered still more critical by
      the fact that in Russia the deposed exploiting classes of
      landowners and capitalists are doing all they can, are exerting
      every effort to restore their power.

      

      This is one of the main reasons why the grain-bearing gubernias
      of Siberia are cut off from us as a result of the Czechoslovak
      mutiny. But we know very well what forces are behind this
      revolt, we know very well that the Czechoslovak soldiers are
      declaring to the representatives of our troops, of our workers
      and of our peasants, that they do not want to fight against
      Russia and against the Russian Soviet government, that they only
      want to make their way by force of arms to the frontier. But at
      their head stand yesterday’s generals, landowners and
      capitalists, who are financed by the British and the French and
      enjoy the support of Russian traitors to socialism who have
      deserted to the side of the bourgeoisie. (Applause.)

    
      The whole gang of them is taking advantage of the famine to make
      another attempt to restore the landowners and the capitalists to
      power. Comrades, the experience of our revolution confirms the
      correctness of the words which always distinguish the
      representatives of scientific socialism, Marx and his followers,
      from the utopian socialists, from the petty-bourgeois
      socialists, from the socialist intellectuals and from the
      socialist dreamers. The intellectual dreamers, the
      petty-bourgeois socialists, thought, and perhaps still think, or
      dream, that it is possible to introduce socialism by
      persuasion. They think that the majority of the people will be
      convinced, and when they become convinced the minority will
      obey; that the majority will vote and socialism will be
      introduced. (Applause.) No, the world is not built so happily;
      the exploiters, the brutal landowners, the capitalist class are
      not amenable to persuasion. The socialist revolution confirms
      what everybody has seen—the furious resistance of the
      exploiters. The stronger the pressure of the oppressed classes
      becomes, the nearer they come to overthrowing all oppression,
      all exploitation, the more resolutely the oppressed peasantry
      and the oppressed workers display their own initiative, the more
      furious does the resistance of the exploiters become.

    
      We are passing through a very severe and very painful period of
      transition from capitalism to socialism, a period which will
      inevitably be a very long one in all countries because, I
      repeat, the oppressors retaliate to every success achieved by
      the oppressed class by fresh attempts at resistance,

      

      by attempts to overthrow the power of the oppressed class. The
      Czechoslovak mutiny, which is obviously being supported by
      Anglo-French imperialism in the pursuit of its policy of
      overthrowing the Soviet government, illustrates what this
      resistance can be. We see that this mutiny is, of course,
      spreading because of the famine. It is understandable that among
      the broad masses of the toilers there are many (you know this
      particularly well; every one of you sees this in the factories)
      who are not enlightened socialists and cannot be such because
      they have to slave in the factories and they have neither the
      time nor the opportunity to become socialists. It is
      understandable that these people should be in sympathy when they
      see the workers coming to the fore in the factory, when they see
      that these workers obtain the opportunity to learn the art of
      managing facto~. riesa diffi cult and exacting task in which
      mistakes are inevitable,.’ but the only task in which the
      workers can at last realise their constant striving to make the
      machines, the factories, the works, the best of modern
      techniques, the best achievements of humanity serve not purposes
      of exploitation, but the purpose of improving and easing the
      lives of the overwhelming majority. But when they see the
      imperialist plunderers in the West, in the North and in the East
      taking advantage of Russia’s defencelessness to tear her
      heart out, and since they do not yet know what the situation in
      the labour movement will be in other countries, of course they
      are guided by despair. Nor can it be otherwise. It would be
      ridiculous to expect and foolish to think that capitalist
      society, based on exploitation, could at one stroke create a
      complete appreciation of the need for socialism and an
      understanding of it. This cannot be. This appreciation comes
      only at the end of the struggle which has to be waged in this
      painful period, in which one revolution has broken out before
      the rest and gets no assistance from the others, and when famine
      approaches. Naturally, certain strata of the toilers are
      inevitably overcome by despair and indignation and turn away in
      disgust from everything. Naturally, the counter-revolutionaries,
      the landowners and capitalists, and their protectors and
      henchmen, take advantage of this situation for the purpose
      of. launching attack alter attack upon the socialist government.

    


      We see what this has led to in all the towns where no assistance
      was given by foreign bayonets. We know that it was possible to
      defeat the Soviet government only when those people who had
      shouted so much about defending the fatherland and about their
      patriotism revealed their capitalist nature and concluded
      agreements, one day with the German bayonets in order jointly
      with them to massacre the Ukrainian Bolsheviks, the next day
      with the Turkish bayonets in order to march against the
      Bolsheviks, the day after that with the Czechoslovak bayonets in
      order to overthrow the Soviet government and massacre the
      Bolsheviks in Samara. Foreign aid alone, the aid of foreign
      bayonets alone, the selling out of Russia to Japanese, German
      and Turkish bayonets alone, have up to now given some show of
      success to the landowners and to those who have compromised with
      the capitalists. But we know that when, owing to the famine and
      the despair of the masses, rebellions of this sort broke out in
      districts where the aid of foreign bayonets could not be
      obtained, as was the case in Saratov, Kozlov and Tambov, the
      rule of the landowners, the capitalists and their friends who
      camouflaged themselves with the beautiful slogans of the
      Constituent Assembly lasted not more than days, if not
      hours. The further the units of the Soviet army were from the
      centre temporarily occupied by the counter-revolution, the more
      determined was the movement among the urban workers, the more
      initiative these workers and peasants displayed in marching to
      the aid of Saratov, Penza and Kozlov and in immediately
      overthrowing the rule of the counter-revolution which had been
      established.

    
      Comrades, if you examine these events from the point of view of
      all that is taking place in world history, if you bear in mind
      that your task, our common task, is to explain to ourselves and
      to explain to the masses that these great disasters have not
      befallen us accidentally, but first as a result of the
      imperialist war, and secondly as a result of the furious
      resistance of the landowners, the capitalists and the
      exploiters, if we are clear about this we can be certain that,
      however difficult it may be, the full appreciation of this will
      spread wider and wider among the masses and we shall succeed in
      creating discipline, in overcoming the indiscipline in our
      factories, and in helping the people to

      

      live through this painful and particularly difficult period,
      which perhaps will last the month or two, the few weeks that
      still remain until the new harvest.

    
      You know that, as a consequence of the Czechoslovak
      counter-revolutionary mutiny, which has cut us off from Siberia,
      as a consequence of the continuous unrest in the South, and as a
      consequence of the war, the position in Russia today Is
      particularly difficult; but it goes without saying that the more
      difficult the position of our country in which famine is
      approaching becomes, the more determined and firm must be the
      measures that we adopt to combat this famine. One of the
      principal measures to combat the famine is the establishment of
      the grain monopoly. In this connection you will know perfectly
      well from your own experience that the kulaks, the rich, are
      raising an outcry against the grain monopoly at every step. This
      can be understood, because in those places where the grain
      monopoly was temporarily abolished, as Skoropadsky abolished it
      in Kiev, profiteering reached unprecedented dimensions; there
      the price of a pood of grain rose to two hundred
      rubles. Naturally, when there is a shortage of goods without
      which it is impossible to live, the owners of such goods can
      become rich, prices rise to unprecedented heights. Naturally,
      the horror, the panic created by the fear of death from
      starvation forced prices up to unprecedented heights, and in
      Kiev they had to think of restoring the monopoly. Here in
      Russia, long ago, even before the Bolsheviks came to power,
      notwithstanding the wealth of grain that Russia possessed, the
      government realised the necessity of introducing the grain
      monopoly. Only those who are absolutely ignorant, or who have
      deliberately sold themselves to the interests of the moneybags,
      can be opposed to it. (Applause.)

    
      But, comrades, when we speak of the grain monopoly we must think
      of the enormous difficulties of realisation that are contained
      in this phrase. It is quite easy to say “grain
      monopoly”, but we must ponder over what this phrase
      means. It means that all surplus grain belongs to the state; it
      means that every single pood of grain over and above that
      required by the peasant for his farm, to maintain his family and
      cattle and for sowing, that every extra pood of grain must be
      taken by the state. How is this to be done? The

      

      state must fix prices; every surplus pood of grain must be found
      and brought in. How can the peasant, whose mind has been
      stultified for hundreds of years, who has been robbed and beaten
      to stupefaction by the landowners and capitalists, who never
      allowed him to eat his fill, how can this peasant learn to
      appreciate in a few weeks or a few months what the grain
      monopoly means? How can millions of people who up to now have
      known the state only by its oppression, its violence, by the
      tyranny and robbery of the government officials, how can these
      peasants, living in remote villages and doomed to ruin, be made
      to understand what the rule of the workers and peasants means,
      be made to understand that power is in the hands of the poor,
      that to hoard grain, possess surplus grain and not hand it over
      to the state is a crime, and that those who hoard surplus grain
      are robbers, exploiters, and guilty of causing terrible
      starvation among the workers of Petrograd, Moscow, etc.? How can
      the peasant understand these things, considering that up to now
      he has been kept in ignorance and that the only thing he has
      been concerned with in the village is 

      tose11 

      his grain? How can he understand these things? It is not
      surprising that when we examine this question more closely, from
      the point of view of practical life, we realise what
      an.enormously difficult task it is to introduce a grain monopoly
      in a country in which tsarism and the landowners held the
      majority of the peasants in ignorance, in a country in which the
      peasantry have sown grain on their own land for the first time
      in many centuries. (Applause.)

    
      But the more difficult this task is, the greater it appears to
      be upon close and careful study, the more clearly must we say to
      ourselves what we have always said, namely, that the
      emancipation of the workers must be performed by the workers
      themselves. We have always said: the emancipation of the working
      people from oppression cannot be brought from outside; the
      working people themselves, by their struggle, by their movement,
      by their agitation, must learn to solve a new historical
      problem,; and the more difficult, the greater, the more
      responsible this new historical problem is, the larger must be
      the number of those enlisted for the purpose of taking an
      independent part in solving it. No class consciousness, no
      organisation is required to sell grain to

      

      a merchant, to a trader. To do that one must live as the
      bourgeoisie has ordered. One must merely be an obedient slave
      and imagine and admit that the world as built by the bourgeoisie
      is magnificent. But in order to overcome this capitalist chaos,
      in order to introduce the grain monopoly, in order to ensure
      that every surplus pood of grain is transferred to the state,
      there must be prolonged, difficult and strenuous organisational
      work, not by organisers, not by agitators, but by the masses
      themselves.

    
      There are such people in the Russian countryside. The majority
      of the peasants belong to the category of the very poor and poor
      peasants who are not in a position to trade in grain surpluses
      and become robbers hoarding perhaps hundreds of poods of grain
      while others are starving. But today, the situation is that a
      peasant will perhaps call himself a working peasant (some people
      like this term very much); but if such a peasant has by his own
      labour, even without the aid of hired labour, harvested hundreds
      of poods of grain and calculates that if he keeps this grain he
      will be able to get more than six rubles, from a profiteer, or
      from a starving urban worker who has come with his starving
      family and may offer two hundred rubles a pood—such a
      peasant, who hoards hundreds of poods of grain in order to raise
      the price and get even a hundred rubles a pood, cannot be called
      a working peasant, he becomes transformed into an exploiter,
      into someone worse than a robber. What must we do under these
      circumstances? Whom can we rely upon in our struggle? We know
      that the Soviet revolution and the Soviet government differ from
      other revolutions and other governments not only because they
      have overthrown the power of the landowners and the capitalists,
      not only because they have destroyed the feudal state, the
      autocracy, but also because the masses have rebelled against all
      the bureaucrats and created a new state in which power must
      belong to the workers and peasants—not only must, but
      already does belong to them. In this state there are no police,
      no bureaucrats and no standing army kept in barracks for many
      years, isolated from the people and trained to shoot the people.

    
      We place arms in the hands of the workers and peasants, who must
      learn the art of war. There are units who give way

      

      to temptation, vice and crime because they are not separated by
      a Chinese Wall from the world of oppression, from the world of
      starvation, in which those who have want to enrich themselves
      out of what they have. That is why very often we see detachments
      of class-conscious workers leaving Petrograd and Moscow and, on
      reaching the district to which they have been sent, going astray
      and becoming criminals. We see the bourgeoisie clapping their
      hands in delight and filling the columns of their corrupt press
      with all sorts of bogies to frighten the people. “See what
      your detachments are like,”they say, “what disorder
      they are creating, how much better our detachments of private
      capitalists behaved”.

    
      No, thank you, bourgeois gentlemen! You will not frighten
      us. You know very well that recovery from the misfortunes and
      ulcers of the capitalist world will not come all at once. And we
      know that recovery will come only through struggle; we will
      expose every incident of this kind, not to provide material for
      the counter-revolutionary Mensheviks and
      Constitutional-Democrats to smile and gloat over, but in order
      to teach wider masses of the people. Since our detachments do
      not fulfil their duties properly, give us more loyal and
      class-conscious detachments far exceeding the number of those
      who gave way to temptation. These must be organised and
      educated; exploited and starving workers who are not
      class-conscious must be rallied around every class-conscious
      worker. The rural poor must be roused, educated and shown that
      the Soviet government will do all it possibly can to help them,
      so as to carry out the grain monopoly.

    
      And so, when we approached this task, when the Soviet government
      stated these questions clearly, it said: comrades, workers,
      organise, rally the food detachments, combat every case in which
      these detachments show that they are not equal to their duties,
      organise more strongly and rectify your mistakes, rally the
      village poor around you! The kulaks know that their last hour
      has struck, that their enemy is advancing not merely with
      sermons, words and phrases, but by organising the village poor;
      and if we succeed in organising the village poor we shall
      vanquish the kulaks. The kulaks know that the hour of the last,
      most determined, most desperate battle for socialism is
      approaching.

      

      This struggle seems to be only a struggle for bread, but as a
      matter of fact it is a struggle for socialism. If the worers
      learn to solve these problems independently—no one will
      come to their aind if they learn to rally the village poor
      around them, they will achieve victory, they will have bread and
      the proper distribution of bread, they will even have the proper
      distribution of labour, because by distributing labour properly
      we shall be supreme in all spheres of labour, in all spheres of
      industry.

    
      Foreseeing all this, the kulaks have made repeated attempts to
      bribe the poor. They know that grain must be sold to the state
      at six rubles per pood, but they sell grain to a poor peasant
      neighbour at three rubles per pood and say to him: “You
      can go to a profiteer and sell at forty rubles per pood. We have
      common interests; we must unite against the state, which is
      robbing us. It wants to give us six rubles per pood; here, take
      three poods, you can make sixty rubles. You needn’t worry
      about how much I make, that is my business.”

    
      I know that on these grounds armed conflicts with the peasants
      repeatedly occur, while the enemies of the Soviet government
      gloat over it and snigger, and exert every effort to overthrow
      the Soviet government. But we say: “That is because the
      food detachments that were sent were not sufficiently
      class-conscious; but the larger the detachments were the more
      frequently we had cases—and this happened
      repeatedly—when the peasants gave their grain without a
      single case of violence, because class-conscious workers show
      that their main strength lies, not in violence, but in the fact
      that they are the representatives of the organised and
      enlightened poor, whereas in the rural districts there is a mass
      of ignorance, the poor are not enlightened. If the latter are
      approached in an intelligent manner, if they are told in plain
      language, without bookish words, in a plain human way, that in
      Petrograd and Moscow an4 in scores of uyezds people are starving
      and typhus is spreading as a result of famine, that tens of
      thousands of Russian peasants and workers are dying of
      starvation, that it is the rich who have been unjustly hoarding
      grain and making profit out of the starvation of the people, it
      will be possible to organise the poor and get the surplus grain
      collected not by violence but by the organisation of the village
      poor. I frequently receive complaints about the kulaks from
      comrades who have gone to the villages with food detachments and
      who have fought against the counter-revolution. I will quote an
      example of which I have a particularly lively recollection
      because I heard it yesterday, of something that occurred in
      Yelets Uyozd.[3] In that uyezd a Soviet of
      Workers’ Deputies has been set up, and there are a large
      number of class-conscious workers and poor peasants
      there. Thanks to this, it has been possible to consolidate the
      power of the poor. The first time the representatives of Yelets
      Uyezd came to report to me I would not believe them, I thought
      they were boasting. But what they said was confirmed by comrades
      who had been sent especially from Moscow to other
      gubernias. They said that the manner in which work had been
      organised in Yelets was only to be welcomed, and confirmed the
      fact that in Russia there were uyezds where the Soviets were
      equal to their tasks and had succeeded in completely removing
      the kulaks and exploiters from the Soviets, in organising the
      toilers, in organising the poor. Let those who use their wealth
      for profit clear out of the Soviet state organisations!
      (Applause.)

    
      After they had expelled the kulaks they went to the town of
      Yelets, a trading town. They did not wait for a decree to
      introduce the grain monopoly but remembered that the Soviets
      represent a government that is close to the people and that
      every person, if he is a revolutionary, if he is a socialist and
      is really on the side of the toilers, must act quickly and
      decisively. They organised all ’the workers and poor
      peasants and formed so many detachments that searches were made
      all over Yelets. They allowed only the trusted and responsible
      leaders of the detachments to enter the houses. Not a single
      person of whom they were not certain was allowed to enter the
      houses, for they knew how often vacillation occurs and that
      nothing disgraces the Soviet government so much as these cases
      of robbery committed by unworthy representatives and servants of
      the Soviet government. They succeeded in collecting a huge
      quantity of surplus grain and there was not a single house in
      commercial Yelets in which the bourgeoisie could make any profit
      by profiteering.

    


      Of course, I know that it is much easier to do this in a small
      town than in a city like Moscow, but it must not be forgotten
      that not a single uyezd town possesses the proletarian forces
      that Moscow has.

    
      In Tambov, recently, the counter-revolution was victorious for
      several hours. It even published one issue of a Menshevik and
      Right Socialist-Revolutionary newspaper which called for the
      convocation of a Constituent Assembly, for the overthrow of the
      Soviet government and declared that the victory of the new
      government was permanent. But Red Army men and peasants arrived
      from the surrounding country and in one day overthrew this new
      “permanent”government, which claimed to be supported
      by the Constituent Assembly. (Applause.)

    
      The same thing occurred in other uyezds in Tambov Gubernia, a
      gubernia of enormous size. Its northern uyezds are in the
      non-agricultural zone, but its southern uyezds are
      extraordinarily fertile, there they gather very big
      harvests. Many of the peasants there have surplus grain, and
      there one must act energetically and have a particularly firm
      and clear understanding of the situation to be able to gain the
      support of the poor peasants and overcome the kulaks. There the
      kulaks are hostile to every sort of workers’ and
      peasants’ government and our people have to wait for the
      assistance of the Petrograd and Moscow workers who, on every
      occasion, armed with the weapon of organisation, expel the
      kulaks from the Soviets, organise the poor and jointly with the
      local peasants acquire experience in fighting for the state
      monopoly of grain, experience in organising the rural poor and
      urban toilers in such a way as will guarantee us final and
      complete victory. I have quoted these examples to illustrate the
      food situation, comrades, because it seems to me that from the
      point of view of the working people, for us, for the workers,
      for the politically conscious proletariat it is not the
      statistical estimate of the amount of grain, of how many million
      poods we can obtain, that matters when one is describing the
      fight against the kulaks for bread. I leave it to the food
      supply experts to draw up these statistics. I must say that if
      we succeed in securing the surplus grain from the gubernias
      adjacent to the Moscow non-agricultural zone and from fertile
      Siberia, 

      

      even there we could secure enough grain to save the
      non-agricultural gubernias from starvation during the few
      critical weeks that remain until the harvest. In order to do
      that we must organise a still larger number of class-conscious,
      advanced workers. This was the main lesson to be learned from
      all preceding revolutions, and it is the main lesson to be
      learned from our revolution. The better we are organised, the
      more widely organisation manifests itself, the more the workers
      in the factories realise that their strength lies entirely in
      their organisation and that of the village poor, the more will
      our victory in the struggle against famine and. in the struggle
      for socialism be assured. For, I repeat, our task is not to
      invent a new form of government but to rouse, to educate and to
      organise every representative of the village poor, even in the
      remotest villages, to independent activity. It will not be
      difficult for a few class-conscious urban workers, Petrograd and
      Moscow workers, to explain, even in remote villages, that it is
      wrong to hoard grain, to profiteer in grain, to use it for
      making vodka, when hundreds of thousands are dying in Moscow. In
      order to do that, the workers of Petrograd and Moscow, and
      particularly you, comrades, the representatives of the most
      varied trades, factories and works, must thoroughly understand
      that no one will come to your assistance, that from other
      classes you can expect not assistants but enemies, that the
      Soviet government has no loyal intelligentsia at its
      service. The intelligentsia are using their experience and
      knowledge—the highest human achievement—in the
      service of the exploiters, and are doing all they can to prevent
      our gaining victory over the exploiters; their efforts will
      cause the death of hundreds of thousands from starvation, but
      that will not break the resistance of the toilers. We have no
      one to depend upon but the class with which we achieved the
      revolution and with which we shall overcome the greatest
      difficulties, cross the very difficult zone that lies ahead of
      us—and that is the factory workers, the urban and rural
      proletariat, who speak to each other in a language they all
      understand, who in town and country will vanquish all our
      enemies—the kulaks and the rich.

     But in order to achieve this we must remember the
      fundamental postulate of the socialist revolution which the

      

      workers so often forget, and that is, that in order to make a
      socialist revolution, in order to bring it about, in order to
      liberate the people from oppression, it is not necessary
      immediately to abolish classes; the most class-conscious and
      organised workers must take power in their hands. The workers
      must become the ruling class in the state. That is the truth
      which the majority of you have read in The Communist Manifesto
      of Marx and Engels, which was written more than seventy years
      ago, and which has been translated into all languages and
      circulated in all countries. Everywhere the truth has been
      revealed that in order to vanquish the capitalists it is
      necessary during the struggle against exploitation, while
      ignorance is rife, while people do not yet believe in the new
      system, that the organised urban factory workers become the
      ruling class. When you gather together in your factory
      committees to settle your affairs, remember that the revolution
      will not be able to retain a single one of its gains if you, in
      your factory committees, merely concern yourselves with
      workers’ technical or purely financial interests. The
      workers and the oppressed classes have managed to seize power
      more than once, but never have they been able to retain it. To
      do this the workers must be able not only to rise in heroic
      struggle and overthrow exploitation; they must also be able to
      organise, to maintain discipline, to be staunch, to discuss
      affairs calmly when everything is tottering, when you are being
      attacked, when innumerable stupid rumours are being spread it is
      at such a time that the factory committees, which in all things
      are closely connected with the vast masses, are faced with the
      great political task of becoming primarily an organ of
      administration of political life. The fundamental political
      problem that faces the Soviet government is that of securing the
      proper distribution of grain. Although Yelets succeeded in
      bridling the local bourgeoisie, it is much more difficult to do
      this in Moscow; but here we have incomparably better
      organisation, and here you can easily find tens of thousands of
      honest people whom your parties and your trade unions will
      supply and answer for, who will be able to lead the detachments
      and guarantee that they will remain ideologically loyal in spite
      of all difficulties, in spite of all temptations and in spite of
      the torments of hunger. No other class could

      

      undertake this task at the present time, no other class would
      ibe able to lead the people who often fall into despair; there s
      no other class but the urban factory proletariat that can do
      this. Your factory committees must cease to be merely factory
      committees, they must become the fundamental state nuclei of the
      ruling class. (Applause.) Your organisation, your solidarity,
      your energy will determine whether we shall hold out in this
      severe transitional period as staunchly as a Soviet government
      should hold out. Take up this work yourselves, take it up from
      every side, expose abuses every day. Rectify every mistake that
      is committed with your own experience—many mistakes are
      committed today because the working class is still
      inexperienced, but the important thing is that it should itself
      take up this work and rectify its own mistakes. If we act in
      this way, if every committee understands that it is one of the
      leaders of the greatest revolution in the world—then we
      shall achieve socialism for the whole world! (Applause
      culminating in an ovation.)

      2

    

      REPLY TO THE DEBATE
      ON THE CURRENT SITUATION
      JUNE 28, 1918

    
      Comrades, permit me first of all to deal with a few of the
      propositions advanced in opposition to me by Paderin, who
      delivered the second report. From the shorthand report I note
      that he said: “We must do everything possible to enable
      primarily the British and German proletariat to rise against
      their oppressors. What must be done to bring this about? Is it
      our business to help these oppressors? By rousing enmity among
      ourselves, by destroying and weakening the country, we
      infinitely strengthen the position of the imperialists, British,
      French and German, who in the end will unite in order to
      strangle the working class of Russia. This argument shows how
      irresolute the Mensheviks have always been in their struggle
      against and in their opposition to imperialist war, because the
      argument I have just quoted can only be understood as coming
      from the lips of a man who calls himself a defencist, who takes
      up a completely imperialist position (applause), of a man who
      justifies imperialist war and who repeats the bourgeois lie that
      in such a war the workers defend their fatherland. If, indeed,
      one adopts the point of view that the workers must not destroy
      and weaken the country during such a war, it is tantamount to
      calling upon the workers to defend the fatherland in an
      imperialist war. And you know what the Bolshevik Government,
      which considered it its first duty to publish, to expose and to
      pillory the secret treaties, has done. You know that the Allies
      waged war for the sake of the secret treaties, and that the
      Kerensky government, which existed with the aid and support of
      the Mensheviks and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, not only
      did not annul the secret treaties, but did not even publish
      them; you know that the Russian people waged war for the sake of
      these secret treaties, which promised the Russian landowners and
      capitalists, in the event of victory, Constantinople, the
      Dardanelles, Lvov, Galicia and Armenia. If we adopt the point of
      view of the working class, if we are opposed to the war, how
      could we tolerate these secret treaties? As long as we tolerated
      the secret treaties, as long as we tolerated the rule of the
      bourgeoisie in Russia, we fostered the chauvinistic conviction
      in the minds of the German workers that there were no
      class-conscious workers in Russia, that everyone in Russia
      supported imperialism, and that Russia was pursuing a war for
      the purpose of plundering Austria and Turkey. But the very
      opposite is the case. The workers’ and peasants’
      government has done more than any other government in the world
      to weaken the German imperialists, to tear the German workers
      away from them, because when the secret treaties were published
      and exposed to the world, even the German chauvinists, even the
      German defencists, even those workers who supported their
      government, had to admit in their newspaper
      Vonviirts,”.’ their central organ, that “this
      is an act of a socialist government, a genuinely revolutionary
      act”. They had to admit this because not a single
      imperialist government involved in the war did this; ours was
      the only government that denounced the secret treaties.

    
      Of course at the back of every German worker’s mind, no
      matter how cowed, downtrodden or bribed by the imperialists he
      may be, there is the thought: “Has not our government
      secret treaties?”(A voice: “Tell us about the Black
      Sea fleet.”) All right, I will tell you about it, although
      it has nothing to do with the subject. At the back of every
      German worker’s mind there is the thought: “If the
      Russian workers have gone to the length of denouncing the secret
      treaties, has not the German Government secret
      treaties?”When the Brest negotiations began, Comrade
      Trotsky’s exposures reached the whole world. Did not this
      policy rouse in an enemy country engaged in a terrible
      Imperialist war with other governments, not anger but the
      sympathy of the masses of the people? The only government to do
      that was our government. Our revolution succeeded in rousing a
      great revolutionary movement during wartime in an enemy country
      merely by the fact that we denounced the secret treaties, by the
      fact that we said: “We will not be deterred by any
      danger.”If we know, if we say, and not merely say, but
      mean it, that international revolution is the only salvation
      from world war, from the imperialist massacre of the people,
      then we in our revolution must pursue that aim, notwithstanding
      all difficulties and all dangers. And when we took this path,
      for the first time in history, in Germany, in the most
      imperialistic and most disciplined country, in the midst of war,
      a mass strike broke out and flared up in January. Of course,
      there are people who believe that revolution can break out in a
      foreign country to order, by agreement. These people are either
      mad or they are provocateurs. We have experienced two
      revolutions during the past twelve years.We know that
      revolutions cannot be made to order, or by agreement; they break
      out when tens of millions of people come to the conclusion that
      it is impossible to live in the old way any longer. We know what
      difficulties accompanied the birth of the revolution in 1905 and
      in 1917, and we never expected revolution to break out in other
      countries at one stroke, as a result of a single appeal. The
      revolution now beginning to grow in Germany and in Austria is a
      tribute to the great service rendered by the Russian October
      Revolution. (Applause.) We read in the newspapers today that in
      Vienna, where the bread ration is smaller than ours, where the
      plunder of the Ukraine can bring no relief, where the population
      says that it has never before experienced such horrors of
      starvation, an Arbelterrat has sprung up. In Vienna general
      strikes are breaking out again.

    
      And we say to ourselves: This is the second step, this is the
      second proof that when the Russian workers denounced the
      imperialist secret treaties, when they expelled their
      bourgeoisie, they acted as consistent class-conscious worker
      internationalists, they facilitated the growth of the revolution
      in Germany and in Austria in a way that no other revolution in
      the world has ever done in a hostile country which was in a
      state of war, and in which bitter feeling ran high.

    
      To forecast when a revolution will mature, to promise that it
      will come tomorrow, would be deceiving you. You remember,
      particularly those of you who experienced both Russian
      revolutions, that no one in November 1904 could guarantee that
      within two months a hundred thousand St. Petersburg workers
      would march to the Winter Palace and start a great revolution.

    
      Recall December 1916. How could we guarantee that two months
      later the tsarist monarchy would be overthrown in the course of
      a few days? We in this country, which has experienced two
      revolutions, know and realise that the progress of the
      revolution cannot be foretold, and that revolution cannot be
      called forth. We can only work for the revolution. If you work
      consistently, if you work devotedly, if this work is linked up
      with the interests of the oppressed masses, who make up the
      majority, revolution will come; but where, how, at what moment,
      from what immediate cause, cannot be foretold. That is why we
      shall never take the liberty of deceiving the masses by saying:
      “The German workers will help us tomorrow, they will blow
      up their Kaiser the day after tomorrow.” We have no right
      to say such things.

    
      Our position is made more difficult by the fact that the Russian
      revolution proved to be ahead of other revolutions; but the fact
      that we are not alone is proved by the news that reaches us
      nearly every day that the best German Social-Democrats are
      expressing themselves in favour of the Bolsheviks, that the
      Bolsheviks are being supported in the open German press by Clara
      Zetkin and also by Franz Mehring, who in a series of articles
      has been showing the German workers that the Bolsheviks alone
      have properly understood what socialism is. Recently a
      Social-Democrat named Hoschka definitely stated in the
      Wiirttemberg Landtag that he regarded the Bolsheviks alone as
      models of consistency in the pursuit of a correct revolutionary
      policy. Do you think that such statements do not find an echo
      among scores, hundreds and thousands of German workers who
      associate themselves with these statements almost before they
      are uttered? When affairs in Germany and Austria have reached
      the stage of the formation of Arbelterrdte and of a second mass
      strike, we can say without the least exaggeration, without the
      least self-deception, that this marks the beginning of a
      revolution. We say very definitely: Our policy and our path have
      been a correct policy and a correct path; we have helped the
      Austrian and the German workers to regard themselves, not as
      enemies strangling the Russian workers in the interests of the
      Kaiser, in the interests of the German capitalists, but as
      brothers of the Russian workers, who are performing the same
      revolutionary work as they are. (Applause.)

    
      I would also like to mention a passage in Paderin’s speech
      which, in my opinion, deserves attention, the more so that it
      partly coincides with the idea expressed by the preceding
      speaker.[4] This is the passage: “We now
      see that civil war is being waged within the working class. Can
      we permit this to go on?” You see that civil war is
      described as war within the working class or as war against the
      peasants, as the preceding speaker described it. We know
      perfectly well that both descriptions are wrong. The civil war
      in Russia is a war waged by the workers and the poor peasants
      against the landowners and the capitalists. This war is being
      prolonged and protracted because the Russian land-owners and
      capitalists were vanquished in October and November with
      relatively small losses, were vanquished by the enthusiasm of
      the masses of the people under conditions in which it became
      immediately clear to them that the people would not support
      them. Things reached the stage that even in the Don region,
      where there is the largest number of rich Cossacks who live by
      exploiting wage labour, where the hopes of the
      counter-revolution were brightest, even there, Bogayevsky, the
      leader of the counter-revolutionary rebellion, had to admit and
      publicly admitted: “Ours is a lost cause because even in
      our region the majority of the population are on the side of the
      Bolsheviks.” (Applause.)

    
      That was the position, that was how the landowners and
      capitalists lost their counter-revolutionary game in October and
      November.

    
      That was the result of their reckless attempt to organise the
      officer cadets, the officers, the sons of landowners and
      capitalists into a White Guard to fight the workers’ and
      peasants’ revolution. And now—if you don’t
      know this read today’s newspapers—the Czechoslovak
      adventurers are operating with the financial assistance of the
      Anglo-French capitalists,[5] who are bribing troops to drag us
      into the war again. Haven’t you read what. the
      Czechoslovaks said iii Samara? They said: “We shall join
      Dutov aiid Semyonov and compel the workers of Russia and the
      Russian people once again to fight against Germany side by side
      with Britain and France. We shall restore those secret treaties
      aiid fling you once again, for another four years perhaps, into
      this imperialist war in alliance with the bourgeoisie.”
      But instead of that we are now waging war against our
      bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie of other countries,’and it
      is solely due to the fact that we are waging this war that we
      have won the sympathy and support of the workers of other
      countries. If the workers of one belligerent country see that in
      the other belligerent country close connections are being
      established between the workers and the bourgeoisie it splits
      the workers up according to nation and unites them with their
      respective bourgeoisie. This is a great evil, it means the
      collapse of the socialist revolution, it means the collapse and
      doom of the whole International. (Applause.)

    
      In 1914 the International was wrecked because the workers of all
      countries united with the bourgeoisie in their respective
      countries and split their own ranks. Now, this split is being
      healed. Perhaps you have read that in Britain recently the
      Scottish schoolteacher and trade unionist MacLean was sentenced
      for a second time, to five years’ imprisonment—the
      first time he was sentenced to eighteen months—for
      exposing the real objects of the war and speaking about the
      criminal nature of British imperialism. When he was released
      there was already a representative of the Soviet Government in
      Britain, Litvinov, who immediately appointed MacLean Consul, a
      representative of the Soviet Russian Federative Republic in
      Britain, and the Scottish workers greeted this appointment with
      enthusiasm. The British Government has again started persecuting
      MacLean and this time not only as a Scottish schoolteacher, but
      also as Consul of the Federative Soviet Republic. MacLean is in
      prison because he acted openly as the representative of our
      government; we have never seen this man, he is the beloved
      leader of the Scottish workers, he has never belonged to our
      Party, but we joined with him; the Russian and Scottish workers
      united against the British Government in spite of the fact that
      the latter buys Czechoslovaks and

      is manoeuvring frantically to drag the Russian Republic into the
      war. This is proof that in all countries, irrespective of their
      position in the war—in Germany which is fighting against
      us, in Britain which is trying to grab Baghdad and strangle
      Turkey—the workers are uniting with the Russian
      Bolsheviks, with the Russian Bolshevik revolution. The speaker
      whose words I have quoted said that workers and peasants are
      waging a civil war against workers and peasants; we know
      perfectly well that this is not true. The working class is one
      thing; groups, small strata of the working class are another
      thing. From 1871 to 1914, for almost half a century, the German
      working class was a model of socialist organisation for the
      whole world. We know that it had a party with a membership of a
      million, that it created trade unions with a membership of two,
      three and four millions; nevertheless, in the course of this
      half-century hundreds of thousands of German workers remained
      united in Christian trade unions, which stood staunchly for the
      priests, for the church and for the Kaiser. Who were the real
      representatives of the working class? Was it the huge German
      Social-Democratic Party and the trade unions, or the hundreds of
      thousands of church-going workers? The working class, which
      comprises the overwhelming majority of the class-conscious,
      advanced, thinking workers, is one thing, while a single
      factory, a single district, a few groups of workers who still
      remain on the side of the.bourgeoisie are another thing.

    
      The overwhelming majority of the working class of
      Russia—this is shown by all the elections to the Soviets,
      the factory committees and conferences—ninety-nine per
      cent of them are on the side of the Soviet government
      (applause), knowing that this government is waging war against
      the bourgeoisie, against the kulaks and not against the peasants
      and workers. It is quite a different matter that there is an
      insignificant group of workers still in slavish dependence upon
      the bourgeoisie. We are not waging war against them but against
      the bourgeoisie. If those insignificant groups which are still
      in alliance with the bourgeoisie get hurt in the process they
      have only themselves to blame. (Applause.)

    
      A question has been sent to me in writing; it reads as follows:
      “Why are counter-revolutionary newspapers still
      published?” One of the reasons is that there are elements
      among the printers who are bribed by the bourgeoisie.[6](Commotion, shouts: “It’s
      not true.”) You can shout as much as you like, but you
      will not prevent me from telling the trtith, which all the
      workers know and which I have just begun to explain. When a
      worker attaches great importance to the wages he gets for
      working for the bourgeois press, when he says: “I want to
      keep my high wages by helping the bourgeoisie to sell poison, to
      poison the minds of the people,” then I say it is as if
      these workers were bribed by the bourgeoisie (applause), not in
      the sense that any individual person was hired, but in the sense
      in which all Marxists have spoken about the British workers who
      ally themselves with their capitalists. All of you who have read
      trade union literature know that there are not only trade unions
      in Britain, but also alliances between the workers and
      capitalists in a particular industry for the purpose of raising
      prices and of robbing everybody else. All Marxists, all
      socialists of all countries point the finger of scorn at these
      cases and, beginning with Marx and Engels, say that there are
      workers who, owing to their ignorance and pursuit of their craft
      interests, allow themselves to be bribed by the
      bourgeoisie. They have sold their birthright, their right to the
      socialist revolution, by entering into an alliance with their
      capitalists against the overwhelming majority of the workers and
      the oppressed toilers in their own country, against their own
      class. The same thing is happening here. When certain groups of
      workers say, the fact that the stuff we print is opium, poison,
      spreads lies and provocation, has nothing to do with us, we get
      high wages and we don’t care a hang for anybody
      else—we will denounce such workers. In our literature we
      have always said openly: “Such workers are abandoning the
      working class and deserting to the side of the
      bourgeoisie.” (Applause.)

    
      Comrades, I will in a moment deal with the questions that have
      been put to me; but first of all, so as not to forget, I will
      reply to the question about the Black Sea fleet,[7] which
      seems to have been put for the purpose of exposing us. Let me
      tell you that the man who was operating there was Comrade
      Raskolnikov, whom the Moscow and Petrograd workers know very
      well because of the agitation and Party

      work be has carried on. Comrade Raskolnikov himself will be here
      and he will tell you how he agitated in favour of destroying the
      fleet rather than allow the German troops to use it for the
      purpose of attacking Novorossiisk. That was the situation in
      regard to the Black Sea fleet; and the People’s Commissars
      Stalin, Shlyapnikov and Raskolnikov will arrive in Moscow soon
      and tell us all about it. You will see then that ours was the
      only possible policy; like the Brest peace policy, it caused us
      many misfortunes but it enabled the Soviet government and the
      workers’ socialist revolution to hold their banner aloft
      before the workers of all countries. If the number of workers in
      Germany who are abandoning the old prejudices about the
      Bolsheviks, and who understand that our policy is correct, is
      growing day by day it is due to the tactics we have been
      pursuing since the Brest Treaty.

    
      Of the questions that have been sent up to me I will deal with
      the two concerning the transportation of grain. Certain workers
      ask: “Why do you prohibit individual workers from bringing
      grain into the town when it is for’ the use of their own
      families?” The reply is a simple one. Just think what
      would happen if the thousands of poods that are necessary for a
      given locality, for a given factory, for a given district, or
      for a given street were carried by thousands of people. If we
      allowed this, the food supply organisations would begin to break
      down entirely. We do not blame the man who, tormented by hunger,
      travels into the country to get grain and procures it in
      whatever way he can, but we say: “We do not exist as a
      workers’ and peasants’ government for the purpose of
      legalising and encouraging disintegration and ruin.” A
      government is not required for this purpose. It is required for
      the purpose of uniting and organising the class-conscious in
      order to combat lack of class consciousness. We cannot blame
      those who owing to their lack of class consciousness throw up
      everything, close their eyes to everything, and try to save
      themselves by procuring grain in whatever way they can, but we
      can blame Party people who, while advocating the grain monopoly,
      do not sufficiently foster class consciousness and solidarity in
      action. Yes, the struggle against the bag-trader, against the
      private transportation of grain is a very difficult one because
      it is a struggle against ignorance, against lack of class
      consciousness, against the lack of organisation of the broad
      masses; but we shall never abandon this struggle. Every time
      people try to collect grain on their own, we shall call for
      proletarian socialist methods of combating famine: having united
      together, let us replace the sick food detachments by new
      forces, by fresher, stronger, more honest, more class-conscious
      and tried men, and we shall collect the same amount of grain,
      the same thousands of poods that are collected individually by
      two hundred persons, each carrying fifteen poods, each raising
      prices and increasing profiteering. We shall unite these two
      hundred persons, we shall create a strong, compact
      workers’army. If we do not succeed in doing this at the
      first attempt we shall repeat our efforts; we shall try to
      induce the class-conscious workers in every factory to delegate
      larger numbers of more reliable people for the purpose of
      combating profiteering, and we are sure that the class
      consciousness, discipline and organisation of the workers will
      in the last resort withstand all severe trials. When people are
      convinced by their own experience that individual bag-traders
      cannot help to save hundreds of thousands from starvation we
      shall see the victory of the cause of organisation and class
      consciousness, and by united action we shall organise the fight
      against famine and secure the proper distribution of grain.

    
      I am asked: “Why is not a monopoly introduced on
      manufactured goods, which are as necessary as grain?” My
      reply is: “The Soviet government is adopting all measures
      to this end.” You know that there is a tendency to
      organise, to amalgamate the textile factories, the textile
      industry. You know that the majority of the people in the
      leading bodies of this organisation are workers, you know that
      the Soviet government is preparing to nationalise all branches
      of industry; you know that the difficulties that confront us in
      this matter are enormous, and that much effort will be required
      to do all this in an organised manner. We are not setting to
      work on this task in the way governments which rely on
      bureaucrats do. It is quite easy to manage affairs in that way:
      let one man receive 400 rubles per month; let another get more,
      a thousand rubles per month—our bussiness is to give
      orders and the others must obey. That is how all bourgeois
      countries are administered; they hire officials at high
      salaries, they hire the sons of the bourgeoisie and entrust the
      administration to them. The Soviet Republic cannot be
      administered in this way. We have no officials to manage and
      guide the work of amalgamating all the textile factories, of
      registering all their property and stocks, of introducing a
      monopoly of all articles of primary necessity, and of properly
      distributing them. We call upon the workers to do this work; we
      call upon the representatives of the Textile Workers’
      Union and say to them: “You must form the majority on the
      collegium of the Central Textile Board, and you are the majority
      on it, in the same way as you are the majority on the collegiums
      of the Supreme Economic Council. Comrades, workers, take up this
      very important State task yourselves. We know that it is much
      more difficult than appointing efficient officials, but we know
      also that there is no other way of doing it.” Power must
      be placed in the hands of the working class, and the advanced
      workers must, in spite of all difficulties, learn by their own
      bitter experience, by their own efforts, by the work of their
      own hands, how all articles, all textile goods, should be
      distributed in the interests of the toilers. (Applause.)

    
      Hence, the Soviet government is doing all it possibly can in the
      present circumstances to introduce a state monopoly and to fix
      prices. It is doing it through the medium of the workers, in
      conjunction with the workers; it gives them the majority on the
      management boards, and in every leading centre, as, for example,
      the Supreme Economic Council or the amalgamated metalworks, or
      the amalgamated sugar refineries, which were nationalised in a
      few weeks. This is a difficult road, but, I repeat, we cannot
      avoid difficulties in the task of getting the workers to adopt a
      new position, workers who have been accustomed and have been
      trained by the bourgeoisie for hundreds of years merely to carry
      out its orders slavishly, to work like convicts, of making them
      feel that they are the government. We are the owners of
      industry, we are the owners of the grain, we are the owners of
      all the wealth of the country. Only when this has deeply
      penetrated the minds of the working class, when, by their own
      experience, by their own efforts, they increase their forces
      tenfold, will all the difficulties of the socialist revolution
      be overcome.

    
      I conclude by once again appealing to this factory committee
      conference. In the city of Moscow the difficulties are
      particularly great because it is an enormous centre of trade and
      speculation in which, for many years, tens of thousands of
      people have obtained their livelihood by trade and
      speculation. Here the difficulties are particularly great, but
      here there are forces that no small town in the country
      possesses. Let the workers’ organisations, let the factory
      committees remember and take firm note of what present events
      and the famine that has descended upon the toilers of Russia
      teach. New organisations, broader organisations of
      class-conscious and advanced workers alone can save the
      revolution and prevent the restoration of the rule of the
      landowners and capitalists. Such workers are now in the
      majority, but it is not enough; they must take a greater part in
      general state work. In Moscow we have hosts of cases of
      profiteers gambling on the famine, making profit out of the
      famine, breaking the state grain monopoly, of the rich having
      everything they desire. In Moscow there are 8,000 members of the
      Communist Party. In Moscow the trade unions can delegate 20,000
      to 30,000 men and women whom they can vouch for, who will be
      reliable and staunch exponents of proletarian policy. Unite
      them, create hundreds of thousands of detachments, tackle the
      food problem, search the whole of the rich population, and you
      will secure what you need. (Applause.)

    
      In my report I told you what successes were achieved in this
      sphere in the town of Yelets; but it is more difficult to
      achieve this in Moscow. I said that Yelets was a well organised
      town. There are many towns that are much less organised because
      this is a very difficult matter, because it is not a matter of a
      shortage of arms’we have any amount of them’the
      difficulty lies in appointing hundreds and thousands of
      completely reliable workers to responsible administration posts,
      workers who understand that they are not working in their local
      cause but in the cause of the whole of Russia, who are capable
      of sticking at their posts as representatives of the whole
      class, of organising the work according to a definite and
      systematic plan, of carrying out orders, of carrying out the
      decisions of the Moscow Soviet, of the Moscow organisations
      representing the whole of proletarian Moscow. The whole
      difficulty lies in organising the proletariat, in training it to
      become more class-conscious than it has been up to now. Look at
      the Petrograd elections.[8] You will see that although famine is
      raging there even worse than in Moscow and still greater
      misfortunes have befallen it, the loyalty to the workers’
      revolution is growing, organisation and solidarity are
      increasing, and you will say to yourselves: the disasters that
      have befallen us are multiplying but the determination of the
      working class to overcome all these difficulties is multiplying
      also. Take this path, increase your efforts, put thousands of
      new detachments on this path to help to solve the food problem,
      and together with you, relying on your support, we will overcome
      the famine and secure proper distribution. (Applause.)

    
3

      Resolution On The Report On The Current Situation
    

      The Fourth Moscow Conference of Factory Committees
      wholeheartedly supports the Soviet government’s food
      policy and particularly approves (and insists that it should be
      supported by all workers) the policy of uniting the rural poor.

    
      The liberation of the workers can be achieved only by the
      workers’ own efforts, and only the closest alliance
      between the urban workers and the rural poor can overcome the
      resistance of the bourgeoisie and the kulaks, bring all
      surpluses of grain into their hands and achieve proper
      distribution among those in need both in town and country.

    
      The Conference calls on all factory committees to exert every
      effort to organise broader sections of the workers in food
      detachments and to send them under the leadership of the most
      reliable comrades to give all-round support to the food policy
      of the workers’ and peasants’ government.

    

Endnotes
[1]
Fourth Conference of Trade Unions and Factory Commitlee
    of Moscow was held from June 27 to July 2, 1918. It was attended
    by 472 delegates with a vote and 71 with a voice but no vote; 341
    of them were Communists, 34 Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, 24
    Mensheviks, 9 Right S.R.s, and 64 non-party people and
    representatives of other groups. The Conference considered the
    food situation; universal military training and mobilisation;
    labour discipline; work of the labour exchange;rules of the
    factory committees, etc. Lenin delivered a report on the vital
    question of food suptly. The Conference passed a resolution based
    on the draft propose by Lenin. In spite of opposition from the
    Mensheviks and S.R.s, the Conference approved the resolutions
    moved by the Communist group on all questions.
    
[2] 
      In May-June 1918, Austria-Hungary was swept by a wave of
      strikes, demonstrations and mass protests by the workers of a
      political and anti-militarist nature. A big strike was launched
      in Vienna in the middle of June over the reduction of the bread
      ration; Soviets of Workers’ Deputies (A rbei terrdte)
      came. into being and started operating in Vienna, Budapest and
      other cities.

      The Vienna Soviet presented the government with the
      strikers’ demands: conclusion of peace, increase of wages,
      reduction of working hours and restoration of the former bread
      ration. The Social-Democratic leaders were unable to prevent the
      strike but they succeeded in making the Vienna Soviet abandon
      it.
    

      The first Soviets of Workers’ Deputies and Soldiers’
      Deputieswere formed during the strike campaign in Vienna,
      Budapest andother cities in January 1918. A political
      strike, which spread to theindustrial centres of
      Austria-Hungary, was declared in Vienna onJanuary l4in
      protest against the rapacious demands made on SovietRussia
      by the governments of the Austro-German bloc during thepeace
      negotiations. Strike calls went out for immediate conclusion
      of general peace on the terms proposed by Soviet Russia,
      abolitionof wartime laws and the censorship, an amnesty for
      political pris-oners, fair distribution of food, etc. The
      movement was crushedand the Soviets broken up with the
      direct support of the opportunist leaders of the Austrian
      Social-Democrats. 
    
[3] 
      Lenin is referring to the article “The Secret Treaties
      Expose(l”, printed on November 28, 1917, in the newspaper
      Vorwdrts (For-w.,xrd) No. 326. It was admitted in this article
      that “by publishing the secret despatches exchanged
      between St. Petersburg and Paris the Bolshevik Government of
      Russia is performing a truly revolutionary act”.
    

      VorivÂrts was the main daily newspaper of the German
      Social-Democratic Party and had been coming out in Berlin since
      1891.In the late nineties, after the death of Engels the
      editorship of thepaper fell into the hands of the Right wing of
      the party and began systematically printing articles by
      opportunists. During the ’imperialist war of 1914-18
      Vortvdrts took up a position of social-chauvinism; after the
      Great October Socialist Revolution the paper conducted
      anti-Soviet propaganda. It continued appearing in Berlin until
      1933. [See also the Vorwarts
      glossary entry]
    
[4] The
      reference is to V. A. Tikhomirov, a representative of the
      Bogorodsk Soviet of Workers’ Deputies, who was also at the
      time chairman of the Bogorodsk co-operatives union.
    
[5]
      Lenin is referring to the article “The French
      Millions” published  June 28, 1918, in Prukopnik
      Svobody (Pioneer of Freedom), the main newspaper of the
      C.E.C. of the Czechoslovak Communist groups in Soviet Russia. In
      this article it was stated that the

      French and British governments had given the Czechoslovak
      white-guards about 15 million rubles. The article was reprinted
      on the same day in Pravda No. 130 and a summary
      appeared in
      Izvestia VTsIK No. 132.
    
[6]
      Lenin has in mind a group of print workers which had for a
      longtime been under the influence of the Mensheviks and Right
      S.R.s who ran the yellow Union of Printing Trade Workers. After
      the October Revolution this union opposed Soviet power and
      organised strikes in Moscow, Petrograd and other cities. The
      Bolsheviks and Left Internationalists had their groups in all
      the large printshops and founded the Red Union of Printers. When
      this union was organised, the influence of the yellow union
      began to decline.           
    
[7]
      The Black Sea fleet was moved from Sevastopol to Novorosslisk on
      April 29-30, 1918, on orders from the Soviet Government be-
      cause the Crimea was being occupied by the German
      imperialists. Lenin set forth the circumstances concerning
      the fleet’s removal and its possible return to
      Sevastopol in the “Protest to the German Government
      against the Occupation of the Crimea". Since there was no
      possibility of saving the fleet and the Soviet Government did
      not wish to surrender it to the German imperialists, who had
      presented an ultimatum demanding the return of the fleet to
      Sevastopol, Lenin sent the following instruction to the Supreme
      Military Council: in view of the hopelessness of the situation,
      whichas been proved by the highest military authorities,
      the fleet must be destroyed immediately” (see
      History of the Civil War in the U.S.S.R., Vol. 3, 1957,
      p. 139). On June 18-19 the government’s order was
      carried out. Most of the ships were scuttled off Novorossiisk. 
    
[8]
      The reference is to the elections to the Petrograd Soviet in
      June 1918-. During the elections the Mensheviks and S.R.s
      conducted abitter struggle against the Bolsheviks,
      resorting  to terrorism (on June 20 during the elections
      V. Volodarsky, an active member of the Communist Party, was
      assassinated by a Right S.R.). The Communists won the
      election. The first session of the Soviet on June 27 was
      attended by 405 Bolsheviks and Bolshevik sympathisers, 75 Left
      S.’R.s, 59 Menshevik defencists and Right S.R.s and 43
      non-party people. 
    

Collected Works
Volume 27

Collected Works Table of
      Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech at a Public Meeting in
      Simonovsky Sub-District. June 28, 1919.











Speech At A Public Meeting In Simonovsky Sub-District, June 28, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech At A Public Meeting In Simonovsky Sub-District[1]
June 28, 1918
Brief Newspaper Report

Delivered: 29 June, 1918
First Published: June 29, 1918; Izvestia VTSiK No. 133;
    Published according to the Izvestia text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 492-493
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

(The workers gave Lenin a rousing welcome.) Lenin spoke of the
    necessity of civil war and called upon the Moscow proletariat to organise solidly in the
    struggle both against the forces of counter-revolution and against famine and disruption.
He touched in passing on the Saratov and Tambov events, and pointed out that wherever
    revolts inspired by the Mensheviks and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries broke out, the working
    class rapidly became disillusioned with the views of these parties and no less rapidly
    overthrew the usurpers of the power of the workers and peasants.
We would receive telegrams; he said, appealing for aid, but before our troops could get
    half-way, the workers who had sent the appeal would inform us that the need for immediate
    assistance had passed as the usurpers had been defeated by local forces. Such was the case in
    Saratov, Tambov and other cities.
Lenin stated that, in general, war ran counter to the aims of the Communist Party. But the
    war that was being preached today was a sacred war; it was a civil war, a war of the working
    class against its exploiters.
Without effort, without tremendous expenditure of energy, he said, we should never set
    foot on the road to socialism. A successful fight for the ideals of the working class
    entailed organisation. Organisation was also needed to consolidate the gains we had won at
    the cost of such severe sacrifice and effort.
It was harder to retain power than to seize it, and we knew of many cases in history when
    the working class had taken power into its hands but had been unable to retain it merely
    because it did not possess strong enough organisations.
The people were worn out, Lenin continued, and they might, of course, be driven to any
    folly, even to the acceptance of a Skoropadsky; for, in their mass, the people were
    ignorant.
Famine was imminent, but we knew that there was grain enough even without Siberia, the
    Caucasus and the Ukraine. There was enough grain in the provinces surrounding Moscow and
    Petrograd to last us until the new harvest, but it was all hidden away by the kulaks. We must
    organise the poor peasants, so as to get this grain with their help. A ruthless struggle with
    words, as well as action, must be waged on profiteering and profiteers.
Only the working class, knit together by organisation, could explain to the common people
    the need for war on the kulaks. The Russian people must know that the poor peasantry had a
    powerful ally in the shape of the organised urban proletariat.
The working class and the peasantry must not place too much hope in the intelligentsia, as
    many of the intellectuals beginning to side with us were expecting our downfall any
    moment.
Lenin concluded with an appeal to organise for the struggle of the workers and peasants
    against the kulaks, the landowners and the bourgeoisie. (Lenin’s speech ended amid
    a general ovation.)

Endnotes
[1] On June 28, 1918, on the
    instructions of the Moscow Party Committee meetings on the subject of the Civil War were held
    in all districts of Moscow. These enthusiastic mass meetings showed the working
    people’s growing trust in the Communist Party, their support for its policy and
    condemnation of the parties of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, who were
    supporting the bourgeoisie whose actions had led to civil war. The meetings were addressed by
    prominent Party workers and also delegates from the Urals, the Volga country and other areas,
    who had come to Moscow for the Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. The delegates described
    the counter-revolutionary activities of the Mensheviks and S.R.s and the fierce struggle the
    kulaks were waging against Soviet power.
Lenin spoke at the AMO Works (Simonovsky Sub-District), the former
    Mikhelson Works (Zamoskvorechye District) and in the Soviet Gardens in Rogozhsky
    District.
Four thousand workers and other employees at the former Mikhelson Works
    listened to Lenin’s speech and stated in their resolution that they approved the Moscow
    Soviet’s decision of June 25, 1918 on the, expulsion “for ever from the
    Soviets” of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries (Right and Centre), who, as
    members of the Soviets, had sabotaged their work and tried to overthrow Soviet power with the
    aid of foreign imperialists. The meeting appealed to all working people to “recall from
    all Soviets and their institutions the Right S.R.s and Mensheviks, who criminally and
    shamefully reside in the camp of the dark forces of the counter-revolution in order to betray
    our workers’ cause”.


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Prophetic
      Words











Prophetic Words



V. I. Lenin
Prophetic Words

Delivered: 29 June, 1918
First Published: July 2, 1918 Pravda;No. 133,  and Signed:N. Lenin; Published according to the Pravda text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 494-499
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


      Nobody, thank God, believes in miracles nowadays. Miraculous
      prophecy is a fairy-tale. But scientific prophecy is a fact. And
      in these days, when we so very often encounter shameful
      despondency and even despair around us, it is useful to recall
      one scientific prophecy which has come true. 

    
      Frederick Engels had occasion in 1887 to write of the coming
      world war in a preface to a pamphlet by Sigismund Borkheim,
      In Memory of the German Arch-Patriots of 1806-1807
      (Zur Erinnerung für die deutschen Mordspatrioten
      1806-1807 ). (This pamphlet is No. XXIV of the
      Social-Democratic Library published in
      Göttingen-Zürich in 1888.)

    
      This is how Frederick
      Engels spoke over thirty years ago of the future world war: 

    
      “. . . No war is any longer possible for Prussia-Germany
      except a world war and a world war indeed of an extent and
      violence hitherto undreamt of. Eight to ten millions of soldiers
      will massacre one another and in doing so devour the whole of
      Eurepe until they have stripped it barer than any swarm of
      locusts has ever done. The devastations of the Thirty
      Years’ War compressed into three or four years, and spread
      over the whole Continent; famine, pestilence, general
      demoralisation both of the armies and of the mass of the people
      produced by acute distress; hopeless confusion of our artificial
      machinery in trade, industry and credit, ending in general
      bankruptcy; collapse of the old states and their traditional
      state wisdom to such an extent that crowns will roll by dozens
      on the pavement and there will be no body to pick them up;
      absolute impossibility of foreseeing how it will all end and who
      will come out of the struggle as victor; only one result is
      absolutely certain: general exhaustion and the establishment of
      the conditions for the ultimate victory of the working class. 

    
      “This is the prospect when the system of mutual outbidding
      in armaments, taken to the final extreme, at last bears its
      inevitable fruits. This, my lords, princes and statesmen, is
      where in your wisdom you have brought old Europe. And when
      nothing more remains to you but to open the last great war
      dance—that will suit us all right (uns kann es recht
      sein ). The war may perhaps push us temporarily into the
      background, may wrench from us many a position already
      conquered. But when you have unfettered forces which you will
      then no longer be able again to control, things may go as they
      will: at the end of the tragedy you will be ruined and the
      victory of the proletariat will either be already achieved or at
      any rate (doch ) inevitable. 
 
    
      “London, December 15, 1887   

    
Frederick Engels”

      What genius is displayed in this prophecy! And how infinitely
      rich in ideas is every sentence of this exact, clear, brief and
      scientific class analysis! How much could be learnt from it by
      those who are now shamefully succumbing to lack of faith,
      despondency and despair, if . . . if people who are accustomed
      to kowtow to the bourgeoisie, or who allow themselves to be
      frightened by it, could but think, were but capable of thinking! 

    
      Some of Engels’s predictions have turned out differently;
      and one could not expect the world and capitalism to have
      remained unchanged during thirty years of frenzied imperialist
      development. But what is most astonishing is that so many of
      Engels’s predictions are turning out “to the
      letter”. For Engels gave a perfectly exact class analysis,
      and classes and the relations between them have remained
      unchanged. 

    
      “. . . The war may perhaps push us temporarily into the
      background. . . .” Developments have proceeded exactly
      along these lines, but have gone even further and even worse:
      some of the social-chauvinists who have been “pushed
      back”, and their spineless “semi-opponents”,
      the Kautskyites, have begun to extol their backward movement and
      have become direct traitors to and betrayers of socialism. 

    
      “. . . The war may perhaps wrench from us many a position
      already conquered. . . .” A number of “legal”
      positions have been wrenched from the working class. But on the
      other hand it has been steeled by trials and is receiving severe
      but salutary lessons in illegal organisation, in illegal
      struggle and in preparing its forces for a revolutionaly
      attack. 

    
      “. . . Crowns will roll by dozens. . . .” Several
      crowns have already fallen. And one of them is worth dozens of
      others—the crown of the autocrat of all the Russias,
      Nicholas Romanov. 

    
      “. . . Absolute impossibility of foreseeing how it will
      all end. . . .” After four years of war this absolute
      impossibility has, if one may say so, become even more
      absolute. 

    
      “. . . Hopeless confusion of our artificial machinery in
      trade, industry and credit. . . .” At the end of the
      fourth year of war this has been fully borne out in the case of
      one of the biggest and most backward of the states drawn into
      the war by the capitalists—Russia. But do not the growing
      starvation in Gerrnany and Austria, the shortage of clothing and
      raw material and the wearing out of the means of production show
      that a similar state of affairs is very rapidly overtaking other
      countries as well? 

    
      Engels depicts the consequences brought about only by
      “foreign” war; he does not deal with internal, i.e.,
      civil war, without which not one of the great revolutions of
      history has taken place, and without which not a single serious
      Marxist has conceived the transition from capitalism to
      socialism. And while a foreign war may drag on for a certain
      time without causing “hopeless confusion” in the
      “artificial machinery” of capitalism, it is obvious
      that a civil war without such a consequence is quite
      inconceivable. 

    
      What stupidity, what spinelessness—not to say mercenary
      service to the bourgeoisie—is displayed by those who, like
      our Novaya Zhizn group, Mensheviks, Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, etc., while continuing to call
      themselves “socialists”, maliciously point to the
      manifestation of this “hopeless confusion” and lay
      the blame for everything on the revolutionary proletariat, the
      Soviet power, the “utopia” of the transition to
      socialism. The “confusion”, or
      razrukha,[Dislocation,
      disruption.—Editor] to use the excellent
      Russian word, has been brought about by the war’. There
      can be no severe war without disruption. There can be no civil
      war—the inevitable condition and concomitant of socialist
      revolution—without disruption. To renounce revolution and
      socialism “in view of” the disruption, only means to
      display one’s lack of principle and in practice to desert
      to the bourgeoisie. 

    
      “. . . Famine, pestilence, general demoralisation both of
      the armies and of the mass of the people produced by acute
      distress. . . .” 

    
      How simply and clearly Engels draws this indisputable
      conclusion, which must be obvious to everyone who is at all
      capable of reflecting on the objective consequences of many
      years of severe and agonising war. And how astonishingly stupid
      are these numerous “Social-Democrats” and
      pseudo-Socialists who will not or cannot realise this most
      simple idea. 

    
      Is it conceivable that a war can last many years without both
      the armies and the mass of the people becoming demoralised
      ? Of course not. Such a consequence of a long war is
      absolutely inevitable over a period of several years, if not a
      whole generation. And our “men in mufflers”, the
      bourgeois intellectual snivelers who call themselves
      “Social-Democrats” and “Socialists”,
      second the bourgeoisie in blaming the revolution for the
      manifestations of demoralisation or for the inevitable severity
      of the measures taken to combat particularly acute cases of
      demoralisation—although it is as clear as noonday that
      this demoralisation has been produced by the imperialist war,
      and that no revolution can rid itself of such consequences of
      war without a long struggle and without a number of stern
      measures of repression. 

    
      Our sugary writers in Novaya Zhizn, Vperyod or
      Dyelo Naroda are prepared to grant a revolution of the
      proletariat and other oppressed classes
      “theoretically”, provided only that the revolution
      drops from heaven and is not born and bred on earth soaked in
      the blood of four years of imperialist butchery of the peoples,
      with millions upon millions of people exhausted, tormented and
      demoralised by this butchery. 

    
      They had heard and admitted “in theory” that a
      revolution should be compared to an act of childbirth; but when
      it came to the point, they disgracefully took fright and their
      fainthearted whimperings echoed the malicious outbursts of the
      bourgeoisie against the insurrection of the
      proletariat. Consider the descriptions of childbirth given in
      literature, when the authors aim at presenting a truthful
      picture of the severity, pain and horror of the act of travail,
      as in Emile Zola’s La joie de vivre (The Joy
      of Life ), for instance, or in Veresayev’s Notes
      of a Doctor. Human child birth is an act which transforms
      the woman into an almost lifeless, bloodstained heap of flesh,
      tortured, tormented and driven frantic by pain. But can the
      “individual” that sees only this in love and its
      sequel, in the transformation of the woman into a mother, be
      regarded as a human being? Who would renounce love and
      procreation for this reason? 

    
      Travail may be light or severe. Marx and Engels, the founders of
      scientific socialism, always said that the transition from
      capitalism to socialism would be inevitably accompanied by
      prolonged birth pangs. And analysing the consequences of a world
      war, Engels outlines simply and clearly the indisputable and
      obvious fact that a revolution that follows and is connected
      with a war (and still more—let us add for our part—a
      revolution which breaks out during a war, and which is obliged
      to grow and maintain itself in the midst of a world war) is a
      particularly severe case of childbirth. 

    
      Clearly realising this, Engels speaks with great caution of
      socialism being brought to birth by a capitalist socicty which
      is perishing in a world war. “Only one result [of a world
      war],” he says, “is absolutely certain: general
      exhaustion and the establishment of the conditions for
      the ultimate victory of the working class.” 

    
      This thought is expressed even more clearly at the end of the
      preface we are examining. 

    
      “. . . At the end of the tragedy you (the capitalists and
      landowners, the kings and statesmen of the bourgeoisie) will be
      ruined and the victory of the proletariat will either be already
      achieved or at any rate inevitable.” 

    
      Severe travail greatly increases the danger of grave illnes or
      of a fatal issue. But while individuals may die in the act of
      childbirth, the new society to which the old system gives birth
      cannot die; all that may happen is that the birth may be more
      painful, more prolonged, and growth and development slower. 

    
      The war has not yet ended. General exhaustion has already set
      in. As regards the two direct results of war predicted
      by Engels conditionally (either the victory of the working class
      already achieved, or the establishment of conditions which will
      make this inevitable, despite all difficulties ) as
      regards these two conditions, now, in the middle of 1918, we
      find both in evidence. 

    
      In one, the least developed, of the capitalist countries, the
      victory of the working class is already achieved. In
      the others, with unparalleled pain and effort, the conditions
      are being established which will make this victory “at any
      rate inevitable”. 

    
      Let the “socialist” snivelers croak, let the
      bourgeoisie rage and fume, but only people who shut their eyes
      so as not to see, and stuff their ears so as not to hear, can
      fail to notice that all over the world the birth pangs of the
      old, capitalist society, which is pregnant with socialism, have
      begun. Our country, which has temporarily been advanced by the
      march of events to the van of the socialist revolution, is
      undergoing the particularIy severe pains of the first period of
      travail. We have every reason to face the future with complete
      assurance and absolute confidence, for it is preparing for us
      new allies and new victories of the socialist revolution in a
      number of the more advanced countries. We are entitled to be
      proud and to consider ourselves fortunate that it has come to
      our lot to be the first to fell in one part of the globe that
      wild beast, capitalism, which has drenched the earth in blood,
      which has reduced humanity to starvation and demoralisation, and
      which will assuredly perish soon, no matter how monstrous and
      savage its frenzy in the face of death. 

    
       June 29, 1918
      N. Lenin


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech Delivered at a Meeting
      in the Alexeyevsky Riding School, July 2, 1918.











Speech Delivered At A Meeting In The Alexeyevsky Riding School, July 2, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At A Meeting In The Alexeyevsky Riding School[1]
July 2, 1918
Brief Newspaper Report

Delivered: 29 June, 1918
First Published: July 4. 1918, Pravda No, 135, Published according
    to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 500-501
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

Lenin pointed out that the army, like the means of production, had formerly been an
    instrument of oppression in the hands of the exploiting class. Today in Russia both were
    becoming weapons in the struggle for the interests of the working people.
This radical change was no easy thing to accomplish, as the soldiers of the old tsarist
    army knew from the discipline that held that army in a vice. Lenin then cited a recent
    experience of his. When he was in Finland, he had heard an old Finnish peasant woman say that
    whereas in the old days the man with the gun was there to prevent her gathering faggots in
    the forest, today he was no longer dangerous; on the contrary, he even protected her. In
    spite of all the mud slung at us by the bourgeois and their followers, Lenin said, in spite
    of all the plotting of the whiteguards, once it had been brought home even to such
    unenlightened masses, the exploited, that the present army was their protector, the Soviet
    government stood firmly planted.
Lenin then went on to say that, as in the past, famine was strengthening the hand of the
    profiteers and capitalists. The same thing was occurring today, so that the new army might in
    the civil war have to deal with these people who were making money out of the famine. Let the
    old worldthe representatives of an outworn society-go on trying to help the starving in the
    old way; the new world would, despite them, do it in a new way. We would win, Lenin said, if
    the vanguard of the working people, the Red Army, remembered that it was there to represent
    and defend the interests of international socialism. Lenin further said that we were not
    alone, as had been shown by the events in Austria, as well as by like-minded people in all
    the countries of Europe, who, although held in subjection at present, were doing their
    work.

Endnotes
[1] On July 2, 1918; meetings of
    men called up for the Red Army were held in Moscow. The public meeting in the former
    Alexeyevsky Riding School was attended by about 1,500 mobilised men and Red Army volunteers.
    After Lenin and other speakers had addressed the meeting there was a concert. The atmosphere
    at the meeting was one of great enthusiasm.
The same day Lenin went to a meeting at the Salamonsky Circus but did not
    speak because the meeting did not start on time..


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech Delivered at a Meeting
      of the Communist Group at the Fifth Congress of Soviets,
      July 3, 1918.











Speech Delivered at a Meeting of the Communist Group at the Fifth Congress of Soviets, July 3, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at a Meeting of the Communist Group at the Fifth Congress of Soviets
July 3, 1918[1]
Brief Newspaper Report

Delivered: 3 July, 1918
First Published: 4 July, 1918, Pravda No, 135, Published according
    to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 502-503
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002

Dealing with Russia’s international position, Lenin said that it continued to be dangetous. The external enemy was not only threatening to attack Russia but was already tearing pieces from her.



This unstable and precarious situation would probably continue until capital was overthrown by the efforts of the working class of the whole world. The present stage muss be taken advantage of as a breathing-space in which to consolidate the Soviet regime.



Speaking of the world war, Lenin stated that the victory of German arms was making peace between the imperialist countries impossible. The British and French capitalists could not reconcile themselves to Germany retaining the huge booty she had seized. Moreover, after a series of offensives in France, where Germany had lost hundreds of thousands of men, a certain balance of forces had ensued,. and German bayonets no longer constituted a direct threat. Besides, the Entente[2] imperialists were fully alive to the disruption and catastrophic state of affairs that had come about in Austria-Hungary.



There was one conclusion to be drawn from the general state of affairs, and that was that the war was becoming hopeless. This hopelessness was an earnest that our socialist revolution had a very good chance of holding on until the world revolution broke out; and the guarantee of this was the war, which only the working masses could end. Our task was to maintain the Soviet regime intact; and that was what we were doing by retreating and manoeuvring. To join open battle at this juncture would damage the position of the world revolution.



Describing the economic state of the country as we had inherited it from the various Right parties formerly in power, Lenin spoke of the great difficulties that would attend the work of economic development organised on new lines, on new principles.



In the struggle against famine, he said, we had two enemies: the rich and the economic disruption. In this struggle it was essential that the poor peasant should believe in a fraternal alliance with the worker. He would believe only deeds, not words. Our only hope here lay in an alliance of the class-conscious urban workers with the poor peasants. The aim of this struggle-the right of all to bread and the right to fair distribution-was a great aim. The ability to distribute equally was the foundation of socialism, which we were building. For this we were answerable not only to our brothers, but to the workers of the whole world.



They must be shown that socialism was not something impossible, but a firm workers’ system, and one for which the proletariat of the whole world must strive.



Endnotes
[1] The meetings of the Communist group at the Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets before the Congress opened were held July 1-3, 1918; they were attended by about 500 Communist delegates who had arrived for the Congress. The first meeting was opened by Y. M. Sverdlov, Chairman of the All-Russia C.E.C. After speaking briefly of the tasks before the Congress, he informed the delegates about the work that had been done on drawing up a draft Constitution of the R .S F .S . R. Lenin spoke on July 3 on the foreign and domestic affairs of the Republic. After his speech a resolution approving the policy of the Central Committee and the Council of People’s Commissars was passed unanimously. The group heard reports from the provinces and discussed and approved the Congress agenda. 


[2] Entente cordiale-bloc of imperialist powers (Britain, France and Russia) formed at the beginning of this century in opposition to the imperialists of the Triple Alliance (Germany, Austria-Hungary and Italy). It took its name from the Anglo-French agreement of 1904. During the world imperialist war of 1914-18 the United States, Japan and other countries joined the Entente. After the Great October Socialist Revolution the chief members of the bloc, Britain, France, the U.S.A. and Japan, inspired, organised and participated in the armed intervention against Soviet Russia.  



Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Fifth All-Russia Congress of
      Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army
      Deputies July 4-10, 1918











Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers' Peasants', Soldiers' and Red Army Deputies



V. I. Lenin
Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ Peasants’,
      Soldiers’ and Red Army Deputies[1]
July 4-10, 1918

Delivered: 4-10 July, 1918
First Published: Newspaper report published: on 6 July, 1 1918 in  Izvestia VTsIK No. 139; Published according to the text or the book: Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. Verbatim Report, All-Russia C.E.C. Publishers, 1918; first five paragraphs of the reply to the debate published according to the text of the magazine Bulletin of Ways of Communication No. 7-8, 1918
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th      
      English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 505-532
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
      Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive March, 2002


      Comrades, permit me, even though the previous speaker was at
      times extremely excited,[2] to submit my report on behalf of the
      Council of People’s Commissars in the usual way, that is,
      to deal with the main questions of principle in order of merit,
      and not enter into the argument which the previous speaker would
      so much like to have, and which, of course, I have no intention
      of declining altogether. You know that since the last Congress,
      the chief factor which has determined our position, changed our
      policy and shaped our tactics and attitude towards certain other
      parties in Russia has been the Brest Treaty. You will recall how
      many reproaches were hurled at us at the last Congress, how many
      accusations were levelled at us, and how many voices were raised
      declaring that this famous respite would not help Russia, that
      in any case an international imperialist alliance had been
      concluded, and that in practice the retreat we were advocating
      would lead nowhere. This basic factor determined the whole
      position of the capitalist states, too, and we must naturally
      dwell on it. I think that the past three and a half months have
      made it absolutely indisputable that despite all reproaches and
      accusations we were right. We may say that the proletariat and
      the peasantry, who do not exploit others, do not make profits
      out of the people’s hunger, are entirely and unreservedly
      on our side, and at any rate are against those unwise people who
      would embroil them in war, who are against the Brest
      Treaty. (Commotion.)

      Nine-tenths of the people are on
      our side, and the clearer the situation becomes, the more
      certain it is that now, when the West-European imperialist
      parties, the two chief imperialist groups, are locked in a
      life-and-death struggle, when with every month, every week,
      every day they are pushing each other nearer and nearer to the
      abyss whose outlines we can clearly perceive, at such a time it
      is clearer than ever to us that our tactics were right. That is
      best felt and realised by those who have been through the war,
      who have seen what war means and do not talk about it in airy
      terms. To us it is perfectly clear that as long as each of these
      groups is stronger than we are, and as long as that radical
      change which will permit the workers, and the working people of
      Russia in general, to enjoy the fruits of the revolution, to
      recover from the blow that has been dealt them and to rise to
      their full stature, so as to create a now, organised and
      disciplined army on new lines, in order that we may, not merely
      in words, but in deeds ... (loud applause on the Left. Voice
      from the Right: “Kerensky!”), as long as that
      radical change has not come, we have to wait. Therefore, the
      deeper we go down among the masses of the people, and the nearer
      we get to the workers of the mills and factories and to the
      working peasants, who do not exploit hired labour, do not defend
      the profiteering interests of the kulak, who conceals his grain
      and fears the food dictatorship, the more surely may we say that
      there too we shall meet and are meeting in fact we may say with
      absolute conviction that we have already met-with full sympathy
      and unanimous accord. Yes, it is a fact that at present the
      people do not want to fight, cannot fight, and will not fight
      these enemies-the imperialists-however much some may try, in
      their ignorance or infatuation with phrases, to drive them into
      this war, and no matter what catchwords they may use as a
      camouflage. No, comrades, anyone who now calls for war directly
      or indirectly, in open or veiled form, anyone who howls about
      the Brest Peace Treaty being a noose, fails to see that it is
      Kerensky and the landowners, capitalists and kulaks who are
      putting a noose around the necks of the workers and peasants of
      Russia... (Voice: “Mirbach!”
      Commotion.) Let them scream, as they do at every
      meeting; among the people their cause is hopeless! (Applause
      and commotion.)

      I am not a bit surprised that, in view of the predicament these
      people are in, the only way they can answer is by shouts,
      hysterical outeries, abuse and wild behaviour
      (applause), when they have no other arguments
      .... (Voice: “We have arguments!”
      Commotion.)

      Ninety-nine out of every hundred Russian soldiers know what
      incredible suffering it cost to get the mastery of this
      war. They know that in order to put war on a new socialist and
      economic basis (cries of “Mirbacb won’t let
      you!”), tremendous effort will be required, and first of
      all we had to put an end to the war of plunder. Knowing that the
      frenzied forces of imperialism are continuing to fight, and that
      in the three months which have elapsed since the last Congress
      they have moved several steps nearer to the abyss, they will not
      join in this war. After we had performed our duty to all the
      nations, realising the value of a declaration of peace and
      bringing its value home to the workers of all countries through
      our Brest delegation, headed by Comrade Trotsky, when we openly
      proposed an honest democratic peace, this proposal was
      frustrated by the frenzied bourgeoisie of all countries. Our
      position cannot be any other but to wait, and the people will
      yet see these frenzied imperialist cliques, strong though they
      still are today, tumble into the abyss which they are now
      approaching, as everybody can see .... (Applause)
      Everybody can see that who does not deliberately close his
      eyes. In these three and a half months, during which the
      frenzied imperialist party has been doing its best to drag out
      the war, this abyss has undoubtedly drawn nearer. We know, feel
      and realise that we are not yet ready for war; that is what the
      soldiers, the men under arms, who know what war means in
      practice, are saying. And as for the cries that we should throw
      off the Brest noose at once, they come from the Mensheviks, the
      Right SocialistRevolutionaries and the followers of Kerensky,
      the Constitutional-Democrats. You know where the followers of
      the landowners and the capitalists, where the hangers-on of the
      Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and Constitutional-Democrats
      still stand. In that camp, the speeches of the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, who also incline towards war, will be
      greeted with loud applause. The Left SocialistRevolutionaries,
      as the previous speakers have said, find themselves in an
      awkward predicament: they have landed in the wrong
      box. (Applause)

      We know that great revolutions arise from the very depths of the
      people, that this takes months and years, and we are not
      surprised that in the course of the revolution the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary party has shown such incredible
      vacillations. Trotsky has told us about these vacillations here,
      and it only remains for me to add that on October 26, when we
      invited the Left Socialist-Revolutionary comrades to join the
      government, they refused, and when Krasnov was at the gates of
      Petrograd, they were not with us, with the consequent result
      that they helped not us, but Krasnov. We are not surprised at
      these vacillations. Yes, this party has been through a great
      deal. But, comrades, there is a limit to everything.

    
      We know that revolution is a thing that is learned by experience
      and practice, that a revolution becomes a real revolution only
      when tens of millions of people rise up with, one accord, as one
      man. (Lenin’s words are drowned by applause. Cries
      of “Long live the Soviets!”) This struggle,
      which is raising us to a new life, has been begun by one hundred
      and fifteen million people: this great struggle must be examined
      with the utmost attention.(Loud applause.) In October, when the
      Soviet regime was founded, on October 26, 1917, when
      ... (commotion, shouts and applause) our party and its
      representatives on the Central Executive Committee invited the
      Left Socialist-Revolutionary party to join the government, it
      refused. When the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries refused to join
      our government they were not with us, but against
      us. (Commotion on the Left Socialist-Revolutionary
      benches.) I am very sorry to have to say things you do not
      like. (The commotion on the Right becomes louder.) But
      what’s to be done? If Krasnov, the Cossack general
      .... (The commotion and outcries prevent Lenin from
      continuing.) When, on October 26, you vacillated, not
      knowing yourselves what you wanted, and refused to join us
      .... (Commotion lasting several minutes.) The truth is
      hard to swallow! Let me remind you that those who vacillated,
      who do not know themselves what they want and refuse to join us,
      willingly listen to the fables of others. I have told you that
      the soldier who has been in the war .... (Commotion and
      applause.) When the previous speaker had the floor the vast
      majority of the delegates did not interrupt her. Well, it is
      only to be expected. If these people prefer to withdraw from the
      Congress, well, then, good riddance! (Commotion and
      excitement on the Right benches.)

      And so, comrades, the whole course of events has shown that we
      were right in concluding the Brest peace. And those who tried at
      the last Congress of Soviets to crack feeble jokes about the
      respite have seen and learnt that we have secured a
      breathing-space; true, it cost us incredible effort, but during
      this breathing-space our workers and peasants have taken a
      tremendous step forward to socialist construction, while the
      Western powers, on the contrary, have taken a tremendous step
      towards that abyss for which imperialism is heading faster and
      faster with every week of this war.

    
      And so the only way I can explain the conduct of those who
      denounce our tactics because of the difficulty of our situation
      is that they are completely bewildered. I repeat that one only
      has to recall the past three and a half months. I would remind
      those who were at the last Congress of some of the things that
      were said there, and would recommend those who were not to read
      the minutes or the newspaper reports of that Congress, which
      will convince them that events have fully corroborated our
      tactics. There can be no boundary line between the victories of
      the October Revolution and the victories of the international
      socialist revolution; outbursts are bound to begin in other
      countries. And in order to hasten them we did all we could in
      the Brest period. Those who have been through the revolutions of
      1905 and 1917, those who have pondered over them and examined
      them thoughtfully and seriously, will know that these
      revolutions in our country were engendered with incredible
      difficulty.

    
      Two months before January 1905 or February 1917 no
      revolutionary, whatever his experience and knowledge, however
      familiar he was with the life of the people, could have foreseen
      that Russia would be shaken by such explosions. To fasten on
      individual cries and launch appeals to the masses which are
      tantamount to terminating the peace and plunging us into war is
      the policy of people who are utterly bewildered and have lost
      their heads completely. And to prove that this is so, I will
      cite the words of a person whose sincerity neither I nor anybody
      else will question-the words of Comrade Spiridonoval from the
      speech which was published in Golos Trudovovo Krestyanstva[3], and which has not been
      repudiated. In this speech of June 30, Comrade Spiridonova
      inserted three totally irrelevant lines to the effect that the
      Germans had presented us with an ultimatum to deliver to them
      2,000million rubles’ worth of textiles.

    
      A party which drives its most sincere representatives into such
      an awful quagmire of lies and deceit, such a party is absolutely
      doomed. The workers and peasants cannot help knowing what
      tremendous effort and anguish it cost us to sign the Brest
      Treaty. Surely, it is not necessary to exaggerate the hardships
      of that peace by the kind of fables and fabrications to which
      even the sincerest members of that party resort. But we know
      that truth is with the people, and we are guided by it, while
      this party writhes in hysterics. From that standpoint, conduct
      inspired by such utter bewilderment is worse than any
      provocation. Especially if we compare all the parties of Russia
      as a whole, as a scientific attitude towards the revolution
      requires. One must never neglect to examine the relations of all
      the parties as a whole. Individual persons or groups may be
      mistaken, maybe baffled, may not be able to explain their own
      conduct; but if we take all the parties of Russia as a whole and
      examine their mutual relations, there can be no mistake. Just
      see what the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, Kerensky, Savinkov
      and the rest, are saying now, when they hear the appeals of the
      Left Socialist-Revolutionaries .... Why, they applaud like
      mad. They would be glad to embroil Russia in a war just now,
      when it would suit Milyukov’s purpose. And to talk like
      that, to talk now about the Brest peace being a noose, is to
      cast the landowner’s noose around the neck of the Russian
      peasant. When they talk here about fighting the Bolsheviks, like
      the previous speaker, who spoke about a quarrel with the
      Bolsheviks, my reply is: no, comrades, this is no quarrel, but a
      genuine and irrevocable rupture, a rupture between those who are
      hearing the whole onus of the situation by telling the people
      the truth, and not allowing themselves to be intoxicated by
      outcries, and those who are intoxicating themselves with such
      outcries and involuntarily doing the work of the enemy, the work
      of provocateurs. (Applause)

      I will now conclude the first part of my report. During these
      three and a half months of frantic imperialist war, the
      imperialist states have drawn nearer to the abyss into which
      they are driving the people. This wounded beast has torn many a
      lump of flesh from our living organism. Our enemies are nearing
      this abyss so fast that even if they had more than three and a
      half months at their disposal, and even if the imperialist
      carnage were again to inflict just as heavy losses on us, it is
      they who would perish, not we; for the rapidity with which their
      power of resistance is diminishing is drawing them rapidly
      nearer to the abyss. We, on the other hand, in spite of the
      tremendous difficulties, which we do not conceal from the
      people, after these three and a half months have many a healthy
      shoot of a healthy organism to show; both in industry and
      everywhere else, small-scale constructive work is going on,
      unpretentious and unsensational though it may be. It has already
      yielded very fruitful results, and, given another three months,
      six months, a whole winter season of such work, we shall march
      forward, while the West-European imperialist beast, worn out by
      the struggle, will be unable to stand such a contest, because
      within it forces are maturing which, although they have no faith
      in themselves as yet, will lead imperialism to its doom. And
      what has already been begun there, and begun radically and
      fundamentally, is not likely to be changed in three and a half
      months. Far too little is being said about this constructive,
      small-scale, creative work, and it seems to me that we should
      talk about it more. I, for my part, cannot pass over this fact
      in silence, if only because the attacks of the previous speaker
      must be taken into accouiit. I would mention the resolution of
      the Central Executive Committee of April 29, 

      1918.[See Six Theses of the
      Soviet Government—Editor] At the time
      I made a speech in which I spoke of the immediate tasks of the
      Soviet 

      government,[Session of the All-Russian
      C.E.C.—Editor] and I pointed out that
      notwithstanding the incredible difficulties of our position
      prime attention at home must be given to constructive work.

    
      And here we must cherish no illusions, and must say that to this
      work, difficult though it may be, we must devote all our
      efforts. Our experience, which I can tell you about, shows that
      in this respect we have undoubtedly made big strides. To be
      sure, if one looks only for outward results, as the bourgeoisie
      do, seizing on our individual mistakes, one can scarcely speak
      of success; but we look at it from a totally different
      angle. The bourgeoisie picks on the administration of the river
      fleet, for example, and points out how often we have set about
      reconstructing it and proclaims with malicious glee that the
      Soviet government cannot cope with the job. To which I reply
      that it is true that we have time and again reconstructed the
      administration of our river fleet, as we have the administration
      of the railways, and now are about to undertake an even bigger
      reorganisation of the Economic Council. That is the whole
      meaning of the revolution, namely, that socialism has passed
      from the sphere of a dogma, which can be discussed only by
      people who understand nothing at all, from the sphere of book
      knowledge, of a programme, to the sphere of practical work. And
      today the workers and peasants are making socialism with their
      own hands.

    
      The times have passed, and in Russia, I am sure, have passed
      beyond recall, when we used to argue about the socialist
      programme on the basis of book knowledge. Today socialism can be
      discussed only on the basis of experience. The whole meaning of
      the revolution lies in the fact that it has for the first time
      in history discarded the old apparatus of bourgeois officialdom,
      the bourgeois system of administration, and has created
      conditions which enable the workers and peasants themselves to
      set about this job, a job of incredible difficulty, whose
      difficulties it would be absurd to conceal from ourselves; for
      the capitalists and landowners have for centuries been hounding
      and persecuting tens of millions of people even for harbouring
      the thought of administering the land. Now, in the space of a
      few weeks, a few mouths, in the midst of desperate and frightful
      disruption, when the whole body of Russia has been bruised and
      battered by the war, so that the people are like a man who has
      been thrashed within an inch of his life—at such a time,
      when the tsars, the landowners and the capitalists have left us
      with a country in a state of utter disruption, the new job, the
      new work of building must be shouldered by the new classes, by
      the workers and those peasants who do not exploit hired workers
      and do not profiteer in grain. Yes, this is an extremely
      difficult task, but an extremely rewarding one. Every month of
      such work and such experience is worth ten, if. not twenty,
      years of our history. Yes, we are not afraid to confess what an
      acquaintance with our decrees will show, namely, that we have
      constantly to alter them; we have not yet produced anything
      finished and complete, we do not yet know a socialism that can
      be embodied in clauses and paragraphs. If we are now able to
      submit a Soviet Constitution[4] to this Congress, it
      is only because Soviets have been set up and tested in all parts
      of the country, because you yourselves have created that
      Constitution and tested it in all parts of the country; only six
      months after the October Revolution, and nearly a year after the
      First All-Russia Congress of Soviets, are we able to write down
      what already exists in practice.

    
      In the economic sphere, where we are only just beginning to
      build socialism, and where a new discipline must be built up, we
      have no such experience—we are acquiring it by dint of
      alteration and reconstruction. That is our prime task. We say
      that every new social order demands new relations between man
      and man, a new discipline. There was a time when economic life
      was impossible without feudal discipline, when there was only
      one kind of discipline the discipline of the lash; and there was
      a time of the rule of the capitalists, when the disciplinary
      force was starvation. But now, with the Soviet revolution, with
      the beginning of the socialist revolution, discipline must be
      built on entirely new principles; it must be a discipline of
      faith in the organising power of the workers and poor peasants,
      a discipline of comradeship, a discipline of the utmost mutual
      respect, a discipline of independence and initiative in the
      struggle. Anyone who resorts to the old capitalist methods,
      anyone who at a time of famine and want argues in the old,
      capitalist way—if I sell grain on my own, I shall make a
      bigger profit; if 1 set out on my own to get grain, I shall get
      it easier—anyone who argues in that way may be choosing
      the easier road, but he will never arrive at socialism.

    
      It is simple and easy to keep within the old realm of customary
      capitalist relations; but we want to take a new road. It is one
      which demands of us and of all the people a high level of
      political consciousness and organisation; it demands more time
      and involves graver mistakes. But we say that only those who
      attempt nothing practical make no mistakes.

    
      If, in the opinion of the meeting, the period under review
      includes experiments in which one frequently meets with changes,
      amendments, reversions to the old, that is not the chief thing,
      the chief meaning and value of this period. The old government
      apparatus of bureaucrats, for whom it was enough to order an
      increase of salary, is a thing of the past. We have now to deal
      with workers’ organisations which are taking economic
      administration into their own hands. We have to deal with the
      railway workers, who used to be worse off than others, and who
      have a legitimate right to demand an improvement of
      conditions. Tomorrow the river transport workers will submit
      their demands, and the day after, the middle peasants—I
      shall speak of them at greater length who often feel they are
      worse off than the worker, whom we treat with the utmost
      attention, and to whose interest all our decrees are
      devoted—a thing the previous speaker has absolutely failed
      to grasp. All this creates enormous difficulties, but they are
      difficulties which are due to the fact that the workers and poor
      peasants for the first time in centuries are themselves, with
      their own hands, organising the whole economic life of
      Russia. And so, we have to find means of satisfying just
      demands; we have to alter decrees and reconstruct the system of
      administration. Side by side with cases of mistakes and
      failures—cases which the bourgeois press seizes upon and
      which, of course, are numerous—we achieve successes, we
      learn by these partial mistakes and failures, we learn by
      experience how to build the edifice of socialism. And when we
      are showered with new demands from all sides, we say: that is as
      it should be, that is just what socialism means, when each wants
      to improve his condition and all want to enjoy the benefits of
      life. But the country is poor, the country is poverty-stricken,
      and it is impossible just now to satisfy all demands; that is
      why it is so difficult to build the new edifice in the midst of
      disruption. But those who believe that socialism can be built at
      a time of peace and tranquillity are profoundly mistaken: it
      will everywhere be built at a time of disruption, at a time of
      famine. That is how it must be. And when we see before us people
      with real ideas, we say: all the thousands, tens of thousands,
      hundreds of thousands of workers and working peasants have set
      about building the new, socialist edifice with their own
      hands. A profound revolution is now beginning in the
      countryside, where the kulaks are agitating and trying to
      interfere with the working peasants who do not exploit the
      labour of others or profiteer in grain, and there the task is
      different. In the towns the thing is to organise the factories,
      the metal industry; and what with the havoc of the war, to
      distribute production, to distribute raw materials and other
      materials is a very difficult task.

    
      There the workers are learning to do this and are forming
      central organs of administration; there we are having to
      reconstruct the Supreme Economic Council; for the old laws,
      passed at the beginning of the year, are already out of date,
      the workers’ movement is marching ahead, the old
      workers’ control is already antiquated, and the trade
      unions are becoming the embryos of administrative bodies for all
      industry. (Applause) In this sphere quite a lot has
      already been done, but still we cannot boast of any brilliant
      successes. We know that in this sphere the bourgeois elements,
      the capitalists, landowners and kulaks will for a long time yet
      have the opportunity to carry on their propaganda and say that,
      as usual, a decree has been passed but is not being enforced,
      another has only just been passed, yet after three months it is
      already being altered, while profiteering is going on just the
      same as under capitalism. Yes, it is true that we do not know of
      any universal quack panacea for putting an end to profiteering
      at one stroke. The habits of the capitalist system are too
      strong; to reeducate the people who have been brought up to
      these habits for centuries is no easy matter and will take a
      long time. But we say that our fighting weapon is
      organisation. We must organise everything, take everything into
      our own hands, keep a check on the kulaks and profiteers at
      every step, declare implacable war on them and never allow them
      to breathe freely, controlling their every move.

    
      We know from experience that alterations of decrees are
      unavoidable, for new difficulties are encountered which are a
      source of fresh changes. And if in the matter of food supply we
      have now arrived at the point of organising the poor peasants,
      and if our former comrades, the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries,
      say in all sincerity—which cannot be doubted—that
      our ways have parted, our firm reply to them is: all the worse
      for you, for that means that you have turned your back on
      socialism. (Applause)

      Comrades? The food question is the main question, it is the one
      to which we are devoting most attention in our policy-making. A
      host of small measures which are imperceptible to the outsider,
      but which the Council of People’s Commissars has
      adopted—such as the steps to improve the water and rail
      transport systems, the clearing up of the war commissariat
      stores, the fight against profiteering—were all directed
      towards putting food supply on a proper footing. Not only our
      country, but even the most civilised countries, which never knew
      what famine meant before the war, are now all in a state of
      utmost distress, created by the imperialists In their struggle
      for the supremacy of one group or another. In the West, tens of
      millions of people are suffering the torments of starvation. It
      is this that makes social revolution inevitable, for social
      revolution stems not from programmes but from the fact that tens
      of millions of people say: “Rather than live and starve,
      we prefer to die for the revolution.” (Applause)

      A terrible disaster—famine—has befallen us, and the
      more difficult our situation, the more acute the food crisis,
      the more the capitalists intensify their struggle against Soviet
      power. You know that the Czechoslovak mutiny is a mutiny of men
      who have been bought by the British and French imperialists. We
      are constantly hearing of revolts against the Soviets in
      one. place or another. The kulak risings are spreading from
      region to region. In the Don region, there is Krasnov, whom the
      Russian workers magnanimously allowed to go free in Petrograd
      when he came and surrendered his sword, for the prejudices of
      the intellectual are still strong and the intellectuals
      protested against capital punishment— Krasnov was allowed
      to go free because of the intellectual’s prejudice against
      capital punishment. But I would like to see the people’s
      court today, the workers’ or peasants’ court, which
      would not sentence Krasnov, who is shooting workers and
      peasants, to be shot. We are told that when people are sentenced
      to he shot by Dzerzhinsky[5] commission` it is all right, but if
      a court were to declare publicly and openly that a man was a
      counter-revolutionary and deserved to he shot, that would be
      wrong. People who have sunk to such depths of hypocrisy are
      political corpses. (Applause) No, a revolutionary who
      does not want to be a hypocrite cannot renounce capital
      punishment. There has never been a revolution or a period of
      civil war without shootings.

    
      Our food supply has been reduced to an almost catastrophic
      state. We have reached the direst period in our revolution. We
      are facing the most distressful period of all there never has
      been a more difficult period in workers’ and
      peasants’ Russia—the period that remains until the
      harvest. I have seen plenty of party differences and
      revolutionary disputes in my day, and I am not surprised to find
      that in such a time of stress an increasing number of people are
      giving way to hysterics and crying: “I will resign from
      the Soviets,” and talking of the decrees abolishing
      capital punishment. But be is a poor revolutionary who at a time
      of acute struggle is halted by the immutability of a law. In a
      period of transition laws have only a temporary validity; and
      when a law hinders the development of the revolution, it must be
      abolished or amended. Comrades, the worse the famine becomes,
      the clearer it becomes that this desperate calamity must he
      combated by equally desperate measures. Socialism, I repeat, has
      ceased to be a dogma, just as it has perhaps ceased to be a
      programme. Our Party has not yet drawn up a new programme, but
      the old one is already worthless. The proper and equitable
      distribution of bread—that is what constitutes the basis
      of socialism today. (Applause) The war has bequeathed
      to us a legacy of economic disruption; the efforts of Kerensky
      and the landowners and kulaks saying, “After us the
      deluge”, have reduced the country to such a state that
      they say, “The worse it gets, the better.” The war
      has bequeathed us such hardships that in this matter of the food
      supply we have the very essence of the whole socialist system,
      and we must take this matter into our hands and find a practical
      solution for it. And we ask ourselves what is to he done about
      bread: are we to continue along the old, capitalist lines, with
      peasants taking advantage of the situation and making thousands
      of rubles profit out of grain, at the same time calling
      themselves working peasants, and sometimes even Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries? (Applause and commotion.) They argue
      like this: if people are starving, grain prices will rise; if
      the towns are starving, I will stuff my pockets; and if the
      starvation becomes worse, I will make thousands more. But I know
      very well that the blame for this kind of argument does not lie
      with individuals. The whole abominable heritage of landowner and
      capitalist society has taught people to argue, to think and to
      live like this; and to reform the life of tens of millions of
      people is terribly difficult; it will require long and
      persistent work, and this work we have only just begun. We would
      never think of blaming people who, tormented by hunger and
      seeing no benefit in the organisation of a socialist system of
      bread distribution, scurry to look after themselves and let
      everything else go hang. These people cannot he blamed. But we
      do say that when it is a case of representatives of parties,
      when it is a case of people belonging to a definite party, when
      it is a case of large bodies of people, we expect them to look
      at the matter, not from the standpoint of the suffering,
      tormented, hungry individual, against whom nobody would think of
      raising his hand, but from the standpoint of the building of a
      new society.

    
      I repeat, it will never be possible to build socialism at a time
      when everything is running smoothly and tranquilly; it will
      never be possible to realise socialism without the landowners
      and capitalists putting up a furious resistance. The worse our
      situation is, the more gleefully they rub their hands and the
      more they resort to revolt; the worse our situation is and the
      more saboteurs there are in our midst, the more eagerly they
      embark on all kinds of Czechoslovak and Krasnov affairs. And we
      say that the old way is not the way to cope with this, hard
      though it may be to drag the cart forward, uphill, instead of
      allowing it to slip back downhill. We know very well that not a
      week or even a day passed without the Council of People’s
      Commissars considering the food problem, without our issuing
      thousands of recommendations, orders and decrees, and discussing
      how to combat famine. Some say there is no need for special
      prices, for fixed prices, for a grain monopoly: give people a
      free hand to trade. The rich will get richer still, and if the
      poor die of starvation, well, they always have. But a socialist
      cannot argue like that; at this moment, when the hill is steeper
      than ever and the cart has to be dragged up the steepest
      inclines, socialism has ceased to be a matter of party
      differences and has become a practical issue; it is a question
      of whether we can hold out against the kulaks, by allying
      ourselves with the peasants who do not profiteer in grain; it is
      a question of whether we can hold out now, when we have to
      fight, and work of the heaviest kind lies ahead of us. They talk
      about the Poor Peasants’ Committees. Those who have seen
      the torments of hunger for themselves will clearly realise that
      in order to break and ruthlessly crush the kulaks, the most
      drastic and ruthless measures are required. When we proceeded to
      organise unions of poor peasants, we fully realised what a
      severe and drastic measure this was; but only an alliance of the
      towns with the rural poor and with those who have stocks but do
      not profiteer, with those who want to cope vigorously with the
      difficulties and ensure that the grain surpluses go to the state
      and are distributed among the working peoplesuch an alliance is
      the sole method of waging this struggle. And the way to wage
      this struggle is not by means of programmes and speeches; this
      struggle with famine will show who is going the direct route to
      socialism, despite all trials and hardships, and who is
      succumbing to the trickery and deceit of the kulaks.

    
      If there are people in the Left Socialist-Revolutionary party
      who, like the previous speaker—one of the sincerest, and
      therefore one who is most liable to be carried away, most
      subject to changes of opinion—say that they cannot work
      with the Bolsheviks and are quitting, we shall not regret it for
      a minute. Socialists who quit at a moment like this, when
      hundreds and thousands of people are dying of hunger while
      others have such large surpluses of grain that they had not sold
      them before last August, when the fixed prices for grain were
      doubled—against which all democrats protested—those
      who know that the people are suffering untold torments of hunger
      yet do not want to sell their grain at the price at which the
      middle peasants are selling it, are enemies of the people, they
      are out to ruin the revolution and are landing their support to
      oppression—they are friends of the capitalists! War on
      such people, relentless war on them! (General applause, in
      which a large number o/ Left Socialist-Revolutionaries take
      part.) A thousand times wrong, a thousand times mistaken is
      he who allows himself even for a moment to he carried away by
      enemy talk and to say that this is a fight against the
      peasantry—as incautious or thoughtless Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries sometimes do. No, this is a fight
      against that insignificant minority, the village kulaks, this is
      a fight to save socialism and to distribute bread in Russia
      properly. (Voices: “What about goods?”) We
      shall fight in alliance with the overwhelming majority of the
      peasants; we shall win this fight, and then every European
      worker will see in practice what socialism means.

    
      We shall get help in this struggle from anyone who has been
      toiling all his life and who may not know scientifically what
      socialism means, but who knows that he earned his bread at a
      bard price. He will understand us. That man will be on our
      side. As for the kulaks who—possess surpluses of grain and
      are capable of concealing that grain at a moment of extreme
      national calamity, at a moment when all the gains of the
      revolution are at stake, when the Skoropadskys of every hue and
      in every part of the country, occupied or not, are craning their
      necks and only waiting for the moment to overthrow the power of
      the workers and peasants by famine and reinstate the
      landowners—at such a moment it is our cardinal socialist
      duty to proclaim ruthless war on the kulaks. He is a poor
      socialist who at this moment of grave difficulty and severe
      trial for the starving people and for the socialist revolution
      washes his hands and repeats the lying tales of the bourgeoisie.

    
      It is false, a thousand times false, to say this is a fight
      against the peasantry! I have seen this said hundreds of times
      in the columns of the Constitutional-Democratic news papers, and
      I am not surprised to hear them crying that the workers have
      split with the peasantry. When they hysterically cry:
      “Peasants, open your eyes, come to your senses and have
      done with the Bolsheviks!”’when I hear and read
      things like this, I am not at all surprised. There it is quite
      in place. These people are serving the master it is their
      function to serve. But I would not like to be in the skin of a
      socialist who sinks to talk like this! (Loud applause.)
      Comrades, we fully realise what incredible difficulties the
      solution of the food problem entails. Here the prejudices are
      most profound; here the interests are most deep-rooted kulak
      interests; here division, stagnation, the scattered character of
      village life, ignorance—all, in many cases, are united
      against us. But we say that in spite of these difficulties, we
      cannot withdraw; famine is not a thing to be trifled with; and
      if the masses of the people do not receive assistance in this
      famine, hunger is capable of driving them even into the arms of
      Skoropadsky. It is false to say that this is a fight against the
      peasantry! Anyone who says that is an out-and-out criminal;
      those who have allowed themselves to be driven by hysteria to
      such talk are victims of a terrible misfortune. No, we are not
      even fighting the middle peasant, let alone the poor
      peasant. All over Russia, the middle peasants have only the
      smallest surpluses of grain. The middle peasants for decades
      before the revolution lived worse than the workers. Before the
      revolution their life was one of unrelieved want and
      oppression. Our policy towards these middle peasants is one of
      agreement. The socialist revolution means equality for all the
      working people; it would be unfair for the urban worker to
      receive more than the middle peasant, who does not exploit the
      labour of others by hiring labour or profiteering; the peasants
      suffer from greater want and oppression than the workers, and
      fare even worse than the workers. They have no organisations or
      trade unions to work for the improvement of their
      conditions. Even with the workers’ unions we find it
      necessary to hold dozens of meetings to try and level out wages
      among the various trades, and all the same cannot get them
      levelled. Every sensible worker knows that this will require a
      long time. See how many complaints are received by the
      Commissariat for Labour! You will find that every trade is
      raising its head; they don’t want to live in the old way;
      they don’t want to live like slaves, they say. In this
      poverty-stricken, destitute country we want to heal the wounds
      it has suffered. We must somehow or other save economic life,
      which has almost completely broken down. This can only he done
      by organisation. In order to organise the peasantry, we issued
      the decree about the Poor Peasants’ Committees. Only the
      enemies of socialism can be opposed to this decree. We said that
      we considered it fair to lower the price of textiles. We are
      registering and nationalising positively
      everything. (Applause) And that will permit us to
      regulate the distribution of the products of industry.

    
      We said: cut the prices of textiles for the poor peasants by
      half, and for the middle peasants by 25 per cent. Perhaps these
      scales are wrong. We do not claim that our solution of the
      problem is right. We do not say that. To solve the problem
      rightly, go and do it together. (Applause) Sitting in
      your armchairs in the chief administrations, fighting
      profiteering and trying to catch swindlers who are doing their
      dirty work in secret, is not going to solve the problem.

    
      Only when the Commissariat for Food, in conjunction with the
      Commissariat for Agriculture, nationalises all goods and fixes
      prices—do we really come close up to socialism. It is only
      the working people of the towns and the rural poor, all those
      who labour, do not rob others, do not exploit the labour of
      others either by hiring or by profiteering, only they come close
      to socialism—for the man who demands a hundred rubles or
      more for grain is no less a profiteer than the man who employs
      hired labour; perhaps he is even a worse, a more arrant
      profiteer. After a desperately difficult half-year of Soviet
      rule, we have now arrived at the organisation of the poor
      peasants. It is a pity we did not arrive at it after half a
      week—that is where we are to blame! If we had been
      reproached with having brought in the decree on the organisation
      of the poor peasants and the food dictatorship six months too
      late, we should have welcomed the reproof. We say that only now
      that we have taken this path has socialism ceased to be a mere
      phrase and is becoming a practical thing. It is possible that
      the decree is unhappily conceived, that the scales are
      wrong. How were we to determine them? Only by your
      experience. How many times have we altered the
      railwaymen’s scales, even though they have their trade
      unions, whereas the poor peasants have none! Let us co-operate
      in checking whether the scales laid down in the decree on the
      poor peasants are right, whether it is right to lower prices for
      the poor peasants by half and for the middle peasants by a
      quarter, and to take everything away from the rich
      peasants—whether these scales are right or not.

    
      If there is to be a fight, we shall wage that fight by bold
      decrees without hesitating for a moment. It will be a real fight
      for socialism—not for a dogma, not for a programme, for a
      party, for a faction, but for living socialism, for the
      distribution of bread among hundreds of thousands and millions
      of starving people in the foremost districts of Russia, for
      taking grain wherever it is to he found and distributing it
      properly. I repeat, we do not doubt for a moment that
      ninety-nine peasants out of every hundred, when they learn the
      truth, when they receive the decree, test it, try it in practice
      and tell us how to correct it—and we will correct it, we
      will alter the scales—when they tackle this job and get an
      idea of its practical difficulty, these peasants will be on our
      side and will say, we are displaying the healthy instinct of the
      working man, and that this, and only this, will decide the real
      issue, the fundamental and vital issue socialism. We shall
      establish proper prices for goods, we shall establish a monopoly
      on grain, on textiles and on all products; and then the people
      will say: “Yes, the distribution of labour, the
      distribution of bread and other products inaugurated by
      socialism is better than it has before.” And that is what
      the people are beginning to say. In spite of a host of mistakes,
      in spite of incidents which we make no attempt to conceal, but
      rather drag into the light and hold up to shame—cases when
      our detachments themselves succumb to profiteering, sink down
      into that slippery gulf into which all the capitalist habits and
      customs tend to drag people—yes, there are such cases
      everywhere, we know that people cannot be remoulded all at once,
      that you cannot inspire tens of millions of people with faith in
      socialism all at once (where are they to get this faith from?
      Not out of their own heads, surely? No, from their
      experience)—but in spite of all this, people are beginning
      to say that bread can be secured without profiteering, and that
      the only salvation from famine lies in an alliance of the urban,
      factory, industrial workers with the poor peasants, for only the
      poor peasant does not profiteer in grain. Yes, as soon as the
      middle peasant sees our decrees, reads them for himself,
      compares them with the talk and slanders of the Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and the champions of the kulak, he
      will say that in establishing one scale for the poor peasants
      and another for the middle peasants, and in taking grain from
      the kulaks without compensation, we are acting rightly. He may
      not say that we are acting like socialists—he may not know
      that word—but he is our sure ally, for he does not
      profiteer in grain, and he will realise and agree that to
      profiteer in grain at a moment of direst danger to the socialist
      revolution is a heinous crime against the people.

    
      Bread cannot be distributed by decree. But when, after long and
      persistent effort in establishing and improving the alliance of
      the factory, urban workers with the rural poor, with the working
      peasants who do not hire any labourers and do not engage in
      profiteering, we get this thing properly going, no hysterical
      outcries against our Party will succeed in rupturing that
      alliance. (Applause)

      When we promised the peasants socialisation of the land, we made
      a concession; for we understood that nationalisation could not
      be introduced at one stroke. We know that we may have made a
      mistake in embodying your socialisation of the land in our law
      of October 

      26.[See Meeting Of The Petrograd Soviet Of
      Workers’ And Soldiers’
      Deputies—Editor] It was a concession to
      the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, who refused to be in the
      government and said they would only remain if this law were
      passed. Spiridonova is a thousand times wrong in bringing
      forward unconnected facts and saying that she came to see me,
      humbled herself and implored. Comrades, many of you have been to
      see me and know that that cannot have been the case, that no
      comrade could have been treated like that. It must be a bad
      party indeed whose best spokesmen stoop to spreading
      fairy-tales. (Commotion.) I have a letter from Comrade
      Spiridonova—she has often written to me. I shall find that
      letter tomorrow and make it known. She writes: “Why do you
      refuse to grant two million for agricultural communes?”
      And this on the very day when Sereda, the People’s
      Commissar for Agriculture, whose work she does not understand,
      submitted a proposal to assign ten million for agricultural
      communes.[6] (Prolonged applause). You
      heard Comrade Spiridonova say the same thing in her speech; but
      it must be a bad party indeed whose sincerest people stoop to
      spreading fairy-tales for propaganda purposes. I repeat, it must
      be a bad party indeed whose best and sincerest spokesmen go to
      the length of spreading such fairy-tales about the Soviet
      government! All the worse for them! Every peasant who comes to
      the Commissariat for Agriculture and reads that ten million have
      been assigned for agricultural communes will see and believe his
      own eyes and ears more than somebody else’s speeches, and
      will understand that these people have sunk so low as to spread
      fairy-tales, and he will turn his back on this
      party. (Applause) I want to say only one thing in
      concluding my speech. Until the new harvest, until that harvest
      is brought to the starving localities of Petrograd and Moscow, a
      hard period of the Russian revolution lies before us. A really
      close alliance between the urban workers and the rural poor, the
      rural working masses who do not profiteer in grain, is the only
      thing that can save the revolution.

    
      Our Congress shows that in spite of everything the alliance of
      all the working people is growing, spreading and gaining
      strength not only in Russia, but all over the world. Absurdly
      little, terribly little is known abroad about our
      revolution. The military censorship there lets nothing
      through. The comrades who returned from abroad have told us
      that; yet, in spite of everything, guided by sheer instinct, the
      European workers sympathise with the Bolshevik Government. And
      ever more numerous are voices showing that sympathy for the
      socialist revolution is growing in Europe in the countries where
      the imperialist war is still in progress. The Bolshevik
      Government is receiving expressions of gratitude, sympathy and
      support from German socialists and other men and women whose
      names are known to every enlightened worker and peasant, people
      like Clara Zetkin and Franz Mehring. In Italy, Lazzari, the old
      secretary of the party, who at Zimmerwald regarded the
      Bolsheviks with mistrust, is now in prison for having expressed
      his sympathy with us.

    
      Understanding of the revolution is growing. In France, comrades
      and workers, who at the Zimmerwald Conference treated the
      Bolsheviks with profound mistrust, the other day issued a
      manifesto in the name of the Committee of International
      Relations[7] earnestly appealing for support of
      the Bolshevik Government and opposing adventures by any party.

    
      And so, comrades, however difficult and arduous the period that
      lies ahead of us may he, it is our duty to tell the truth and to
      open people’s eyes to this, for only the people, by their
      initiative and organisation, by advancing demand after demand
      and defending the socialist republic, can help us. And we say,
      comrades, that there is not a shadow of doubt that if we follow
      the path which we have chosen and which events have confirmed,
      if we follow this path firmly and unswervingly, if we do not
      allow ourselves to be diverted from the right path by any
      phrase-making, illusions, deceit or hysterics, we have every
      chance in the world of maintaining our position and of
      resolutely furthering the victory of socialism in Russia, and
      thus furthering the victory of the world socialist revolution!
      (Loud and prolonged applause and cheers.)
    
2
Reply To The Debate
July 5, 1918

      All the objections of the opposition concerning my report begin
      with the question of the Brest Treaty. But such a formulation of
      the question could be called practical only if it led to
      practical results. None of their speeches about this have
      produced results, nor can they produce any. (Applause)

      If the party of Left Socialist-Revolutionaries happened to have
      a majority, they would not be making so much fuss about this
      matter as they are making now. What should be discussed are the
      real achievements of the Soviet Republic on the road to
      socialism. We can assert—and not one speaker has denied
      this—that in this respect great success has been achieved
      since the last Congress. Nor have the representatives of the
      opposition refuted the fact that all who are in favour of
      tearing up the Brest peace are acting in the interests of
      restoring the power of the landowners and capitalists and rely
      for their strength on the support of Anglo-French
      imperialism. When I said that the Czechoslovaks in return for
      ten or fifteen million are also out to bring about this break,
      no one denied it. Can anyone deny that the Czechoslovaks, hiding
      behind the slogan of the Constituent Assembly, are aiming at
      dragging us into war?

    
      The Left Socialist-Revolutionaries said it was impossible to
      create an army in a short time, but everything depends on how
      soon we put the fuel situation riglit, how the peasants get on,
      and what happens to the harvest.

    
      Your appeals for the creation of guerilla detachments to fight a
      regular imperialist army are recognised as absurd by any
      soldier. 

    
      When people force us to go back to the question of the Brest
      peace, we say: “That peace will be violated if you
      overthrow Soviet power, and that will not happen!”
      (Applause.) Only then, on the basis of tearing up the
      Brest peace, will you be able to drag the masses of the working
      people into a war to the delight of the landowners, capitalists
      and white guards, who have been bribed with the millions of the
      Anglo-French imperialists. Sabotage of the Brest peace will in
      practice stem from forces hostile to the masses of the working
      people. None of the objections concerning the Brest peace can be
      considered practical. They are merely the hysterics of the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries.

    
      When it was said here that the Bolsheviks were yielding, and
      that their reports contained nothing of practical value, I
      recalled the words uttered here by one Socialist-Revolutionary,
      a Maximalist I think he was, to the effect that the Supreme
      Economic Council is passing from the control of production to
      its administration.[8] Isn’t that statement of
      practical value? What, then, are those workers doing, who by
      their own efforts, through their trade unions, have begun to
      learn from the bosses the business of administering enterprises?
      You say that it is an easy thing to learn to administer, but
      every day we in the Supreme Economic Council have to settle
      thousands of conflicts and incidents which show that the worker
      has learnt a lot, and we must conclude that the workers are
      beginning to learn—slowly, to be sure, and with mistakes;
      but it is one thing to utter fine phrases, and another to see
      how with every passing month the worker is beginning to find his
      feet, how he is beginning to lose his timidity and to feel that
      he is the ruler. Rightly or wrongly, he is acting as the peasant
      does in an agricultural commune. Time has shown that the worker
      had to learn to administer industry, and all the rest is just
      empty talk and not worth a brass farthing. If, after six months
      of Soviet rule, we are now beginning to find that control is out
      of date, that is a big step forward.

    
      The cry has been raised here that we are marking time, or even
      retreating. Nothing of the kind. You may persuade the kulak of
      that, but not the ordinary worker; he knows what we mean when we
      say, let us have better people than the ones you sent, make them
      learn better than you are learning.

      And so, when the cry is raised here about concessions, let us
      ask any worker or peasant what he prefers: to pay in concessions
      the debt the Germans imposed upon us, or to fight? When we
      signed the Peace Treaty of Brest, we said of the imperialists
      that until they were vanquished by an international socialist
      revolution, we should not be able to defend ourselves in any
      other way than by retreating. That is unpleasant, but it will
      remain a fact’and it is better to tell the people
      so’until we have built up an army, for which we shall need
      only a few years, not decades, provided we introduce a proper
      system of bread distribution, so that there will be stocks of
      grain for the army, gathered and stored. In what uyezd or
      gubernia have the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries done that? They
      have done nothing of the kind! And until it is done, we declare
      that all your cries are just empty talk; whereas when we take a
      step towards administration by the workers, we take a step
      forward. My words have been misquoted here. What I said was that
      it must be a bad party whose sincere members are obliged to
      stoop to such talk.

    
      We have assigned a thousand million to our Commissariat for
      Food—isn't that a step forward? Much still remains
      to be arranged, and you can do it if you only have the
      desire. But through whom, I do not know. Not through the old
      officials, surely? Our workers and peasants on the Soviets are
      learning to do it (applause), and so the purchases of
      textiles and the appropriations are having their
      effect. Hundreds of times the Council of People’s
      Commissars has discussed through whom to purchase textiles, how
      to exercise control, and how to get them distributed as quickly
      as possible. And we know that as the weeks go by measures have
      been devised for combating profiteering and catching profiteers,
      and that with every month the workers are getting a firmer
      mastery of this job—and this success of ours nobody can
      deny. We are advancing, not marking time. On June 28, we carried
      out nationalisation[9] to the extent perhaps of several
      hundred millions, yet you keep on objecting and repeating the
      talk of the bourgeois intellectuals. Socialism is not a job that
      can be done in a few months. We are not marking time, but are
      continuing to move towards socialism, and since the Brest peace
      we have come closer to it The workers have derived experience
      from a number of mistakes, they realise the gravity and
      difficulty of the struggle, while the peasants have experience
      in the socialisation of the land, and there can he no doubt that
      the more experienced and intelligent peasants are saying:
      “In the first spring we took land for ourselves; in the
      autumn we’ll take over the whole job, the whole business
      of distributing the land.” Do not forget that we are
      selling the peasants textiles at a 50 per cent rebate, that is,
      at half-price. Who else would have given the poor peasants
      textiles at such a price? We shall proceed towards socialism by
      way of grain, textiles and implements, which will not fall into
      the hands of the profiteers, but will go first and foremost to
      the poor peasants. That is socialism. (Applause) After
      six months of socialist revolution, the people who get all their
      ideas from books understand nothing. We have arrived at a stage
      where we are taking the concrete step of distributing bread and
      exchanging textiles for bread in such a way that it is the poor
      that benefit, and not the rich profiteers. We are not a
      bourgeois republic; if we were we should not need Soviets. It is
      the poor that must benefit from the distribution of grain and
      textiles—that is something no republic in the world has
      attempted, but we are attempting it now. (Applause) We
      are doing a noble work; we have the experience; and we are doing
      everything in our power to get the poor to organise. Cases of
      extortion and hooliganism are practically disappearing; for
      every such case there are a dozen others when the poor peasants
      and the middle peasants say: we must get rid of the kulak and
      the landowner! Since the Brest peace we have made tremendous
      strides in the education of the peasants, and they are now no
      longer novices in the struggle for socialism.
    

Endnotes
[1] 
      Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets opened on July 4, 1918 in
      the Bolshoi Theatre in Moscow. It was attended by 1,164
      delegates with the right to vote. These included 773 Bolsheviks,
      353 Left S.R.s, 17 Maximalists (a variety of Left S.R.s), 4
      anarchists, 4 Menshevik-Internationalists, 3 members of other
      parties and 10 non-party people. Among the delegates there were
      representatives of the German-occupied areas of the Ukraine,
      Latvia, and Transcaucasia, who brought greetings and described
      the situation in these areas. The Congress was greeted by the
      representative of the British Socialist Party Joseph Fineberg,
      who read out a resolution passed by his party’s conference
      declaring its support for the socialist revolution
      in. Russia. The Congress also received greetings from the
      working people of Germany and Norway, and from Russian
      prisoners-of-war interned in various countries.

    
      The Congress approved the agenda proposed by the Presidium of
      the All-Russia C.E.C., which included the following items:
      reports of the All-Russia C.E.C. and the Council of
      People’s Commissars; the food question; organisation of
      the socialist Red Army; Constitution of the Russian Soviet
      Republic; elections to the All-Russia C.E.C. The Congress
      rejected the Left S.R. demand that reports from the provinces
      and a discussion on the Soviet Government’s decision to
      introduce capital punishment for treason should be added to the
      agenda.

    
      After the agenda had been approved, the Congress discussed a
      question that was not on the agenda concerning incidents in the
      area bordering on the Ukraine, where Mensheviks and S.Rs were
      agitating among the military units in the area with the aim of
      causing a clash with the Germans and thus sabotaging the peace
      treaty with Germany and drawing the country into war. In their
      explanation to the Congress the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries
      demagogically accused the Communist Party of not wishing to help
      the working people of the occupied areas, refused to discuss the
      resolution moved by the Communist group and walked out of the
      meeting. The Congress unanimously resolved that “decisions
      on matters of war and peace rest solely with the All-Russia
      Congress of Soviets” and the central organs of Soviet
      power-the All-Russia C.E.C. and the Council of People’s
      Commissars, and advised the Soviet Government to deal firmly
      with all agents provocateurs.

    
      Y. M. Sverdlov delivered the report on the work of the
      Aull-Russia C.E.C.; Lenin reported on the work of the Council of
      .People’s Commissars. After stormy debates on the two
      reports the Congress passed the Communist group’s
      resolution expressing “complete approval of the foreign
      and domestic policy of the Soviet Government”. The Left
      S.R. resolution calling for a vote of no confidence in the
      Soviet Government, denunciation of the Brest Peace Treaty, and a
      change in the home and foreign policy of Soviet power was
      rejected.

    
      Defeated at the Congress, the Left S.R.s resorted to use of
      force, and on July 6 launched an armed counter-revolutionary
      insurrection in Moscow. The Congress adjourned until July
      9. When it met again to discuss the events of July 6-7, the
      Congress fully approved the government’s resolute measures
      to deal with the criminal venture of the Left S.R.s and stated
      that the Left S.R.s who shared the views of their ruling clique
      “can have no place in the Soviets of Workers’ and
      Peasants’ Deputies”.

    
      In a resolution on the report by the People’s Commissar
      for Food A. D. Tsyurupa the Congress endorsed the grain
      monopoly, stressed the need for resolute suppression of kulak
      resistance and approved the setting up of the poor
      peasants’ committees.

    
      At its final session on July 10, the Congress heard a report on
      the organisation of the Red Army and unanimously approved the
      Communist group’s resolution outlining essential measures
      for organising and consolidating the Red Army on the basis of
      compulsory military service by the working people.

    
      The Congress completed its work with an act of the greatest
      historical significance. It passed the first Constitution of the
      R.S.F.S.R., thus legislatively consolidating the gains of the
      working people of Soviet Russia.  

    [2] 
      The “previous speaker”. was M. A. Spiridonova, one
      of the Left S.R. leaders. She had delivered a supplementary
      report to the Congress on the work of the peasant section of the
      All-Russia C.E.C., which contained a number of  attacks on the
      policy of the Soviet Government and the Communist Party.

    [3]
Golos Trudovovo Krestyanstva (Voice of the Labouring
      Peasantry)—daily newspaper that appeared in Petrograd from
      the end of November 1917 as the organ of the Executive Committee
      of the All-Russia Soviet of Peasants’ Deputies, Second
      Convocation (until December 9 [221 it was known as
      Izvestia of the All-Russia Peasant Congress). On
      January 20 (February 2), 1918, it became the organ of the
      peasant section of the All-Russia C.E.C. Up to July 10, 1918,
      the paper was controlled by the Left S.R.s. On November 6, 1918,
      Became the organ of the People’s Commissariat for
      Agriculture. It continued to appear until May 31, 1919.

    [4]
      The reference is to the Draft Constitution of the Russian
      Socialist Federative Soviet Republic, which was submitted for
      the approval of the Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets.

    
      A decisionon pre aration of a draft constitution of the
      R.S. F.S.R. had been pass11 in January 1918 by the Third
      All-Russia Congress of Soviets. But the Soviet Government was
      able to begin work on the draft only after the peaceful
      breathing-space had been gained. Lenin played a decisive part in
      drawing up the first Soviet Constitution.

    
      The work of preparing the draft was done by the constitution
      commission set up by the All-Russia C.E.C. on April 1, 1918,
      under the chairmanship of Y. M. Sverdlov.

    
      On Sverdlov’s suggestion at a meeting of the All-Russia
      C.E.C. on June 14 the question of the Soviet Constitution was
      included on the agenda of the Fifth All-Russia Congress of
      Soviets. The final drafting of the Constitution for submission
      to the Congress was entrusted to a commission of the Central
      Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) under the chairmanship of Lenin. On
      July 3 this commission considered two drafts of the Soviet
      Constitution-one made by the constitution commission of the
      All-Russia C.E.C. and another submitted by the People’s
      Commissariat for Justice. The commission of the Central
      Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) took as the basis for the
      constitution the draft submitted by the constitution commission
      of the All-Russia C.E.C., adding some of the proposals put
      forward by the People’s Commissariat for Justice. On
      Lenin’s suggestion the following amendments were made: a
      Declaration of Rights of the Working and Exploited People was
      included as a preamble to the Constitution; an article on
      national and racial equality in the Soviet Republic, and
      articles on the political rights of foreigners resident in the
      R.S.F.S.R. for purposes of work (Lenin’s “Rough
      Draft of Point 20 of the Second Section of the Constitution of
      the R.S.F.S.R.”, which defines their rights) and on the
      granting of the right of asylum to all foreigners subjected to
      persecution for their political and religious beliefs
      (Lenin’s amendments, see Decrees of the Soviet Government,
      Russ. ed., Vol. 2, 1959, pp. 546-49) were added. The commission
      of the C.C. of the R.C.P.(B . ) also introduced a number of
      other important amendments and corrections. The draft passed by
      the C.C. of the R.C.P.(B.) was submitted for approval by the
      Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets.

    
      On the first day of the Congress Sverdlov proposed setting up a
      commission to consider the draft Constitution and report on it
      to the Congress. The commission was formed from among
      representatives of the various groups; it made a few changes of
      a stylistic nature, added several articles to the section on
      budget rights and introduced a new section on the arms and flag
      of the R.S.F.S.R. At its final session on July 10 the Congress
      heard the report of the commission on the draft Constitution,
      after which it unanimously approved the Constitution of the
      R.S.F.S.R. and entrusted the final work of editing the text to
      the new All-Russia C.E.C.

    
      On July 19, 1918, the Constitution of the Russian Socialist Federative
      Soviet Republic was published as the Fundamental Law and came
      into force as from the date of publication.

    [5]
      The reference is to the All-Russia Extraordinary Commission of
      the Council of People’s Commissars, whose Chairman was
      F. B. Dzerzhinsky.

    
      The All-Russia Extraordinary Commission (Cheka) was set upon
      December 7 (20), 1917 by decision of the Council of
      People’s Commissars for the purpose of “ruthlessly
      combating counterrevolution, sabotage and
      profiteering”. As the strong right arm of the dictatorship
      of the proletariat, the Cheka played an enormous part in
      checking counter-revolutionary sabotage and in protecting the
      security of the Soviet Republic. Appraising the work of this
      commission, Lenin pointed out in his report to the Ninth
      All-Russia Congress of Soviets in December 1921: “... It
      was our effective weapon against the numerous plots and numerous
      attacks on Soviet power” (see V. 1. Lenin, Report on
      Peace, Moscow, p. 262). In its Resolution on the Cheka the Ninth
      Congress noted the commission’s heroic work in protecting
      the gains of the October Revolution and, in view of the
      consolidation of Soviet power, proposed curtailing the
      commission’s sphere of activity. This resolution reflected
      proposals made by Lenin in a draft decision of the Political
      Bureau of the C.C,. of the R.C.P.(B.) on the Cheka, which he
      wrote on December 1, 1921 (see Lenin Miscellany XXXVI,
      p. 369). On February 6, 1922 the All-Russia C.E.C. passed a
      decree abolishing the Cheka.

    [6]
      In the very first months of its existence Soviet rower gave the
      collective farming enterprises considerable material and
      financial assistance. Estimates of the Current Land Policy
      Department of the People’s Commissariat for Agriculture
      show that in the second half of 1918 fifteen million rubles were
      assigned to the organisation of agricultural communes and artels
      in the form of interest free loans. Additionally the government
      assigned 10 million rubles for the same purpose in July 1918. A
      decree passed on November 2, 1918 “for the purpose of
      improving and developing agriculture and bringing about its
      speediest reorganisation on socialist principles” set up a
      fund of one thousand million rubles for financial and technical
      assistance to the labour associations and communes. The actual
      amount disbursed to communes and artels on the basis of this
      decree was considerably more than one thousand million rubles.

    
      The collective farms enjoyed great advantages during the
      distribution of complex agricultural machinery, livestock and
      farm implements, and seed. State farms and collective farms were
      given priority by the state agricultural machine-hire points and
      repair stations that had been set up.  

    [7]
      Committee of International Relations was set up by the French
      Internationalists in January 1916. This was the first attempt to
      set up in France a revolutionary-internationalist organisation
      of socialists to counter the social-chauvinist organisations
      there. Lenin saw the value of the committee’s work in
      rallying internationalists and on his instructions I. F. Armand
      took part in the committee’s work.

    
      Thanks to the influence of the October Revolution in Russia and
      the growing strength of the French working-class movement the
      committee became a centre for people with revolutionary
      internationalist views. In 1920 it merged with the French
      Communist Party.

    
      The manifesto referred to by Lenin was published on June 29, 1918 in
      Pravda No. 131.

    [8]
      Lenin is referring to a speech by a representative of the
      S.R.Maximalist group Svetlov.

    [9]
      Lenin has in mind the historic Decree of the Council of
      People’s Commissars on the Nationalisation of Large-Scale
      Industry, passed on June 28, 1918 and published on June 30 in
      Izvestia VtsIK No. 134. “According to a plan that
      had been outlined long before,” Lenin wrote of this
      decree, “after extensive preparatory work a decree, whose
      appearance was impatiently awaited by the masses of the people
      of Russia was finally published on June 28” (Lenin
      Miscellany XXXV, p. 27). The decree made all large industrial
      enterprises public property. In spite of enormous difficulties
      the work of nationalisation was carried out in a short period
      thanks to the organising work of the Communist Party and the
      energetic participation of the workers. By August 31, 1918 there
      were over 3,000 nationalised enterprises in the country.

    
      Under the same decree, all private railways and also the public
      utilities (water supply, gasworks, urban transport, etc.) were
      made public property and put under the control of the local
      Soviets.  
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Telegram to
      J. V. Stalin











Telegram To J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. Stalin
July 7, 1 a. m.
Tsaritsyn to People’s Commissar Stalin

Wired: 3 July, 1918
First Published: 21 January, 1936 In Pravda No. 21 Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
      Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, page 523
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
      Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive March, 2002

Today at about three p. m. a Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary killed Mirbach with a bomb. This murder is
      obviously in the interests of the monarchists or Anglo-French
      capitalists. The Left S.R.s, not wanting to surrender the
      assassin, arrested Dzerzhinsky and Latsis and began an uprising
      against us. We are liquidating it mercilessly this very night and
      we shall tell the people the whole truth: we are a hair’s
      breadth from ’war. We have hundreds of Left S.R.s as
      hostages. Everywhere it is essential to crush mercilessly these
      pitiful and hysterical adventurers who have become tools in the
      hands of the counter-revolutionaries. All who are against war will
      be for us.
      
    
      As regards Baku, the most important thing is that you should be
      continuously in contact with Shahumyan, and that Shahumyan
      should know of the Germans’ proposal, made to Ambassador
      Joffe in Berlin, to the effect that the Germans would agree to
      halt the Turks’ offensive against Baku if we guaranteed
      the Germans part of the oil. Of course, we shall agree. And so,
      be merciless against the Left S.R.s and report more frequently.

    
      Lenin
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Interview Granted to an
      Izvestia Correspondent in Connection wit the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary Revolt.











Interview Granted To An Izvestia Correspondent In Connection With The Left Socialist-Revolutionary Revolt



V. I. Lenin
Interview Granted To An Izvestia Correspondent In
      Connection With The Left Socialist-Revolutionary 
      Revolt[1]
Brief Report

Interviewed: 8 July, 1918
First Published: 8 July, 1918, Izvestia VTsIK No. 141, July 8. 1918; Published according to the Izvestia text

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 534-535
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


      Revolution with remarkable consistency drives every proposition
      to its logical conclusion and ruthlessly exposes the utter
      futility and criminality of all wrong tactics.

    
      The Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, carried away by
      nigh-sounding phrases, have for several months now been
      screaming: "Down with the Brest peace! To arms against the
      Germans!"

    
      We replied that under present conditions, in the present period
      of history, the Russian people cannot fight and do not want to
      fight.

    
      Closing their eyes to the facts, they continued with insane
      obstinacy to persist in their own line, not sensing that they
      were drawing further and further away from the masses of the
      people, and determined at all costs, even by brute force, to
      impose their will on these masses, the will of their Central
      Committee, which included criminal adventurers, hysterical
      intellectuals, and so on.

    
      And the further they drew away from the people, the more they
      earned the sympathies of the bourgeoisie, which was hoping to
      accomplish its designs by their hand.

    
      Their criminal terrorist act and revolt have fully and
      completely opened the eyes of the broad masses to the abyss into
      which the criminal tactics of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary
      adventurers are dragging Soviet Russia, the Russia of the
      people.

    
      On the day of the revolt, I myself and many other comrades had
      occasion to hear even the most backward sections of the people
      expressing their profound disgust of the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries.

    
      One simple old woman said indignantly on hearing of the
      assassination of Mirbach:

    
      "The devils, so they've driven us into war after all!"

    
      It at once became perfectly clear and obvious to everybody that
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries' terroristic act had brought
      Russia to the brink of war. That, in fact, was what the masses
      thought of the action of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries.

    
      They are trying by underhand methods to embroil us in war with
      the Germans at a time when we cannot fight and do not want to
      fight. The masses will never forgive the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries for trampling so brutally on the will
      of the people and trying to force them into war.

    
      And if anybody was well pleased with the action of the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and rubbed his hands with glee, it was
      only the whiteguards and the servitors of the imperialist
      bourgeoisie; whereas the worker and peasant masses have been
      rallying ever closer and more solidly around the
      Communist-Bolshevik Party, the authentic spokesman of the will
      of the masses.
    

Endnotes
[1] 
      The counter-revolutionary insurrection of the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries in Moscow (July 6-7, 1918) was
      organised in accordance with the decision of the C.C. of the
      Left S.R.s of June 24. It was part of a general attack by the
      internal counter-revolution and the imperialists of the Entente
      against Soviet Russia, and the insurrectionists were secretly
      supported by foreign diplomatic missions.

      The insurrection was launched during the Fifth All-Russia
      Congress of Soviets, at which the anti-Soviet speeches of the
      Left S.R.s received no support from the overwhelming majority of
      delegates. Defeated at the Congress, the Lefb S.R.s pursued
      their aim of sabotaging the Brest Peace Treaty and dragging
      Soviet Russia into war with Germany by assassinating the German
      Ambassador inMoscow Count Mirbach on July 6. This was followed
      up by an insurrection. The main rebel force was a detachment
      commanded by D.I. Popov, a Left S.R. and member of the
      Cheka. About 1,800 people took part in the insurrection,
      bombarding the Kremlin with artillery and seizing the telephone
      exchange and telegraph office. During the two hours that they
      remained in control there, they sent out several provocatory
      manifestos, bulletins and telegrams in the name of the Left
      S.R. Central Committee alleging that the Left S.R.s had taken
      over power and that their action had been welcomed by the whole
      population.

      The Fifth Congress of Soviets instructed the government to
      suppress the insurrection at once, and the group of Left S.R.s
      at the Congress was arrested. Thanks to the energetic measure
      taken by the Soviet Government and the united action of the
      Moscow workers and garrison the insurrection was put down within
      twenty four hours. By 2 p. m. on July 7 it was all over.

      The Left S.R.s also tried to start insurrections in Petrograd,
      Vologda and other cities A telegram from the Left S . R. Central
      Committee stating that the Left S.R.s had seized power in
      Moscow, was sent to M. A. Muravyov, a Left S.B. and Commander of
      the Eastern Front. On the pretext of attacking the Germans, he
      tried to seize Simbirsk (now Ulyanovsk) and march his forces on
      Moscow in support of the insurrectionists. Like the other
      insurrections, Muravyov's reckless attempt was quickly
      supressed.

      When the Fifth Congress of Soviets reassembled after the defeat
      of the insurrection, it passed a decision expelling from the
      Soviets the Left S.R.s who had supported the adventuristic line
      of their leadership. Numerous telegrams in which the workers and
      peasants expressed their approval of the suppression of the
      revolt and their readiness to take up arms to defend Soviet
      power reached the Congress from all parts of the country. 


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## To the Workers of
      Petrograd











To The Workers Of Petrograd



V. I. Lenin
To The Workers Of Petrograd

Delivered: 12 July, 1918
First Published: 1924 in the magazine Proletarskaya Revolutsia No. 3 (26); Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 536-537
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


Dear Comrades,

I am taking advantage of the fact that Comrade Kayurov, an old acquaintance of mine and well known to the Petrograd workers, is leaving for Petrograd, to send you a few words.

Comrade Kayurov has been in Simbirsk Gubernia and has himself observed the attitude of the kulaks to the poor peasants and to our government. He has perfectly realised what no Marxist and no class-conscious worker can doubt, namely, that the kulaks hate the Soviet government, the government of the workers, and will inevitably overthrow it if the workers do not immediately make every effort to forestall the attack of the kulaks on the Soviets and to smash the kulaks before they can manage to unite.

The class-conscious workers can do this at the present moment; they can rally the poor peasants around themselves, defeat the kulaks and smash them, provided the vanguard of the workers realise their duty, make every effort and organise a mass campaign into the rural districts.

Nobody but the workers of Petrograd can do this, for there are no other workers in Russia as class-conscious as the Petrograd workers. It is foolish and criminal to stay in Petrograd, starve, hang around idle factories and cherish the absurd dream of restoring Petrograd industry or defending Petrograd. That will mean the ruin of our revolution. The Petrograd workers must abandon such nonsense, send packing the fools who advocate it, and set out in tens of thousands for the Urals, the Volga and the South, where there is an abundance of grain, where they can feed themselves and their families, where they must help the poor peasants to organise, and where the Petrograd worker is indispensable as an organiser, guide and leader.

Kayurov will recount his personal observations, and, I am certain, will convince all waverers. The revolution is in danger. Only a mass campaign of the Petrograd workers can save it. Arms and money we shall not stint.

With Communist greetings,

Lenin
July 12, 1918


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech and Government
      Statement at the Session of the All-Russia C.E.C., July
      15, 1918











Speech And Government Statement At The Session Of The All-Russia C.E.C., July 15, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech And Government Statement At The Session Of The All-Russia C.E.C.
July 15, 1918[1]

Delivered: 15 July, 1918
First Published: Newspaper reports published on July 16, 1918 in Pravda No. 146 and in Izvestia VTsIK No. 148; Published according to the text of the book: Fifth Convocation of the All-Russia C.E.C. of the Soviets. Verbatim Report. All-Russia C.E.C. Publishers, 1919; the Government Statement published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 538-541
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


Comrades, our Soviet Republic cannot complain of any shortage of political crises and sudden political changes. No matter how simple, how elementary all the imperialist forces may be (and they cannot, of course, feel at ease side by side with the Socialist Soviet Republic), yet in a situation like the one we are passing through at present, with war still continuing on its former scale, the obviously dominant forces, the combination of the two imperialist groups continues to cause political crisis and the like. Concerning one such event, which either resembles or is a real political crisis, I have a communication to make to you.

Yesterday, July 14, at 11 p. m., the People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs was visited by the German ChargÃ© d’Affaires Doctor Ritzier, who informed him of the contents of a telegram he had just received from Berlin in which the German Government instructs him to request the Russian Government to allow a battalion of German soldiers in uniform to enter Moscow for the purpose of guarding the German Embassy and to allow these soldiers to be dispatched to Moscow at once.

It was further stated in the message that the German Government was far from aiming at any sort of occupation.

The People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs, in agreement with the Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars, replied that the common people of Russia desire peace, that the Russian Government is prepared to give the German Embassy, Consulate and Commissions an entirely adequate and reliable guard consisting of its own troops, but that it cannot under any circumstances allow a foreign military unit to enter Moscow; it firmly hopes that the German Government, inspired by the same desire for peace, will not insist on its request.

In fact, the request to the Russian Government is in complete contradiction to the statement made by the Imperial Chancellor in the Reichstag that the unfortunate murder of Count Mirbach would not lead to a worsening of relations between the two countries. It also contradicts the wish that we know has been expressed by leading commercial and industrial circles to set up and develop close economic relations to the benefit of both countries; it contradicts the negotiations that have been proceeding successfully. Numerous statements made to our representative in Berlin concerning the political situation and the attitude to Russia also bear witness to this fact.

We still have every reason to hope that a favourable solution to this unexpected incident will be found, but whenever tension arises in our international relations we consider it necessary to make known the facts openly and make the issues clear.

I therefore consider it my duty to make the following Governmpt statement:

“The Government of the Soviet Republic was well aware when it concluded the Brest peace what an onerous task the workers and peasants of Russia had been obliged to undertake owing to the international situation that had developed. The will of the overwhelming majority at the Fourth Congress of Soviets was perfectly clear; the working classes demanded peace because they needed a rest to be able to work, to organise the socialist economy, to recover and build up their strength, which had been undermined by an agonising war.

“In obedience to the will of the Congress the government has carried out the harsh terms of the Brest Treaty to the letter, and of late our negotiations with the German Government concerning the exact amount of the payments to be made by us, and the forms of payment, which we have decided to discharge as soon as possible, have made considerable progress.

“But while most scrupulously fulfilling the terms of Brest and upholding the will of the workers and peasants to have peace, the Soviet Government has never lost sight of the fact that there are limits beyond which even the most peace loving masses of the working people will be compelled to rise, and will rise, as one man to defend their country with arms in hand.

“The senseless and criminal folly of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries has brought us to the brink of war. Our relations with the German Government were bound, despite our will, to become strained. We acknowledge the legitimacy of the German Government’s desire to strengthen the guard over its Embassy and we have gone very far in order to satisfy this desire.

“But when we were informed of the German Government’s desire, which is not yet formulated as a categorical demand, that we should allow a battalion of armed German soldiers in uniform access to Moscow, we replied-and we now repeat that reply before the highest body of the Soviet government of workers and peasants, before the All-Russia Central Executive Committee-that we could on no account and under no circumstances satisfy such a request, because this would be objectively the beginning of the occupation of Russia by foreign troops.

“To this action we would have been obliged to respond as we have responded to the Czechoslovak mutiny and to the military operations of the British in the North, namely by expanded mobilisation, by the calling up of all adult workers and peasants for armed resistance, and for the destruction, in the event of a temporarily necessitated withdrawal, of absolutely every road and railway without exception, and also of stores, particularly food stores, so that they do not fall into the hands of the enemy. War would then be for us a fateful but absolute and unconditional necessity, and this would be a revolutionary war waged by the workers and peasants of Russia shoulder to shoulder with the Soviet government till the last breath.

“Like its foreign policy, the home policy of the Soviet government, in strict adherence to the decisions of the Fifth Congress of Soviets, remains unchanged. The criminal folly of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, who have turned out to be henchmen of the white guards, the landowners and the capitalists, will now that the clouds are gathering and the danger of war is increasing be even more criminal in the eyes of the people, and we shall fully and wholeheartedly support and carry out the ruthless punishment of the traitors who have been irrevocably condemned by the will of the Fifth Congress of Soviets. If war, in spite of all our efforts, becomes a fact, we shall be unable to maintain a shadow of trust in the gang of Left Socialist-Revolutionary traitors, who are capable of thwarting the will of the Soviets, resorting to military betrayal and the like. We shall draw fresh strength for war from the merciless suppression both of the madly reckless (Left Socialist-Revolutionary) and the class-conscious (landowner, capitalist and kulak) exponents of counter-revolution.

“To the workers and peasants of all Russia this is our appeal: ’Triple vigilance, caution and endurance, comrades! Everyone must be at his post! Everyone must give his life if necessary to defend Soviet power, to defend the interests of the working people, the exploited, the poor, to defend socialism! ’”

Endnotes
[1]
At its first session on July 15, 1918 the All-Russia Central Executive Committee (5th Convocation) heard Lenin's speech and declaration and unanimously passed the following resolution. “The All-Russia Central Executive Committee wholly approves the statement of the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars and decrees that it shall be brought to the attention of the widest masses of the working people.” A government statement under the title “Appeal of Comrade Lenin to the Workers, Peasants and Soldiers of the Red Army, Approved at the Session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee of July 15, 1918” was published on July 17 in Izvestia VTsIK No. 149.
 
The document has also been published under the title “Statement at a Meeting of the All-Russia C.E.C. of July 15, 1918”.



Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech Delivered at a public
      meeting in Lefortovo District, July 19, 1918.











Speech Delivered At A Public Meeting In Lefortovo District July 19, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At A Public Meeting In Lefortovo District[1]
July 19, 1918

Delivered: 21 July, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 151, July 21, 1918; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 542-543
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


The critical position of the Soviet Republic has two causes, home and foreign. We have never attempted to conceal from the workers and peasants how great was the burden of the shameful peace. Burdensome though it was, the Fourth Congress of Soviets deemed it essential to make this peace in order to afford the Russian workers and peasants a breathing-space and an opportunity to consolidate their position. The responsibility for the assassination of Mirbach lies at the door of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary party, which has brought Russia within an ace of doom.

There are signs that the German Government is prepared to come to terms and may renounce the dispatch of a battalion of German soldiers to Moscow. The Soviet Government has categorically rejected this request of the German Government, even if it leads to war.


The folly of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries has severely affected the position of Soviet power, but, on the other hand, one result has been that the best of them, the working people, are repudiating the Left Socialist-Revolutionary party.


The aggravation of relations with Germany has been accompanied by an aggravation of relations with the other coalition. The Czechoslovak revolt is its work. This is borne out in the case of the officers, who are being supported by French money and are assisting the Czechoslovaks.


Lenin went on to speak of the war, which is engendering revolution, and the longer it lasts, the more hopeless it makes the position of the belligerent countries and the nearer it brings them to revolution. Germany and Austria have again been swept by a strike wave. All the imperialist sharks are hurling themselves on Russia and are bent on tearing her to pieces, for they know that every month of socialist Russia's existence brings them nearer to their own doom. To us has fallen the supreme honour and supreme difficulty of being the first socialist detachment in the fight against world imperialism. Our task is to hold on.


Lenin then went on to speak of the famine, which the whiteguards are banking on in order to overthrow the Soviet government. The monarchists, the kulaks, the moneybags are playing up the famine for all they are worth. They are not confining themselves to propaganda, but are corrupting the poor peasants, egging them on to profiteer and to fight the workers. Two classes are in conflict: the proletariat and the kulaks, the capitalists. One of these classes must win, and the other will be smashed. Our socialist revolution calls for an alliance of the class-conscious workers with the majority of the peasantry, the poor and middle peasants, to combat the kulaks and to establish the strictest order in the interests of the workers. We have one means of salvation from famine at our disposal, and that is a fighting alliance between the workers and the poor peasants to take away the grain from the kulaks and profiteers. Look the danger in the face! The enemy is everywhere, but we have new allies too-the proletariat of the countries where war is still being waged. We also have allies at home-the vast mass of the poor peasants, who will march shoulder to shoulder with the urban proletariat.

Endnotes
[1]
On July 19, 1918 the meetings arranged every Friday by the Moscow Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) went off very well in all districts of Moscow. The meeting in Lefortovo District, at which Lenin spoke on the international and internal situation, was attended by 5 out 2,000 people.

Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## To Zinoviev, Lashevich and
      Stasova











To Zinoviev, Lashevich And Stasova



V. I. Lenin
To Zinoviev, Lashevich And Stasova

Written: 20 July, 1918
First Published: First published in 1942 In Lenin Miscellany XXXIV; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, page 544
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


      It is essential to move the maximum number of workers from
      Petrograd:

    
      (1) some dozens of “leaders” (a la Kayurov)

    
      (2) thousands of “rank and file”.

    
      Otherwise we shall fall, for the situation with the
      Czechoslovaks is as bad as could be.

    
      In such a situation it is silly to “sit tight” on
      the “wellbeing” of Petrograd and to
      “grudge” giving from there: let the Bolshevik
      majority in the Petrograd Soviet of Deputies even fall from 98
      per cent (have you 98 per cent?) to 51 per cent! What does it
      matter!

    
      We shall not perish even (even!) if in Petrograd the number of
      those not ours in the Soviet of Deputies goes up to 49 per cent
      (if ever this does happen). But we shall certainly perish owing
      to the Czechoslovaks unless we make desperate efforts to add
      hundreds and thousands of leading workers in order to convert
      the jelly into something solid. This is not an exaggeration but
      an accurate appraisal. You will be responsible for our perishing
      if you are miserly and keep back “for Petrograd”.

    
      Greetings! Yours, Lenin

    
      P.S. Reply!

    
      July 20, 1918
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Report Delivered at a Moscow
      Guernia Conference of Factory Committees, July 23,
      1918.











Report Delivered at a Moscow Gubernia Conference of Factory Committees, July 23, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Report Delivered at a Moscow Gubernia Conference of Factory Committees, July 23, 1918

Written: .
First Published: July 24, 1918 in
 Pravda No. 153 and Izvestia VTsIK No. 155; 
 Published according to the
 Pravda text, collated with the Izvestia text.
Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
 1965, Volume 27, pages 545-548
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription\HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive March, 2002


 (Lenin's appearance in the conference hall was greeted with
loud applause,
 which continued for several minutes.)
 These past few days have been marked by an extreme aggravation
of the affairs of the Soviet Republic, caused both by the
country's position internationally and by the
counter-revolutionary plots and the food crisis which is
closely connected with them.

 
 Allow me to dwell on the international situation. The Russian
 revolution is only one of the contingents of the international
 socialist army, on the action of which the success and triumph
 of our revolution depends.
 This is a fact which none of us lose sight of.
 We likewise bear in mind that the vanguard role of the Russian
 proletariat in the work working-class movement is not due to the
 economic development of the country. On the contrary, it is the
 backwardness of Russia, the inability of what is called our
 native bourgeoisie to cope with the enormous problems connected
 with the war and its cessation that have led the proletariat to
 seize political power and establish its own class dictatorship.

 
 Aware of the isolation of its revolution, the Russian
 proletariat clearly realises that an essential condition and
 prime requisite for its victory is the united action of the
 workers of the whole world, or of several capitalistically
 advanced countries. But the Russian proletariat knows perfectly
 well that it has both avowed and unavowed friends in every
 country. For example, there is no country where the prisons are
 not crammed with internationalists who sympathise with Soviet
 Russia; there is no country where revolutionary socialist
 thought has not found expression in either the open or
 underground press. And therefore, knowing our true friends, we
 refuse to come to any understanding with the Mensheviks, who
 supported Kerensky and his offensive.
 Very significant in this latter connection is a letter (small in
 size but distinctly internationalist in substance) from the
 internationalist Rosa Luxemburg, which appeared in the British
 paper the Workers' Dreadnought
 on the subject of the June offensive. Rosa Luxemburg holds that
 the internationalism of the Great Russian Revolution was
 undermined by Kerensky's offensive and by the sanction and
 approval given to it by the First All-Russia Congress of
 Soviets. This offensive of revolutionary Russia retarded the
 development of the revolution in the West, and it was only the
 dictatorship of the proletariat, its assumption of the entire
 power, that led to the frustration of the secret treaties and
 the exposure of their predatory, imperialist character, and,
 hence, to the acceleration of revolutionary developments in
 Europe. An equally powerful influence in awakening and developing
 proletarian energies in the West was exercised by our appeal to
 all the nations for the conclusion of a democratic peace without
 annexations or indemnities. All these revolutionary acts opened the eyes of the workers of the whole world, and no efforts on the part of the bourgeois and
 renegade socialist groups will succeed in obscuring their
 awakened class consciousness. The reception given to Kerensky by
 the British workers shows this quote clearly. The attraction
 exercised by the Russian revolution found expression in the
 first action of the German workers on a grand scale since the
 outbreak of the war, when they reacted to the Brest negotiations
 by a gigantic strike in Berlin and other industrial
 centres. This action of the proletariat in a country doped by
 the fumes of nationalism and intoxicated with the poison of
 chauvinism is a fact of cardinal importance and marks a turn of
 sentiment among the German proletariat.

 
 We cannot say what course the revolutionary movement in Germany
 will take. One thing is certain, and that is the existence of a
 tremendous revolutionary force there that must by iron necessity
 make its presence felt. There is no reason to blame the German
 workers for not making a revolution. One might with equal
 justice have blamed the Russian workers for not manufacturing a
 revolution during the ten years 1907-1917. But that, we know,
 would be wrong. Revolutions are not made to order, they cannot
 be timed for any particular moment; they mature in a process of
 historical development and break out at a moment determined by a
 whole complex of internal and external causes. That moment is
 close at hand and is bound to come, inevitably and
 unavoidably. It was easier for us to start the revolution, but it
 is extremely difficult to continue it and consummate it. It is
 terribly difficult to make a revolution in such a highly
 developed country as Germany, with its splendidly organised
 bourgeoisie, but all the easier will it be to triumphantly
 consummate the socialist revolution once it flares up and
 spreads in the advanced capitalist countries of Europe.

 
 There is no reason to blame us for concluding the Brest
 Treaty--humiliating, distressful and brutal though it is--or to
 regard it as a complete renunciation of our ideals and an act of
 allegiance to German imperialism. It is characteristic that
 these accusations come from the bourgeois circles and
 compromiser-socialists, who in the Ukraine, Finland and the
 Caucasus (the Mensheviks) are today greeting the German Junkers
 with open arms. Similar accusations are showered upon our heads
 by the empty-headed Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. We are
 perfectly aware of the distressful nature of the Brest
 Treaty. We are also aware that under this brutal treaty we shall
 have to pay Germany about 6,000,000,000 rubles, according to the
 calculations of our economic delegation now in Berlin. The
 situation is undoubtedly a hard one, but a way out can and must
 be found by the joint efforts of the proletariat and the poor
 peasants. And the mad attempt of the Left
 Socialist-Revolutionaries to embroil us in war by assassinating
 Mirbach is not the way to escape from the Brest Treaty. On the
 contrary, this act of folly played into the hands of the German
 war parties, whose position, naturally, is bound to be weakened
 by the growth of defeatism not only among the German workers,
 but also among the bourgeoisie. For now, after the Brest peace,
 it is clear and obvious to everybody that Germany is waging a
 predatory war for definitely imperialist aims.

 
 The food situation in Soviet Russia, surrounded as she is on all
 sides by imperialist plunderers and with ever alert
 counter-revolutionaries with the country supporting them, is
 very grave.

 
 The attention of the working class must be directed to combating
 famine, the bourgeoisie's most effective means of fighting the
 proletarian dictatorship. But one thing we must take as our
 fundamental precept: in combating famine, we will categorically
 renounce the bourgeois methods of struggle, the method of
 starving the masses in the interests of the money-bags and
 parasites, and will resort to purely socialist methods. And
 these consist in introducing a grain monopoly and establishing
 fixed prices in the interests of the workers.

 
 The bourgeoisie and its followers, the compromiser-socialists,
 are advocating freedom of trade and the abolition of the fixed
 prices. But freedom of trade has already displayed its fruits in
 a number of cities. No sooner were the bourgeoisie in power than
 the price of grain increased several times over, and as a result
 that commodity disappeared from the market; it was hidden away
 by the kulaks in the hope of a further rise of prices.

 
 The most desperate enemy of the proletariat and Soviet Russia is
 famine. But in its efforts to vanquish it, the proletariat comes
 into collision with the rural bourgeoisie, which, far from
 having any interest in putting an end to the famine, derives
 advantage from it for its own group and class. The proletariat
 must bear this in mind and, in alliance iwth the starving
 peasant poor, must start a desperate and uncompromising struggle
 against the rural kulaks. With the same purpose in view, the
 organisation of food detachments already begun should be
 continued, and at the head of them should be placed honest
 Communists who enjoy the confidence of the Party and trade union
 organisations. Only then will the food problem be solved and the
 cause of the revolution saved.
 


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Conversation with
      J. V. Stalin by direct Line, July 24, 1918











Conversation With J. V. Stalin By Direct Line, July 24, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Conversation With J. V. Stalin
By Direct Line
 July 24, 1918
Tsaritsyn, To Stalin


Conducted: 1931 in Lenin Miscellany XVIII; Published according to the manuscript; J. V. Stalin’s reply according to the text of the telegram
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
      Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, pages 549-550
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
      Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive March, 2002
    


      Lenin speaking:

    
      Can you transmit to Baku a wireless telegram just received from Tashkent:  

    
      Next about food, I must tell you that today none at all is being
      issued; neither in Petrograd nor in Moscow. The situation is
      very bad. Inform us whether you can take extraordinary measures,
      for there is nowhere we can get anything except from you. In
      Yaroslavi the rising of the Whites has been put down. Simbirsk
      has been captured by the Whites or Czechs. I await your reply.

    
      Stalin's Reply

    
      Two nights ago we sent to Turkestan all that could be sent.

    
      The wireless message has been transmitted to Baku. There are
      large stocks of grain in the North Caucasus, but the railway
      line being cut prevents sending them to the North.

    
      Until the line is restored delivery of grain is out of the
      question. An expedition has been sent to Samara and Saratov
      gubernias, but it will not be possible to help you. with grain
      within the next few days. We hope to restore the line in about
      ten (lays. Hold out somehow, distribute meat and fish, which we
      can send you in plenty. In a week's time things will be better.

    
      Stalin
    
Tsaritsyn, To Stalin

      Send fish, meat, vegetables, any kind of produce, whatever you
      can and as much as you can.

    
      Lenin
    


Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech Delivered at a Meeting
      in Khamovniki District, July 26, 1918.











Speech Delivered At A Meeting In Khamovniki District, July 26, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At A Meeting In Khamovniki District[1]
July 26, 1918
Brief Newspaper Report

Delivered: 26 July, 1918
First Published: 28 July, 1918 Pravda No. 157, Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 27, page 551
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


(Lenin was welcomed with cheers and loud applause.) Speaking on the subject, “What the Soviet Constitution Will Mean to the Working People”, Lenin noted that the Soviet Constitution, which, like the Soviets, had been created in a period of revolutionary struggle, was the first to proclaim the government power of the working people and to disfranchise the exploiters-the enemies of the building of a new life. This was the chief thing that distinguished it from the constitutions of other countries, and it was a pledge of ultimate victory over capital.

Referring to some of the chief principles of the Declaration of the Rights of the Working and Exploited People, Lenin said that the working people of all countries would see that the Soviet Constitution-the fundamental law of the Russian Socialist Federative Republic-reflected the ideals of the proletariat of the whole world. “The hour of reckoning with the bourgeoisie of all countries Is approaching! Indignation is growing in Western Europe! The task before us is to overcome all obstacles in our path, however difficult they may be, and to maintain the power of the Soviets until the working class of all countries revolts and raises aloft the great banner of a world socialist republic!” (Loud applause.)


Endnotes
[1]
On July 26, 1918 meetings were held in all districts of Moscow on the subject #8220;What Does the Soviet Constitution Give the Working People#8221;, Prominent members of the Communist Party addresses the meetings explaining the importance of the Constitution of the R.S.F.S.R., which had been adopted on July 10, 1918 by the Fifth  All-Russia Congress of Soviets.
Lenin addressed more than a thousand people assembled in the hall of the Higher Women's Courses. 



Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## By Direct Line. To Zinoviev,
      The Smolny, Petrograd











By Direct Line To Zinoviev, The Smolny, Petrograd



V. I. Lenin

By Direct Line To Zinoviev, The Smolny, Petrograd


Written: 27 July, 1918
First Published: 1942 in Lenin Miscellany XXXIV; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected 
Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 
1972 Volume 27, pages 549-550
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive March, 2002


News has just been received that Alexeyev in the Kuban area, with about sixty thousand men, is advancing against us, carrying out the plan for a combined attack by the Czechoslovaks, the British and the Alexeyev Cossacks. In view of this, and in view of the statement of the Petrograd workers, Kayurov, Chugurin and others, who have arrived here, that Petrograd could provide ten times as many if it were not for the opposition of the Petrograd section of the C.C.in view of this I categorically and imperatively insist on the cessation of all opposition and on the dispatch from Petrograd of ten times as many workers. That is the demand of the C.C. of the Party.

I categorically warn you that the Republic is in a dangerous situation and that the Petrograders, by holding up dispatch of workers from Petrograd to the Czech front, will make themselves responsible for the possible downfall of our whole cause.

Lenin

N.B. Return me this paper with a note of the time

It was transmitted to the Smolny in Petrograd.

Lenin



Collected Works Volume 27
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 

