# Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Volume II

==========

## Table of contents









Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Vol. II




 Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Vol. II



The Period of the War of Resistance Against Japan

Policies, Measures and Perspectives for Resisting the Japanese Invasion (July 23, 1937)




      I.     Two Policies

    

      II.   Two Sets of Measures

    

      III. Two Perspectives

   

      IV.   Conclusion 

For the Mobilization of All the Nation's Forces for Victory in the War of Resistance (August 25, 1937)

Combat Liberalism (September 7, 1937)

Urgent Tasks Following the Establishment of Kuomintang-Communist Cooperation (September 29, 1937)

Interview with the British Journalist James Bertram
(October 25, 1937)

The Communist Party of China and the War of

  Resistance
The War Situation and Its Lessons
The Eighth Route Army in the War of Resistance
Capitulationism in the War of Resistance
Democracy and the War of Resistance

The Situation and Tasks in the Anti-Japanese War After the Fall of Shanghai and Taiyuan (November 12, 1937)


  I. The Present Situation Is One of Transition from

  a War of Partial Resistance to a War of Total Resistance

  

  II. Capitulationism Must Be Combated Both Inside

  the Party and Throughout the Country

Inside the Party, Oppose Class Capitulationism
In the Country as a Whole, Oppose National

    Capitulationism
The Relation Between Class Capitulationism and

    National Capitulationism


Proclamation by the Government of the Shensi-Kansu ningsia Border Region and the Rear Headquarters of the Eighth Route Army
(May 15, 1938)

Problems of Strategy in Guerilla War Against Japan
(May 1938)

Chapter I
Why Raise the Question of Strategy in Guerrilla

  War?
Chapter II
The Basic Principle of War Is to Preserve Oneself

  and Destroy the Enemy
Chapter III
Six Specific Problems of Strategy in Guerrilla

  War Against Japan
Chapter IV
Initiative, Flexibility and Planning in Conducting

  Offensives Within the Defensive, Battles of Quick Decision Within Protracted

  War, and Exterior-Line Operations Within Interior-Line Operations
Chapter V
Co-ordination with Regular Warfare
Chapter VI
The Establishment of Base Areas


 

1.  The Types of Base Areas

    

2.  Guerrilla Zones and Base Areas

      

3.  Conditions for Establishing Base Areas

      

4.  The Consolidation and Expansion of Base Areas

      

5.  Forms in Which We and the Enemy Encircle One

Another

Chapter VII
The Strategic Defensive and the Strategic Offensive

  in Guerrilla War

The Strategic Defensive in Guerrilla War
The Strategic Offensive in Guerrilla War

Chapter VIII
Development of Guerrilla War into Mobile War
Chapter IX
The Relationship of Command 

On Protracted War (May 1938)

Statement of the Problem

The Basis of the Problem

Refutation of the Theory of National Subjugation

Compromise or Resistance? Corruption or Progress?

The Theory of National Subjugation Is Wrong and

  the Theory of Quick Victory Is Likewise Wrong

Why a Protracted War?

The Three Stages of the Protracted War

A War of Jig-Saw Pattern

Fighting for Perpetual Peace

Man's Dynamic Role in War

War and Politics

Political Mobilization for the War of Resistance

The Object of War

Offence Within Defence, Quick Decisions Within

  a Protracted War, Exterior Lines Within Interior

  Lines

Initiative, Flexibility and Planning

Mobile Warfare, Guerrilla Warfare and Positional

  Warfare

War of Attrition and War of Annihilation

The Possibilities of Exploiting the Enemy's

  Mistakes

The Question of Decisive Engagements in the

  Anti-Japanese War

The Army and the People Are the Foundation of

  Victory

Conclusions

The Role of the Chinese Communist Party in the National War (October 1938)

Patriotism and Internationalism

Communists Should Set an Example in the National

  War

Unite the Whole Nation and Combat Enemy Agents

  in Its Midst

Expand the Communist Party and Prevent Infiltration

  by Enemy Agents

Maintain Both the United Front and the Independence

  of the Party

Consider the Situation as a Whole, Think in Terms

  of the Majority, and Work Together with Our Allies

Cadres Policy

Party Discipline

Party Democracy

Our Party Has Consolidated Itself and Grown Strong

  Through the Struggle on Two Fronts

The Present Struggle on Two Fronts

Study

Unity and Victory


The Question of Independence and Initiative Within (November 5, 1938)

Help and Concessions Should Be Positive, Not

  Negative

The Identity Between the National and the Class

  Struggle

"Everything Through the United Front" Is

  Wrong


Problems of War and Strategy (November 6,

1938)


  

      I.  China's Characteristics and Revolutionary War


      II.  The War History of the Kuomintang


      III.  The War History of the Chinese Communist Party


      IV.  Changes in the Party's Military Strategy in the

      Civil War and the National War


      V.  The Strategic Role of Guerrilla Warfare Against

      Japan


      VI.  Pay Great Attention to the Study of Military

      Matters


The May 4th Movement (May 1939)

The Orientation of the Youth Movement (May

4, 1939)

Oppose Capitulationist Activity (June 30,

1939)

The Reactionaries Must Be Punished (August

1, 1939)

Interview With a New China Daily Correspondent on the New International Situation (September 1, 1939)

Interview with Three Correspondents from the Central News Agency, the Sao Tang Pao and the Hsin Min Pao (September 16, 1939)

The Identity of Interests Between the Soviet Union and All Mankind (September 28, 1939)

Introducing The Communist (October

4, 1939)

The Current Situation and the Party's Tasks
(October 10, 1939)

Recruit Large Numbers of Intellectuals (December

1, 1939)

The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese Communist Party (December 1939)

Chapter I
Chinese Society

The Chinese Nation

The Old Feudal Society

Present-Day Colonial, Semi-Colonial and Semi-Feudal

      Society 


Chapter II
The Chinese Revolution


      1.  The Revolutionary Movements in the Last Hundred

      Years


      2.  The Targets of the Chinese Revolution


      3.  The Tasks of the Chinese Revolution


      4.  The Motive Forces of the Chinese Revolution


      5.  The Character of the Chinese Revolution


      6.  The Perspectives of the Chinese Revolution


      7.  The Twofold Task of the Chinese Revolution and

      the Chinese Communist Party 


Stalin, Friend of the Chinese People (December

20, 1939)

In Memory of Norman Bethune (December 21,

1939)

On New Democracy (January 1940)


  

      I.     Whither China?

    

      II.    We Want to Build a New China

    

      III.    China's Historical Characteristics

    

      IV.    The Chinese Revolution Is Part of the World

      Revolution

    

      V.     The Politics of New Democracy

    

      VI.    The Economy of New Democracy

    

      VII.   Refutation of Bourgeois Dictatorship

    

      VIII.  Refutation of "Left" Phrase-mongering

   

      IX.    Refutation of the Die-hards

    

      X.     The Three People's Principles, Old and New

    

      XI.    The Culture of New Democracy

    

      XII.   The Historical Characteristics of China's Cultural

      Revolution

    

      XIII.  The Four Periods

    

      XIV.   Some Wrong Ideas About the Nature of Culture

    

      XV.    A National, Scientific and Mass Culture


Overcome the Danger of Capitulation and Strive for a turn for the Better (January 28, 1940)

Unite all Anti-Japanese Forces and Combat the Anti-Communist Die Hards (February 1, 1940)

Ten Demands on the Kuomintang (February 1,

1940)

Introducing The Chinese Worker (February

7, 1940)

We Must Stress Unity and Progress (February

10, 1940)

New-Democratic Constitutional Government
(February 20, 1940)

On the Question of Political Power in the Anti-Japanese Base Areas (March 6, 1940)

Current Problems of Tactics in the Anti-Japanese United Front (March 11, 1940)

Freely Expand the Anti-Japanese Forces and Resist the Onslaughts of the Anti-Communist Die-Hards (May 4, 1940)

Unity to the Very End (July 1940)

On Policy (December 25, 1940)

Order and Statement on the Southern Anhwei Incident
(January 1941)


  Order of the Revolutionary Military Commission of the Central Committee of

  the Communist Party of China



  Statement by the Spokesman of the Revolutionary Military Commission of the

  Central Committee of the Communist Party of China to a Correspondent of the

  Hsinhua News Agency



The Situation After the Repulse of the Second Anti-Communist Onslaught (March 18, 1941)

Conclusions on the Repulse of the Second Anti-Communist Onslaught (May 8, 1941)
 

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  

HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org
 

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung






==========

## Policies, Measures and Perspectives for Resisting the Japanese Invasion







THE PERIOD OF THE WAR OF RESISTANCE AGAINST JAPAN (1) 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE PERIOD OF THE WAR OF RESISTANCE AGAINST JAPAN (1)


  POLICIES, MEASURES AND PERSPECTIVES FOR RESISTING THE JAPANESE INVASION

July 23, 1937

[On July 7, 1937, the Japanese imperialists staged the Lukouchiao Incident
in their attempt to annex the whole of China by armed force. The Chinese
people unanimously demanded war against Japan. Ten days elapsed before Chiang
Kai-shek tardily made a public statement at Lushan announcing armed resistance
to Japan. He did so under nation-wide popular pressure and as a result of
the serious blow the Japanese invasion had dealt to the interests both of
the British and U.S. imperialists in China and of the big landlords and the
big bourgeoisie whom Chiang Kai-shek directly represented. But at the same
time the Chiang Kai-shek government continued to parley with the Japanese
aggressors and even accepted the so-called peaceful settlements they concluded
with local authorities. It was not until August 13, 1937, when the Japanese
aggressors launched a major attack on Shanghai and thus made it impossible
for Chiang Kai-shek to maintain his rule in southeastern China, that he was
compelled to embark on armed resistance; but Chiang never ceased his clandestine
attempts to make peace with Japan right up to 1944. Throughout the War of
Resistance Chiang Kai-shek opposed all-out people's war in which the entire
people are mobilized, and pursued the reactionary policy of passively resisting
Japan but actively opposing the Communist Party and the people; thus his
actions completely violated his own Lushan statement that "once war breaks
out, every person, young or old, in the north or in the south, must take
up the responsibility of resisting Japan and defending our homeland". The
two policies, two sets of measures and two perspectives discussed by Comrade
Mao Tse-tung in this article reflect the struggle between the line of the
Communist Party and Chiang Kai-shek's line in the War of Resistance.]


I. TWO POLICIES


On July 8, the day after the Lukouchiao Incident,
[1] the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of China issued a manifesto to the whole nation calling for a war of resistance.
The manifesto reads in part:

Fellow-countrymen! Peiping and Tientsin are in peril! Northern China is in
peril! The Chinese nation is in peril! A war of resistance by the whole nation
is the only way out. We demand immediate and resolute resistance to the invading
Japanese armies and immediate preparations to meet all emergencies. From
top to bottom the whole nation must at once abandon any idea of being able
to live in submissive peace with the Japanese aggressors. Fellow-countrymen!
We should acclaim and support the heroic resistance of Feng Chih-an's troops.
We should acclaim and support the declaration of the local authorities of
northern China that they will defend the homeland to the death. We demand
that General Sung Cheh-yuan immediately mobilize the entire 29th
Army [2] and send it into action at the front.
Of the Central Government in Nanking we demand the following: Give effective
aid to the 29th Army. Immediately lift the ban on patriotic movements among
the masses and let the people give full play to their enthusiasm for armed
resistance. Immediately mobilize all the country's land, sea and air forces
for action. Immediately weed out all the hidden traitors and Japanese agents
in China and so consolidate our rear. We call on the people of the whole
country to throw all their strength behind the sacred war of self-defence
against Japan. Our slogans are: Armed defence of Peiping, Tientsin and northern
China ! Defend our homeland to the last drop of our blood ! Let the people
of the whole country, the government, and the armed forces unite and build
up the national united front as our solid Great Wall of resistance to Japanese
aggression! Let the Kuomintang and the Communist Party closely co-operate
and resist the new attacks of the Japanese aggressors! Drive the Japanese
aggressors out of China !

This is a declaration of policy.

On July 17, Mr. Chiang Kai-shek made a statement at Lushan. Setting out as
it did a policy of preparing for a war of resistance, the statement was the
Kuomintang's first correct declaration on foreign affairs for many years
and it has consequently been welcomed by all our countrymen as well as by
ourselves. The statement listed four conditions for the settlement of the
Lukouchiao Incident:

(1) Any settlement must not infringe China's sovereignty and territorial
integrity; (2) there must be no unlawful change in the administrative structure
of Hopei and Chahar Provinces; (3) there must be no dismissal and replacement,
at the demand of others, of local officials appointed by the Central Government;
(4) the 29th Army must not be confined to the area in which it is now stationed.

The concluding remarks of the statement read:

Concerning the Lukouchiao Incident, the government has decided on a policy
and a stand to which it will always adhere. We realize that when the whole
nation goes to war, sacrifices to the bitter end will be called for, and
we should not cherish the faintest hope of an easy way out. Once war breaks
out, every person, young or old, in the north or in the south, must take
up the responsibility of resisting Japan and defending our homeland.

This, too, is a declaration of policy.

Here we have two historic political declarations on the Lukouchiao Incident,
one by the Communist Party and the other by the Kuomintang. They have this
point in common: both stand for a resolute war of resistance and oppose
compromise and concessions.

This is one kind of policy for meeting Japanese invasion, the correct policy.

But there is the possibility of the adoption of another kind of policy. In
recent months the traitors and the pro-Japanese elements in Peiping and Tientsin
have been very active, they have been trying to get the local authorities
to acquiesce in Japan's demands, they have been undermining the policy of
resolute armed resistance and advocating compromise and concessions. These
are extremely dangerous signs.

The policy of compromise and concessions is the diametrical opposite of the
policy of resolute armed resistance. If it is not speedily reversed, Peiping,
Tientsin and the whole of northern China will fall into the hands of the
enemy, and the entire nation will be seriously imperilled. Everyone must
be on the alert.

Patriotic officers and men of the 29th Army, unite! Oppose compromise and
concessions and conduct resolute armed resistance!

Fellow patriots of Peiping, Tientsin and northern China, unite! Oppose compromise
and concessions and support resolute armed resistance!

Fellow patriots throughout the country, unite! Oppose compromise and concessions
and support resolute armed resistance!

Mr. Chiang Kai-shek and all patriotic members of the Kuomintang! We hope
that you will firmly adhere to your policy, fulfil your promises, oppose
compromise and concessions, conduct resolute armed resistance, and thus answer
the outrages of the enemy with deeds.

Let all the armed forces in the country, including the Red Army, support
Mr. Chiang Kai-shek's declaration, oppose compromise and concessions and
conduct resolute armed resistance!

We Communists are whole-heartedly and faithfully carrying out our own manifesto,
and at the same time we resolutely support Mr. Chiang Kai-shek's declaration;
together with the members of the Kuomintang and all our fellow-countrymen,
we are ready to defend the homeland to the last drop of our blood; we oppose
any hesitation, vacillation, compromise or concessions, and will conduct
resolute armed resistance.


II. TWO SETS OF MEASURES

To achieve its purpose the policy of resolute armed resistance calls for
a whole set of measures.

What are they? The principal ones are the following:

1. Mobilize all the armed forces of the whole country. Mobilize
our standing armed forces of well over two million men, including the land,
sea and air forces, the Central Army, the local troops and the Red Army,
and immediately send the main forces to the national defence lines, while
keeping some forces in the rear to maintain order. Entrust the command on
the various fronts to generals loyal to the national interests. Call a national
defence conference to decide on strategy and to achieve unity of purpose
in military operations. Overhaul the political work in the army in order
to achieve unity between officers and men and between the army and the people.
Establish the principle that guerrilla warfare should carry the responsibility
for one aspect of the strategic task, and ensure proper co-ordination between
guerrilla and regular warfare. Weed out traitors from the army. Call up an
adequate number of reserves and train them for service at the front. Adequately
replenish the equipment and supplies of the armed forces. Military plans
on these lines must be made, in keeping with the general policy of resolute
armed resistance. China's troops are far from few, but unless these plans
are executed, they will not be able to defeat the enemy. However, if the
political and material factors are combined, our armed forces will become
unmatched in East Asia.

2. Mobilize the whole people. Lift the ban on patriotic movements,
release political prisoners, annul the "Emergency Decree for Dealing with
Actions Endangering the Republic" [3] and the "Press
Censorship Regulations", [4] grant legal status
to existing patriotic organizations, extend these organizations among the
workers, peasants, businessmen and intellectuals, arm the people for self-defence
and for operations in support of the army. In a word, give the people freedom
to express their patriotism. By their combined strength the people and the
army will deal a death-blow to Japanese imperialism. Beyond doubt, there
can be no victory in a national war without reliance on the great masses
of the people. Let us take warning from the fall of Abyssinia.
[5] No one who is sincere about waging a resolute
war of resistance can afford to ignore this point.

3. Reform the government apparatus. Bring representatives of all
political parties and groups and public leaders into the government for joint
management of the affairs of the state and weed out the hidden pro-Japanese
elements and traitors in the government, so that the government can become
one with the people. Resistance to Japan is a gigantic task which cannot
be performed by a few individuals alone. If they insist on keeping it in
their own hands, they will only bungle it. If the government is to be a real
government of national defence, it must rely on the people and practice
democratic centralism. It must be at once democratic and centralized; it
is this kind of government which is the most powerful. The national assembly
must be truly representative of the people; it must be the supreme organ
of authority, determine the major policies of the state and decide on the
policies and plans for resisting Japan and saving the nation.

4. Adopt an anti-Japanese foreign policy. Accord the Japanese
imperialists no advantages or facilities, but on the contrary confiscate
their property, repudiate their loans, weed out their lackeys and expel their
spies. Immediately conclude a military and political alliance with the Soviet
Union and closely unite with the Soviet Union, the country which is most
reliable, most powerful and most capable of helping China to resist Japan.
Enlist the sympathy of Britain, the United States and France for our resistance
to Japan, and secure their help provided that it entails no loss of our territory
or our sovereign rights. We should rely mainly on our own strength to defeat
the Japanese aggressors; but foreign aid cannot be dispensed with, and an
isolationist policy will only play into the enemy's hands.

5. Proclaim a programme for improving the livelihood of the people and
immediately begin to put it into effect. Start with the following minimum
points: Abolish exorbitant taxes and miscellaneous levies, reduce land rent,
restrict usury, increase the workers' pay, improve the livelihood of the
soldiers and junior officers, improve the livelihood of office workers, and
provide relief for victims of natural calamities. Far from making a mess
of the country's finances as some people argue, these new measures will increase
the people's purchasing power and lead to thriving commercial and financial
conditions. They will add immeasurably to our strength for resisting Japan
and consolidate the government's foundations.

6. Institute education for national defence. Radically reform the
existing educational policy and system. All projects that are not urgent
and all measures that are not rational must be discarded. Newspapers, books
and magazines, films, plays, literature and art should all serve national
defence. Traitorous propaganda must be prohibited.

7. Adopt financial and economic policies for resisting Japan.
Financial policy should be based on the principle that those with money
should contribute money and that the property of the Japanese imperialists
and Chinese traitors should be confiscated, and economic policy should be
based on the principle of boycotting Japanese goods and promoting home
products--everything for the sake of resistance to Japan. Financial strain
is the product of wrong measures and can surely be overcome after the adoption
of new policies such as these, which serve the interests of the people. It
is sheer nonsense to say that a country with so vast a territory and so huge
a population is financially and economically helpless.

8. Unite the entire Chinese people, the government and the armed forces
to build up the national united front as our solid Great Wall. The
application of the policy of armed resistance and of the above measures depends
on this united front. Here the key is close cooperation between the Kuomintang
and the Communist Party. Let the government, the troops, all the political
parties and the whole people unite on the basis of such co-operation between
the two parties. The slogan "Unity in good faith to meet the national crisis"
must not be limited to fine words but must be demonstrated in fine deeds.
Unity must be genuine, deception will not do. There must be more large-mindedness
and a broader sweep in the conduct of state affairs. Petty niggling, mean
tricks, bureaucracy, and Ah Q-ism [6] are of no
use at all. They are of no avail against the enemy and simply ridiculous
if practiced on one's own countrymen. There are major and minor principles
in everything, and the minor principles are all subordinate to the major.
Our compatriots must think things over carefully in the light of the major
principles, for only then will they be able to orientate their own ideas
and actions properly. Today, anyone who has not begun to have some genuine
desire for unity ought to examine his conscience in the stillness of the
night and feel some shame, even if no one else censures him.

The set of measures for resolute armed resistance described above may be
called the Eight-Point Programme.

The policy of resolute armed resistance must be accompanied by this set of
measures, or otherwise victory will never be achieved and Japanese aggression
against China will never be ended, while China will be helpless against Japan
and hardly be able to escape the fate of Abyssinia.

Whoever is sincere about the policy of resolute armed resistance must put
this set of measures into practice. And the test of whether or not he is
sincere about resolute armed resistance is whether or not he accepts and
carries out this set of measures.

There is another set of measures which is contrary to this set in every respect.

Not the total mobilization of the armed forces, but their immobilization
or withdrawal.

Not freedom for the people, but oppression.

Not a government of national defence based on democratic centralism, but
an autocratic government of bureaucrats, compradors and big landlords.

Not a foreign policy of resisting Japan, but one of fawning on her.

Not the improvement of the people's livelihood, but continued extortions
so that they groan under their sufferings and are powerless to resist Japan.

Not education for national defence, but education for national subjugation.

Not financial and economic policies for resisting Japan, but the same old,
or even worse, financial and economic policies benefiting the enemy rather
than our own country.

Not building up the Anti-Japanese National United Front as our Great Wall,
but tearing it down, or talking glibly about unity while never doing anything
to advance it.

Measures stem from policy. If the policy is one of non-resistance, all measures
will reflect non-resistance; we have been taught this lesson over the last
six years. If the policy is one of resolute armed resistance, then
it is imperative to apply the appropriate measures-- the Eight-Point Programme.
  
III. TWO PERSPECTIVES

What are the perspectives? This is what everyone is anxious about. Pursue
the first policy and adopt the first set of measures, and the perspective
will definitely be the expulsion of Japanese imperialism and the attainment
of China's liberation. Can there still be any doubt about it? I think not.

Pursue the second policy and adopt the second set of measures, and the
perspective will definitely be the occupation of China by the Japanese
imperialists, with the Chinese people being turned into slaves and beasts
of burden. Can there still be any doubt about it? Again, I think not.
  
IV. CONCLUSION

It is imperative to carry out the first policy, to adopt the first set of
measures and to strive for the first perspective.

It is imperative to oppose the second policy, to reject the second set of
measures and to avert the second perspective.

Let all patriotic members of the Kuomintang and all members of the Communist
Party unite and steadfastly carry out the first policy, adopt the first set
of measures and strive for the first perspective; let them steadfastly oppose
the second policy, reject the second set of measures and avert the second
perspective.

Let all patriotic people, patriotic troops and patriotic parties and groups
unite as one and steadfastly carry out the first policy, adopt the first
set of measures and strive for the first perspective, let them steadfastly
oppose the second policy, reject the second set of measures and avert the
second perspective.

Long live the national revolutionary war!

Long live the liberation of the Chinese nation!

NOTES


1. On July 7, 1937, the Japanese invading forces attacked
the Chinese garrison at Lukouchiao, some ten kilometres southwest of Peking.
Under the influence of the ardent nation-wide anti-Japanese movement, the
Chinese troops put up resistance. This incident marked the beginning of the
Chinese people's heroic War of Resistance Against Japan which lasted for
eight years.

2. The 28th Army, which was originally part of the Kuomintang's
Northwestern Army under Feng Yu-hsiang, was then stationed in Hopei and Chahar
Provinces. Sung Cheh-yuan was its commander and Feng Chih-an one of its
divisional commanders.

3. The Kuomintang government promulgated the so-called
"Emergency Decree for Dealing with Actions Endangering the Republic" on January
31, 1931, using the trumped-up charge of "endangering the Republic" to persecute
and slaughter patriots and revolutionaries. This decree imposed extremely
brutal measures of persecution.

4. "Press Censorship Regulations" was another name for
the "General Measures for Press Censorship" issued by the Kuomintang government
in August 1934 to stifle the voice of the people. They laid down that "all
news copy must be submitted to censorship".

5. See "The Tasks of the Chinese Communist Party in the
Period of Resistance to Japan", Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Eng.
ed., Foreign Languages Press, Peking, 1965, Vol. I, p. ,67.

6. Ah Q is the leading character in The True Story
of Ah Q, the famous work by the great Chinese writer Lu Hsun. Ah Q typifies
all those who compensate themselves for their failures and setbacks in real
life by regarding them as moral or spiritual victories.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## For the Mobilization of All the Nation's Forces for Victory in the War of Resistance







FOR THE MOBILIZATION OF ALL THE NATION'S FORCES FOR VICTORY IN THE
  WAR OF RESISTANCE 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung
FOR THE MOBILIZATION OF ALL THE NATION'S FORCES FOR VICTORY IN THE WAR
  OF RESISTANCE
August 25, 1937

[This was an outline for propaganda and agitation written by Comrade Mao
Tse-tung in August 1937 for the propaganda organs of the Central Committee
of the Chinese Communist Party. It was approved by the enlarged meeting of
the Political Bureau of the Central Committee at Lochuan, northern Shensi.]



A. The Lukouchiao Incident of July 7 marked the beginning of the Japanese
imperialist all-out invasion of China south of the Great Wall. The fight
put up by the Chinese troops at Lukouchiao marked the beginning of China's
nation-wide War of Resistance. The ceaseless Japanese attacks, the people's
resolute struggle, the national bourgeoisie's tendency towards resistance,
the Communist Party's vigorous advocacy and firm application of a national
united front policy and the nation-wide support this policy has won--all
these have compelled the Chinese authorities to begin changing their policy
of nonresistance, as pursued ever since the September 18th Incident of 1931,
to a policy of resistance since the Lukouchiao Incident, and have caused
the Chinese revolution to develop beyond the stage reached after the December
9th Movement, [1] i.e., the stage of ending
the civil war and preparing for resistance, into the stage of actual resistance.
The initial changes in the Kuomintang's policy with the Sian Incident
and the Third Plenary Session of its Central Executive Committee as their
starting point, Mr. Chiang Kai-shek's Lushan statement of July on the question
of resistance to Japan, and many of his measures of national defence, all
deserve commendation. The troops at the front, whether the land and air forces
or the local armed units, have all fought courageously and demonstrated the
heroic spirit of the Chinese nation. In the name of the national revolution,
the Chinese Communist Party ardently salutes our patriotic troops and
fellow-countrymen throughout China.

B. But on the other hand, even after the Lukouchiao Incident of July 7, the
Kuomintang authorities are continuing to pursue the wrong policy they have
pursued ever since the September 18th Incident, making compromises
and concessions, [2] suppressing the zeal of the
patriotic troops and clamping down on the patriotic people's national salvation
movement. There is no doubt that, having seized Peiping and Tientsin, Japanese
imperialism will press ahead with its policy of large-scale offensives, take
the second and third steps in its premeditated war plan and launch fierce
attacks on the whole of northern China and other areas, relying on its own
brute military strength while at the same time drawing support from German
and Italian imperialism and exploiting the vacillations of British imperialism
and the estrangement of the Kuomintang from the broad masses of the working
people. The flames of war are already raging in Chahar and in Shanghai. To
save our motherland, to resist the attacks of the powerful invaders, to defend
northern China and the seacoast and recover Peiping, Tientsin and northeastern
China, the Kuomintang authorities and the whole people must thoroughly learn
the lesson of the loss of northeastern China, Peiping and Tientsin, learn
and take warning from the fall of Abyssinia, learn from the Soviet Union's
past victories over its foreign enemies, [3] learn
from Spain's present experience in successfully defending Madrid,
[4] and firmly unite to fight to the end in defence
of the motherland. Henceforth the task is: "Mobilize all the nation's forces
for victory in the War of Resistance", and the key to its accomplishment
is a complete and thorough change in Kuomintang policy. The step forward
taken by the Kuomintang on the question of resistance is to be commended;
it is what the Chinese Communist Party and the people of the whole country
have for years been hoping for, and we welcome it. But the Kuomintang has
not changed its policies on such matters as the mobilization of the masses
and the introduction of political reforms. It is still basically unwilling
to lift the ban on the people's anti-Japanese movement or make fundamental
changes in the government apparatus, it still has no policy for improving
the people's livelihood, and is still not sufficiently sincere in its
co-operation with the Communist Party. If, at this critical juncture of life
or death for our nation, the Kuomintang continues in the same old groove
and does not quickly change its policy, it will bring disaster to the War
of Resistance. Some Kuomintang members say, "Let political reforms be instituted
after victory." They think the Japanese aggressors can be defeated by the
government's efforts alone, but they are wrong. A few battles may be won
in a war of resistance fought by the government alone, but it will be impossible
to defeat the Japanese aggressors thoroughly. This can be done only by a
war of total resistance by the whole nation. Such a war, however, requires
a complete and drastic change in Kuomintang policy and the joint efforts
of the whole nation from top to bottom to carry out a thoroughgoing programme
of resistance to Japan, that is, a national salvation programme formulated
in the spirit of the revolutionary Three People's Principles and the Three
Great Policies [5] drawn up personally by Dr. Sun
Yat-sen during the Best period of Kuomintang Communist co-operation.

C. In all earnestness the Chinese Communist Party proposes to the Kuomintang,
to the people of the whole country, to all political parties and groups,
to people in all walks of life and to all the armed forces a Ten-Point National
Salvation Programme for the purpose of completely defeating the Japanese
aggressors. It firmly believes that only by carrying out this programme fully,
sincerely and resolutely will it be possible to defend the motherland and
defeat the Japanese aggressors. Otherwise, the responsibility will fall on
those who procrastinate and allow the situation to deteriorate; once the
country's doom is sealed, it will be too late for regrets and lamentations.
The ten points are as follows:

1. Overthrow Japanese imperialism.

Sever diplomatic relations with Japan, expel Japanese officials, arrest Japanese
agents, confiscate Japanese property in China, repudiate debts to Japan,
abrogate treaties signed with Japan and take back all Japanese Concessions.

Fight to the finish in defence of northern China and the seacoast.

Fight to the finish for the recovery of Peiping, Tientsin and northeastern
China.

Drive the Japanese imperialists out of China.

Oppose all vacillation and compromise.

2. Mobilize the military strength of the whole nation.

Mobilize all land, sea and air forces for a nation-wide war of resistance.

Oppose a passive, purely defensive strategy and adopt an active, independent
strategy.

Set up a permanent council of national defence to deliberate and decide on
national defence plans and strategy.

Arm the people and develop anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare in co-ordination
with the operations of the main forces.

Reform the political work in the armed forces to achieve unity between officers
and men.

Achieve unity between the army and the people and bring the army's militant
spirit into play.

Support the Northeast Anti-Japanese United Army and disrupt the enemy's rear.

Give equal treatment to all troops fighting in the War of Resistance.

Establish military zones in all parts of the country, mobilize the whole
nation to join in the war and thus effect a gradual change from the mercenary
system to one of general military service.

3. Mobilize the people of the whole country.

Let all the people of the country (with the exception of the traitors) have
freedom of speech, the press, assembly and association in resisting Japan
and saving the nation, and the right to take up arms against the enemy.

Annul all old laws and decrees which restrict the people's patriotic movements
and promulgate new, revolutionary laws and decrees.

Release all patriotic and revolutionary political prisoners and lift the
ban on political parties.

Let the people of the whole country mobilize, take up arms and join the War
of Resistance. Let those with strength contribute strength, those with money
contribute money, those with guns contribute guns, and those with knowledge
contribute knowledge.

Mobilize the Mongolian, the Hui and all other minority nationalities, in
accordance with the principle of national self-determination and autonomy,
in the common fight against Japan.

4. Reform the government apparatus.

Call a national assembly which is genuinely representative of the people
to adopt a genuinely democratic constitution, to decide on policies for resisting
Japan and saving the nation, and to elect a government of national defence.

The government of national defence must draw in the revolutionaries of all
parties and mass organizations, and expel the pro-Japanese elements.

The government of national defence shall practice democratic centralism,
and shall be at once democratic and centralized.

The government of national defence shall pursue revolutionary policies for
resisting Japan and saving the nation.

Institute local self-government, throw out corrupt officials and establish
clean government.

5. Adopt an anti-Japanese foreign policy.

Conclude anti-aggression alliances and anti-Japanese pacts for mutual military
aid with all countries that are opposed to Japanese aggression, provided
that this entails no loss of our territory or of our sovereign rights.

Support the international peace front and oppose the front of aggression
of Germany, Japan and Italy.

Unite with the worker and peasant masses of Korea and Japan against Japanese
imperialism.
 6. Adopt wartime financial and economic policies.

Financial policy should be based on the principle that those with money should
contribute money and that the property of the traitors should be confiscated
in order to meet war expenditures. Economic policy should consist in readjusting
and expanding defence production, developing the rural economy and assuring
self-sufficiency in wartime commodities. Encourage the use of Chinese goods
and improve local products. Completely prohibit Japanese goods. Suppress
profiteering merchants and ban speculation and manipulation of the market.

7. Improve the people's livelihood.

Improve the conditions of workers, office employees and teachers, and of
soldiers fighting the Japanese.

Give preferential treatment to the families of the soldiers fighting the
Japanese.

Abolish exorbitant taxes and miscellaneous levies.

Reduce rent and interest.

Give relief to the unemployed.

Regulate grain supplies.

Aid the victims of natural calamities.

8. Adopt an anti-Japanese educational policy.

Change the existing educational system and curriculum and put into effect
a new system and curriculum aimed at resisting Japan and saving the nation.

9. Weed out traitors and pro-Japanese elements and consolidate the
  rear.

10. Achieve national unity against Japan.

Build up the Anti-Japanese National United Front of all political parties
and groups, people in all walks of life and all armed forces on the basis
of Kuomintang-Communist co-operation in order to lead the War of Resistance,
unite in good faith and meet the national crisis.

D. It is imperative to discard the policy of resistance by the government
alone and to enforce the policy of total resistance by the whole nation.
The government must unite with the people, fully restore the revolutionary
spirit of Dr. Sun Yat-sen, put the above Ten-Point Programme into effect
and strive for complete victory. Together with the masses of the people and
the armed forces under its leadership, the Chinese Communist Party will firmly
adhere to this programme and stand in the forefront of the War of Resistance,
defending the motherland to the last drop of its blood. In keeping with its
consistent policy, the Chinese Communist Party is ready to stand side by
side with the Kuomintang and the other political parties and groups and unite
with them in building the solid Great Wall of the national united front to
defeat the infamous Japanese aggressors and strive for a new China which
is independent, happy and free. To achieve this goal, we must firmly repudiate
the traitors' theories of compromise and capitulation, and combat national
defeatism according to which it is impossible to defeat the Japanese aggressors.
The Chinese Communist Party firmly believes that the Japanese aggressors
can definitely be defeated provided the above Ten-Point Programme is carried
out. If our 450 million countrymen all exert themselves, the Chinese nation
will certainly achieve final victory! 
Down with Japanese imperialism!
Long live the national revolutionary war!
Long live New China, independent, happy and free!

NOTES 


1. The year 1935 witnessed a new upsurge in the popular
patriotic movement throughout the country. Students in Peking, under the
leadership of the Communist Party of China, held a patriotic demonstration
on December 9, putting forward such slogans as "Stop the civil war and unite
to resist foreign aggression" and "Down with Japanese imperialism". This
movement broke through the long reign of terror imposed by the Kuomintang
government in league with the Japanese invaders and very quickly won the
people's support throughout the country. It is known as the "December 8th
Movement". The outcome was that new changes manifested themselves in the
relations among the various classes in the country, and the Anti-Japanese
National United Front proposed by the Communist Party of China became the
openly advocated policy of all patriotic people. The Chiang Kai-shek government
with its traitorous policy became very isolated.

2. See the introductory note to "Policies, Measures and
Perspectives for Resisting the Japanese Invasion", pp. 13-14 of this volume.

3. See History of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union (Bolsheviks), Short Course, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1951, pp.
347-81.

4. The defence of Madrid, starting in October 1936, lasted
for two years and five months. In 1936, fascist Germany and Italy made use
of the Spanish fascist warlord Franco to launch a war of aggression against
Spain. The Spanish people, led by the Popular Front Government, heroically
defended democracy against aggression. The battle of Madrid, the capital
of Spain, was the bitterest in the whole war. Madrid fell in March 1939 because
Britain, France and other imperialist countries assisted the aggressors by
their hypocritical policy of "non-intervention" and because divisions arose
within the Popular Front.

5. The Three People's Principles were the principles and
the programme put forward by Sun Yat-sen on the questions of nationalism,
democracy and people's livelihood in China's bourgeois-democratic revolution.
In the manifesto adopted by the Kuomintang at its First National Congress
in 1924 Sun Yat-sen restated the Three People's Principles. Nationalism was
interpreted as opposition to imperialism and active support was expressed
for the movements of the workers and peasants. Thus the old Three People's
Principles were transformed into the new Three People's Principles characterized
by the Three Great Policies, that is, alliance with Russia, co-operation
with the Communist Party, and assistance to the peasants and workers. The
new Three People's Principles provided the political basis for the co-operation
between the Communist Party of China and the Kuomintang during the First
Revolutionary Civil War period.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Combat Liberalism








COMBAT LIBERALISM



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

COMBAT LIBERALISM

September 7, 1937


We stand for active ideological struggle because it is the weapon for ensuring
unity within the Party and the revolutionary organizations in the interest
of our fight. Every Communist and revolutionary should take up this weapon.

But liberalism rejects ideological struggle and stands for unprincipled peace,
thus giving rise to a decadent, Philistine attitude and bringing about political
degeneration in certain units and individuals in the Party and the revolutionary
organizations.

Liberalism manifests itself in various ways.

To let things slide for the sake of peace and friendship when a person has
clearly gone wrong, and refrain from principled argument because he is an
old acquaintance, a fellow townsman, a schoolmate, a close friend, a loved
one, an old colleague or old subordinate. Or to touch on the matter
lightly instead of going into it thoroughly, so as to keep on good terms.
The result is that both the organization and the individual are harmed. This
is one type of liberalism.

To indulge in irresponsible criticism in private instead of actively putting
forward one's suggestions to the organization. To say nothing to people to
their faces but to gossip behind their backs, or to say nothing at a meeting
but to gossip afterwards. To show no regard at all for the principles of
collective life but to follow one's own inclination. This is a second type.

To let things drift if they do not affect one personally; to say as little
as possible while knowing perfectly well what is wrong, to be worldly wise
and play safe and seek only to avoid blame. This is a third type.

Not to obey orders but to give pride of place to one's own opinions. To demand
special consideration from the organization but to reject its discipline.
This is a fourth type.

To indulge in personal attacks, pick quarrels, vent personal spite or seek
revenge instead of entering into an argument and struggling against incorrect
views for the sake of unity or progress or getting the work done properly.
This is a fifth type.

To hear incorrect views without rebutting them and even to hear
counter-revolutionary remarks without reporting them, but instead to take
them calmly as if nothing had happened. This is a sixth type.

To be among the masses and fail to conduct propaganda and agitation or speak
at meetings or conduct investigations and inquiries among them, and instead
to be indifferent to them and show no concern for their well-being, forgetting
that one is a Communist and behaving as if one were an ordinary non-Communist.
This is a seventh type.

To see someone harming the interests of the masses and yet not feel indignant,
or dissuade or stop him or reason with him, but to allow him to continue.
This is an eighth type.

To work half-heartedly without a definite plan or direction; to work
perfunctorily and muddle along--"So long as one remains a monk, one goes
on tolling the bell." This is a ninth type.

To regard oneself as having rendered great service to the revolution, to
pride oneself on being a veteran, to disdain minor assignments while being
quite unequal to major tasks, to be slipshod in work and slack in study.
This is a tenth type.

To be aware of one's own mistakes and yet make no attempt to correct them,
taking a liberal attitude towards oneself. This is an eleventh type.

We could name more. But these eleven are the principal types.

They are all manifestations of liberalism.

Liberalism is extremely harmful in a revolutionary collective. It is a corrosive
which eats away unity, undermines cohesion, causes apathy and creates dissension.
It robs the revolutionary ranks of compact organization and strict discipline,
prevents policies from being carried through and alienates the Party
organizations from the masses which the Party leads. It is an extremely bad
tendency.

Liberalism stems from petty-bourgeois selfishness, it places personal interests
first and the interests of the revolution second, and this gives rise to
ideological, political and organizational liberalism.

People who are liberals look upon the principles of Marxism as abstract dogma.
They approve of Marxism, but are not prepared to practice it or to practice
it in full; they are not prepared to replace their liberalism by Marxism.
These people have their Marxism, but they have their liberalism as well--they
talk Marxism but practice liberalism; they apply Marxism to others but liberalism
to themselves. They keep both kinds of goods in stock and find a use for
each. This is how the minds of certain people work.

Liberalism is a manifestation of opportunism and conflicts fundamentally
with Marxism. It is negative and objectively has the effect of helping the
enemy; that is why the enemy welcomes its preservation in our midst. Such
being its nature, there should be no place for it in the ranks of the revolution.

We must use Marxism, which is positive in spirit, to overcome liberalism,
which is negative. A Communist should have largeness of mind and he should
be staunch and active, looking upon the interests of the revolution as his
very life and subordinating his personal interests to those of the revolution;
always and everywhere he should adhere to principle and wage a tireless struggle
against all incorrect ideas and actions, so as to consolidate the collective
life of the Party and strengthen the ties between the Party and the masses;
he should be more concerned about the Party and the masses than about any
private person, and more concerned about others than about himself. Only
thus can he be considered a Communist.

All loyal, honest, active and upright Communists must unite to oppose the
liberal tendencies shown by certain people among us, and set them on the
right path. This is one of the tasks on our ideological front.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Urgent Tasks Following the Establishment of Kuomintang-Communist Cooperation







URGENT TASKS FOLLOWING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF KUOMINTANG-COMMUNIST CO-OPERATION
  



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung
URGENT TASKS FOLLOWING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF KUOMINTANG-COMMUNIST
  CO-OPERATION

September 29, 1937


As far back as 1933, the Chinese Communist Party issued a declaration stating
that it was ready to conclude an agreement for resisting Japan with any section
of the Kuomintang army on three conditions, namely, that attacks on the Red
Army be stopped, that democratic freedoms be granted to the people and that
the people be armed. This declaration was made because after the September
18th Incident in 1931, resistance to the Japanese imperialist invasion became
the primary task of the Chinese people. But we did not succeed in our objective.

In August 1935, the Chinese Communist Party and the Chinese Red Army called
upon all political parties and groups and the people throughout the country
to organize an anti-Japanese united army and a government of national defence
for a common fight against Japanese
imperialism.[1] In December of that year, the Chinese
Communist Party adopted a resolution [2] on the
formation of an anti-Japanese national united front with the national
bourgeoisie. In May 1936, the Red Army published an open telegram
[3] demanding that the Nanking government stop
the civil war and make common cause against Japan. In August of that year,
the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party sent a letter
[4] to the Central Executive Committee of the
Kuomintang demanding that the Kuomintang stop the civil war and form a united
front of the two parties to fight jointly against Japanese imperialism. In
September of the same year, the Communist Party passed a resolution
[5] on the establishment of a unified democratic
republic in China. Besides the declaration, the open telegram, the letter
and the resolutions, we sent representatives to hold discussions with people
from the Kuomintang side on many occasions, and yet all in vain. It was only
towards the end of 1936 after the Sian Incident that the plenipotentiary
of the Chinese Communist Party and the responsible chief of the Kuomintang
reached an agreement on a contemporary issue of vital political importance,
namely, cessation of the civil war between the two parties, and brought about
the peaceful settlement of the Sian Incident. This was a great event in Chinese
history and provided a prerequisite for the renewal of cooperation between
the two parties.

On February 10 this year, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist
Party sent a telegram [6] to the Third Plenary
Session of the Kuomintang Central Executive Committee on the eve of its meeting,
making comprehensive proposals for concrete co-operation between the two
parties. In that telegram we demanded that the Kuomintang give the Communist
Party guarantees on the following five points: the ending of the civil war,
the realization of democratic freedoms, the convening of a national assembly,
speedy preparations for resisting Japan, and improvement of the people's
livelihood. At the same time the Communist Party offered guarantees to the
Kuomintang on the following four points: the elimination of the state of
antagonism between the two regimes, the redesignation of the Red Army, the
application of the new-democratic system in the revolutionary base areas,
and the discontinuance of the confiscation of the land of the landlords.
This was likewise an important political step, for without it the establishment
of co-operation between the two parties would have been retarded, which would
have been wholly detrimental to speedy preparations for resisting Japan.

Since then the two parties have moved a step closer to each other in their
negotiations. The Communist Party has made more specific proposals on the
question of a common political programme for the two parties, on the question
of lifting the ban on the mass movements and releasing political prisoners,
and on the question of redesignating the Red Army. So far the common programme
has not yet been promulgated, nor has the ban on the mass movements been
lifted, nor has the new system in the revolutionary base areas been recognized;
however, about a month after the fall of Peiping and Tientsin an order was
issued to the effect that the Red Army was to be redesignated as the Eighth
Route Army of the National Revolutionary Army (also called the Eighteenth
Group Army in the anti-Japanese battle order). The declaration of the Central
Committee of our Party on the establishment of bi-partisan co-operation,
which had been conveyed to the Kuomintang as early as July 15, and Chiang
Kai-shek's statement recognizing the legal status of the Communist Party
of China, which should have been published as agreed simultaneously with
the declaration, were finally released to the public (alas after a long delay)
by the Kuomintang Central News Agency on September 22 and 23 respectively,
when the situation at the front had become critical. The Communist Party's
declaration and Chiang Kai-shek's statement announced the establishment of
co-operation between the two parties and laid the necessary foundation for
the great cause of alliance between the two parties to save the nation. The
declaration of the Communist Party not only embodies the principle of unity
between the two parties but also embodies the basic principle of the great
unity of the people throughout the country. It is good that Chiang Kai-shek,
in his statement, recognized the legal status of the Communist Party throughout
China and spoke of the necessity of unity to save the nation; however, he
has not abandoned his Kuomintang arrogance or made any necessary self-criticism,
and we can hardly be satisfied with that. Nevertheless, the united front
between the two parties has been proclaimed as established. This has ushered
in a new epoch in the history of the Chinese revolution. It will exert a
widespread and profound influence on the Chinese revolution and play a decisive
role in defeating Japanese imperialism.

Ever since 1924, the relationship between the Kuomintang and the Chinese
Communist Party has played a decisive role in the Chinese revolution. The
revolution of 1924-27 took place as a result of the co-operation of the two
parties on the basis of a definite programme. In a mere two or three years,
tremendous successes were achieved in the national revolution to which Dr.
Sun Yat-sen had devoted forty years and which he had left unaccomplished;
these successes were the establishment of the revolutionary base in Kwangtung
and the victory of the Northern Expedition. They were the products of the
formation of the united front of the two parties. But at the very moment
when the revolution was nearing its triumph, some people who failed to uphold
the revolutionary cause disrupted the two-party united front and so brought
about the failure of the revolution, and the door was left open for foreign
aggression. These were the products of the disruption of the united front
of the two parties. Now the newly formed united front between the two parties
has ushered in a new period in the Chinese revolution. There are still people
who do not understand the historical role of the united front and its great
future and regard it as a mere temporary makeshift devised under the pressure
of circumstances; nevertheless, through this united front, the wheel of history
will propel the Chinese revolution forward to a completely new stage. Whether
China can extricate herself from the national and social crisis which is
now so grave depends on how this united front will develop. There is already
fresh evidence that the prospects are favourable. First, as soon as the policy
of the united front was put forward by the Chinese Communist Party, it won
the approval of the people everywhere. This is a clear expression of the
will of the people. Second, immediately after the Sian Incident was settled
peacefully and the two parties ended the civil war, all political parties
and groups, people in all walks of life and all armed forces in the country
achieved unprecedented unity. This unity, however, still falls far short
of meeting the needs of resisting Japan, especially as the problem of unity
between the government and the people remains basically unsolved. Third,
and most striking of all, is the fact that the nation-wide War of Resistance
has started. We are not satisfied with the War of Resistance in its present
state because, though national in character, it is still confined to the
government and the armed forces. As we pointed out earlier, Japanese imperialism
cannot be defeated through a war of resistance of this kind. Nevertheless,
for the first time in a hundred years, China is definitely putting up nation-wide
resistance to a foreign invader, and this could never have come about without
internal peace and without co-operation between the two parties. If the Japanese
aggressors were able to take the four northeastern provinces without firing
a single shot during the time when the two-party united front was broken
up, then today, when the united front has been re-established, they will
not be able to occupy more Chinese territory without paying a price in bloody
battles. Fourth, there is the effect abroad. The proposal for the anti-Japanese
united front put forward by the Chinese Communist Party has won the support
of the workers and peasants and the Communist Parties all over the world.
With the establishment of co-operation between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party, the people of various countries, and particularly of the Soviet Union,
will help China more actively. China and the Soviet Union have concluded
a treaty of non-aggression [7] and the relations
between the two countries can be expected to improve still further. From
all this evidence we can state with certainty that the growth of the united
front will carry China towards a bright and great future, namely, the defeat
of Japanese imperialism and the establishment of a unified democratic republic.

However, the united front cannot accomplish this great task if it remains
in its present state. The united front of the two parties must be developed
further. For in its present state it is not yet broadly based or consolidated.

Should the Anti-Japanese National United Front be confined to the Kuomintang
and the Communist Party? No, it should be a united front of the whole nation,
with the two parties forming only a part of it. It should be a united front
of all parties and groups, people in all walks of life and all armed forces,
a united front of all patriots-- the workers, peasants, soldiers, intellectuals
and businessmen. So far, the united front has in fact been confined to the
two parties, while the masses of the workers, peasants, soldiers and urban
petty bourgeoisie and a large number of other patriots have not yet been
aroused, called into action, organized or armed. This is the most serious
problem at present. It is serious because it makes victories at the front
impossible. It is no longer possible to conceal the critical situation at
the front both in northern China and in Kiangsu and Chekiang Provinces, nor
is there any need to do so; the question is how to save the situation. And
the only way to save it is to put Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Testament into practice,
to "arouse the masses of the people". In his deathbed Testament, Dr. Sun
declared he was deeply convinced, from the experience accumulated over forty
years, that only thus could the goal of revolution be achieved. What reason
is there for obstinately refusing to put this testament into practice? What
reason is there for failing to do so at a moment when the fate of the nation
is at stake? Everybody knows that autocracy and suppression run counter to
the principle of "arousing the masses of the people". Resistance by the
government and the army alone can never defeat Japanese imperialism. Early
in May this year we warned the ruling Kuomintang in all seriousness that
unless the masses of the people were aroused to resist, China would follow
the same path to disaster as Abyssinia. This point has been made not only
by the Chinese Communists but by progressives throughout the country and
by many intelligent members of the Kuomintang itself. Yet the policy of
autocratic rule remains unchanged. As a result the government has estranged
itself from the people, the army from the masses, and the military command
from the rank and file. Unless the united front is reinforced by the
participation of the masses, the crisis on the war fronts will inevitably
be aggravated, not mitigated.

The present anti-Japanese united front still lacks a political programme
to replace the Kuomintang's policy of autocratic rule, a programme accepted
by both parties and formally promulgated. In relation to the masses the
Kuomintang is continuing the same practices it has followed for the last
ten years; there has been no change and on the whole everything has remained
the same for the last ten years, from the government apparatus, the army
system and the policy towards civilians to financial, economic and educational
policies. Changes there are and very great ones too--cessation of civil war
and unity against Japan. The two parties have ended the civil war and the
nation-wide War of Resistance Against Japan has started, which mean a tremendous
change in the Chinese political scene since the Sian Incident. But so far
there has been no change in the practices enumerated above, and there is
thus a disharmony between the things that have not changed and those that
have. The old practices are suited only to compromise abroad and suppression
of the revolution at home, and they prove ill-suited in every respect and
reveal all their inadequacies when it comes to coping with the Japanese
imperialist invasion. It would be another story if we did not want to resist
Japan, but since we do and resistance has actually begun, and since a serious
crisis has already revealed itself, refusal to change over to new ways will
lead to the gravest dangers imaginable. Resistance to Japan requires a broadly
based united front, and hence all the people should be mobilized to join
it. Resistance to Japan requires a consolidated united front, and this calls
for a common programme. The common programme will be the united front's guide
to action and will serve also as the tie which, like a cord, closely binds
together all the organizations and individuals in the united front, all political
parties and groups, people in all walks of life and all armed forces. Only
in this way will we be able to speak of firm unity. We are opposed to the
old binding rules, because they are unsuited to the national revolutionary
war. We look forward to the introduction of new binding rules to replace
the old, that is, to the promulgation of a common programme and the establishment
of revolutionary order. Nothing else will suit the War of Resistance.

What should the common programme be? It should be the Three People's Principles
of Dr. Sun Yat-sen and the Ten-Point Programme for Resisting Japan and Saving
the Nation [8] proposed by the Communist Party
on August 25 this year.

In its declaration announcing Kuomintang-Communist cooperation, the Chinese
Communist Party stated that "the Three People's Principles of Dr. Sun Yat-sen
being what China needs today, our Party is ready to fight for their complete
realization". Some people find it strange that the Communist Party should
be ready to put the Three People's Principles of the Kuomintang into practice;
Chu Ching-lai [9] of Shanghai, for instance, has
expressed doubts in a local periodical. These people think that communism
and the Three People's Principles are incompatible. This is a purely formal
approach. Communism will be put into practice at a future stage of the
development of the revolution; at the present stage the communists harbour
no illusions about being able to realize it but will carry out the national
and democratic revolution as required by history. This is the basic reason
why the Communist Party has proposed an anti-Japanese national united front
and a unified democratic republic. As for the Three People's Principles,
at the Kuomintang's First National Congress the Communist Party and the
Kuomintang jointly decided to put them into practice during the first two-party
united front over ten years ago, and they were put into practice from 1924
to 1927 in large areas of the country through the efforts of all loyal Communists
and all loyal members of the Kuomintang. Unfortunately that united front
broke up in 1927, and in the subsequent ten years the Kuomintang opposed
the application of the Three People's Principles. But as far as the Communist
Party is concerned, all its policies in these ten years have been fundamentally
in line with the revolutionary spirit of Dr. Sun's Three People's Principles
and Three Great Policies. Not a day has passed without the Communist Party's
conducting a struggle against imperialism, which means the thoroughgoing
application of the Principle of Nationalism; the worker-peasant democratic
dictatorship is nothing but the thoroughgoing application of the Principle
of Democracy; the Agrarian Revolution is the thoroughgoing application of
the Principle of People's Livelihood. Why, then, has the Communist Party
announced the abolition of the worker-peasant democratic dictatorship and
the discontinuance of confiscating the land of landlords? The reason, as
we explained some time ago, is not that there is anything at all wrong with
these things, but that the Japanese imperialist armed aggression has led
to a change in class relations in the country, and has thereby not only made
it necessary to unite all classes of the nation against Japanese imperialism,
but also created the possibility of doing so. An anti-fascist united front
for the sake of the common struggle against fascism is both necessary and
possible not only in China but throughout the world. Therefore we stand for
the establishment of a national and democratic united front in China. It
is on these grounds that we have proposed a democratic republic based on
the alliance of all classes in place of a worker-peasant democratic dictatorship.
The Agrarian Revolution put into effect the principle of "land to the tiller",
which is precisely what Dr. Sun Yat-sen proposed. We have now discontinued
it for the sake of uniting greater numbers of people against Japanese
imperialism, but that does not mean China does not need to solve her land
problem. We have unequivocally explained our position on the causes of these
changes in policy and their timing. It is precisely because the Chinese Communist
Party, basing itself on Marxist principles, has constantly adhered to and
developed the revolutionary Three People's Principles--the common programme
of the first Kuomintang-Communist united front--that, in this hour of national
crisis when our country is invaded by a powerful aggressor, the Party has
been able to put forward the timely proposal for a national and democratic
united front, which is the only policy capable of saving the nation, and
to apply this policy with unremitting effort. The question now is not whether
it is the Communist Party which believes in or carries out the revolutionary
Three People's Principles, but whether it is the Kuomintang which does so.
The present task is to restore the revolutionary spirit of Dr. Sun's Three
People's Principles throughout the country, and on this basis to work out
a definite programme and policy and put them into practice sincerely and
not half-heartedly, conscientiously and not perfunctorily, promptly and not
tardily; the Chinese Communist Party has been earnestly praying day and night
for this to happen. For this very reason, it put forward the Ten-Point Programme
for Resisting Japan and Saving the Nation after the Lukouchiao Incident.
The Ten-Point Programme is in line both with Marxism and with the genuine
revolutionary Three People's Principles. It is an initial programme, the
programme for the Chinese revolution at the present stage, which is the stage
of the anti-Japanese national revolutionary war; China can be saved only
if this programme is put into effect. History will punish those who persist
in any course conflicting with this programme.

It is impossible to put this programme into practice throughout the country
without the consent of the Kuomintang, because the Kuomintang today is still
the biggest party in China and the party in power. We believe that the day
will come when intelligent members of the Kuomintang will agree to this
programme. For if they do not, the Three People's Principles will for ever
remain an empty phrase, and it will be impossible to restore the revolutionary
spirit of Dr. Sun Yat-sen, impossible to defeat Japanese imperialism and
impossible for the Chinese people to escape becoming the slaves of a foreign
power. No really intelligent member of the Kuomintang can possibly want this
to happen, and our people will never allow themselves to be turned into slaves.
Moreover, in his statement of September 23 Mr. Chiang Kai-shek declared:

I hold that we who stand for the revolution should put aside personal grudges
and prejudices and devote ourselves to the realization of the Three People's
Principles. At this critical juncture of life and death, we should all the
more let bygones be bygones and together with the whole nation make a completely
fresh start, and work strenuously for unity in order to preserve the very
life and existence of our country.

This is most true. The urgent task at present is to strive for the realization
of the Three People's Principles, to discard personal and factional prejudices,
to change the old set of practices, to carry out a revolutionary programme
in line with the Three People's Principles immediately and to make a completely
fresh start together with the whole nation. Today this is the only course.
With further delay it will be too late to repent.

But there must be instruments for carrying out the Three People's Principles
and the Ten-Point Programme, and this raises the question of reforming the
government and the army. The present government is still a one-party dictatorship
of the Kuomintang and not a government of the national democratic united
front. In the absence of a government of the national democratic united front,
it is impossible to carry out the Three People's Principles and the Ten-Point
Programme. The present army system of the Kuomintang is still the old one,
and it is impossible to defeat Japanese imperialism with troops organized
under this system. The troops are now engaged in resistance and we have great
admiration and respect for them all, and especially for those fighting at
the front. But the lessons of the War of Resistance in the last three months
demonstrate that the Kuomintang army system must be changed, as it is unsuited
to the task of completely defeating the Japanese aggressors and to the successful
application of the Three People's Principles and the revolutionary programme.
The change should be based on the principles of unity between officers and
men and unity between the army and the people. The present army system of
the Kuomintang is fundamentally opposed to both these principles. It prevents
the mass of officers and men from giving their best despite their loyalty
and courage, and therefore an immediate start must be made to reform it.
This does not mean that the fighting has to stop until the system is reformed;
it can be reformed while the fighting is going on. Here the central task
is to bring about a change in the army's political spirit and its political
work. The National Revolutionary Army during the Northern Expedition provides
an admirable precedent, for in general it did establish unity between officers
and men and between the army and the people; a revival of the spirit of those
days is absolutely necessary. China should learn from the war in Spain where
the Republican army has been built up under extremely adverse circumstances.
China is in a better position than Spain, but she lacks a broadly based and
consolidated united front, she lacks a united front government capable of
carrying out the whole revolutionary programme and large numbers of troops
organized according to a new system. She must remedy these defects. With
regard to the war as a whole, the Red Army led by the Chinese Communist Party
can at present only play a vanguard role, it cannot yet play a decisive role
on a national scale. Nevertheless its political, military and organizational
merits are well worth acquiring by friendly armies throughout the country.
At its inception the Red Army was not what it is today; it, too, has undergone
many reforms, the main ones being the weeding out of feudal practices within
the army and the application of the principles of unity between officers
and men and unity between the army and the people. Friendly armies throughout
the country can draw on this experience.

Anti-Japanese comrades of the ruling Kuomintang party! Today we share with
you the responsibility for saving the nation from extinction and ensuring
its survival. You have already formed an anti-Japanese united front with
us. That is very good. You have started resisting Japan. That is also very
good. But we do not approve of your continuing your other policies in the
old way. We should all develop and broaden the united front and draw in the
masses of the people. It is necessary to consolidate the united front and
pursue a common programme. It is essential resolutely to reform the political
and army systems. It is absolutely necessary to have a new government, which
alone can carry out the revolutionary programme and start to reform the armies
on a national scale. This proposal of ours answers the needs of the times.
Many people in your party also feel that now is the time to put it into practice.
Dr. Sun Yat-sen, in his day, made up his mind and reformed the political
and army systems, thereby laying the foundation for the revolution of 1924-27.
The responsibility for effecting the same kind of reform now falls on your
shoulders. We believe that no loyal and patriotic member of the Kuomintang
will consider that our proposal is ill-suited to the needs of the situation.
We are firmly convinced that it meets the objective needs.

The fate of our nation is at stake--let the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party unite closely! Let all our fellow-countrymen who refuse to become slaves
unite closely on the basis of Kuomintang Communist unity! The urgent task
in the Chinese revolution today is to make all the reforms necessary to overcome
all difficulties. When this task is accomplished, we can surely defeat Japanese
imperialism. If we try hard, our future will be bright. 


NOTES


1. See "The Tasks of the Chinese Communist Party in the
Period of Resistance to Japan", Note 2, Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung,
Eng. ed., FLP, Peking, 1965, Vol. I, pp. 276-77.

2. For the resolution see ibid., Note 3, pp. 277-78.

3. For the open telegram see ibid., Note 4, pp.
279-80.

4. For the contents of the letter see "A Statement on Chiang
Kai-shek's Statement", Note 7, ibid., pp. 259-61.

5. For the resolution see "The Tasks of the Chinese Communist
Party in the Period of Resistance to Japan", Note 6, ibid., pp.
280-81.

6. For the telegram see ibid., Note 7, pp. 281-82.

7. The Treaty of Non-Aggression Between the Republic of
China and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was concluded on August
21, 1937.

8. For the Ten-Point Programme see "For the Mobilization
of All the Nation's Forces for Victory in the War of Resistance", pp. 25-28
of this volume.

9. Chu Ching-lai was a leader of the National Socialist
Party (a small clique organized by reactionary landlords, bureaucrats and
big bourgeoisie) who later became a member of the traitorous Wang Ching-wei
government.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Interview with the British Journalist James Bertram







INTERVIEW WITH THE BRITISH JOURNALIST JAMES BERTRAM 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

INTERVIEW WITH THE BRITISH JOURNALIST JAMES BERTRAM

October 25, 1937

THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA AND THE WAR OF
  RESISTANCE

James Bertram: What specific pronouncements has the Chinese Communist
Party made before and since the outbreak of the Sino-Japanese war?

Mao Tse-tung: Before the war broke out, the Chinese Communist Party
warned the whole nation time and again that war with Japan was inevitable,
and that all the Japanese imperialists' talk of a "peaceful settlement" and
all the fine phrases of the Japanese diplomats were only so much camouflage
to screen their preparations for war. We repeatedly stressed that a victorious
war of national liberation cannot be waged unless the united front is
strengthened and a revolutionary policy is adopted. The most important point
in this revolutionary policy is that the Chinese government must institute
democratic reforms in order to mobilize all the people to join the anti-Japanese
front. We repeatedly pointed out the error of those who believed in Japan's
"peace pledge" and thought that war might be avoided, or of those who believed
in the possibility of resisting the Japanese aggressors without mobilizing
the masses. Both the outbreak of the war and its course have proved our views
to be correct. The day after the Lukouchiao Incident, the Communist Party
issued a manifesto to the whole country, calling upon all political parties
and groups and all social strata to make common cause in resisting Japanese
aggression and strengthening the national united front. Soon afterwards we
announced the Ten-Point Programme for Resisting Japan and Saving the Nation,
in which we set out the policies that the Chinese government ought to adopt
in the War of Resistance. With the institution of Kuomintang-Communist
co-operation we issued another important declaration. All this testifies
to our firm adherence to the principle of waging the War of Resistance by
strengthening the united front and putting a revolutionary policy into effect.
In the present period our basic slogan is "Total resistance by the whole
nation".
THE WAR SITUATION AND ITS LESSONS


Question: As you see it, what are the results of the war up to the
present?

Answer: There are two main aspects. On the one hand, by capturing
our cities, seizing our territory, raping, plundering, burning and massacring,
the Japanese imperialists have irrevocably brought the Chinese people face
to face with the danger of national subjugation. On the other hand, the majority
of the Chinese people have consequently become very much aware that the crisis
cannot be overcome without greater unity and without resistance by the whole
nation. At the same time, the peace-loving countries of the world are being
awakened to the necessity of resisting the Japanese menace. These are the
results produced by the war so far.

Question: What do you think are Japan's objectives, and how far
have they been achieved?

Answer: Japan's plan is to occupy northern China and Shanghai as
the first step and then to occupy other regions of China. As to how far the
Japanese aggressors have realized their plan, they seized the three provinces
of Hopei, Chahar and Suiyuan within a short space of time, and now they are
threatening Shansi; the reason is that China's War of Resistance has hitherto
been confined to resistance by the government and the army alone. This crisis
can be overcome only if resistance is carried out jointly by the people and
the government.

Question: In your opinion, has China scored any achievements in
the War of Resistance? If there are any lessons to be drawn, what are they?

Answer: I would like to discuss this question with you in some detail.
First of all, there have been achievements, and great achievements too. They
are to be seen in the following: (1) Never since imperialist aggression
began against China has there been any thing comparable to the present War
of Resistance Against Japan. Geographically, it is truly a war involving
the whole country. This war is revolutionary in character. (2) The war has
changed a disunited country into a relatively united one. The basis of this
unity is Kuomintang-communist co-operation. (3) The war has the sympathy
of world public opinion. Those who once despised China for her nonresistance
now respect her for her resistance. (4) The war has inflicted heavy losses
on the Japanese aggressors. The daily drain on their resources is reported
to be twenty million yen and their casualties are also undoubtedly very heavy,
though figures are not yet available. While the Japanese aggressors took
the four northeastern provinces with ease and with hardly any exertion, now
they cannot occupy Chinese territory without fighting bloody battles. The
aggressors expected to be able to gorge themselves in China, but China's
protracted resistance will bring about the collapse of Japanese imperialism.
Thus China is fighting not only to save herself but also to discharge her
great duty in the world anti-fascist front. Here also the revolutionary character
of the War of Resistance is manifest. (5) We have learned some lessons from
the war. They have been paid for in territory and blood.

As for the lessons, they are likewise great ones. Several months of fighting
have disclosed many of China's weaknesses. They are manifest above all in
the political sphere. Although geographically the war involves the whole
country, it is not being waged by the whole nation. As in the past, the broad
masses are restrained by the government from taking part, and so the war
is not yet of a mass character. Unless it has a mass character, the war against
Japanese imperialist aggression cannot possibly succeed. Some say, "The war
is already an all-embracing war." But this is true only in the sense that
vast parts of the country are involved. As regards participation, it is still
a partial war because it is being waged only by the government and the army,
and not by the people. It is precisely here that the chief reason for the
great loss of territory and for the many military setbacks during the last
few months is to be found. Therefore, although the present armed resistance
is a revolutionary one, its revolutionary character is incomplete because
it is not yet a mass war. Here, too, the problem of unity is involved. Although
the political parties and groups are relatively united as compared with the
past, unity still falls far short of what is needed. Most of the political
prisoners have not yet been released, and the ban on political parties has
not been completely lifted. Relations are still very bad between the government
and the people, between the army and the people, and between officers and
men, and here one observes estrangement instead of unity. This is a fundamental
problem. Unless it is solved, victory is out of the question. In addition,
military blunders are another major reason for our losses in men and territory.
The battles fought have been mostly passive, or to put it in military terms,
have been battles of "pure defence". We can never win by fighting this way.
For the attainment of victory, policies radically different from the present
ones are necessary in both the political and the military fields. These are
the lessons we have learned.

Question: What, then, are the political and military prerequisites?

Answer: On the political side, first, the present government must
be transformed into a united front government in which the representatives
of the people play their part. This government must be at once democratic
and centralized. It should carry out the necessary revolutionary policies.
Secondly, the people must be granted freedom of speech, freedom of the press,
and freedom of assembly and association and the right to take up arms against
the enemy, so that the war will acquire a mass character. Thirdly, the people's
livelihood must be improved through such measures as the abolition of exorbitant
taxes and miscellaneous levies, the reduction of rent and interest, better
conditions for workers, junior officers and soldiers, preferential treatment
for the families of the soldiers fighting the Japanese, and relief for victims
of natural calamities and war refugees. Government finance should be based
on the principle of equitable distribution of the economic burden, which
means that those who have money should contribute money. Fourthly, there
should be a positive foreign policy. Fifthly, cultural and educational policy
should be changed. Sixthly, traitors must be sternly suppressed. The problem
has become extremely serious. The traitors are running wild. At the front
they are helping the enemy; in the rear they are creating disturbances, and
some of them even put on an anti-Japanese pose and denounce patriotic people
as traitors and have them arrested. Effective suppression of the traitors
will be possible only when the people are free to co-operate with the government.
On the military side, comprehensive reforms are required, the most important
of these being to change from pure defence in strategy and tactics to the
principle of active attack; to change the armies of the old type into armies
of a new type; to change the method of forcible recruitment into one of arousing
the people to go to the front; to change the divided command into a unified
command, to change the indiscipline which alienates the army from the people
into conscious discipline which forbids the slightest violation of the people's
interests; to change the present situation in which the regular army is fighting
alone into one in which extensive guerrilla warfare by the people is developed
in co-ordination with regular army operations; and so on and so forth. All
these political and military prerequisites are listed in our published Ten-Point
Programme. They all conform to the spirit of Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Three People's
Principles, his Three Great Policies and his Testament. The war can be won
only when they are carried into effect.

Question: What is the Communist Party doing to carry out this programme?

Answer: We take it as our task tirelessly to explain the situation
and to unite with the Kuomintang and all other patriotic parties and groups
in the effort to expand and consolidate the Anti-Japanese National United
Front, mobilize all forces and achieve victory in the War of Resistance.
The Anti-Japanese National United Front is still very limited in scope and
it is necessary to broaden it, that is, to "arouse the masses of the people",
as called for in Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Testament, by mobilizing the people at
the grass roots to join the united front. Consolidation of the united front
means carrying out a common programme which will be binding on all political
parties and groups in their actions. We agree to accept Dr. Sun's revolutionary
Three People's Principles, Three Great Policies and Testament as the common
programme of the united front of all political parties and all social classes.
But so far this programme has not been accepted by all the parties, and above
all the Kuomintang has not agreed to the proclamation of such an over-all
programme. Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Principle of Nationalism has been partially
put into practice by the Kuomintang, as shown in its resistance to Japan.
But neither his Principle of Democracy nor his Principle of People's Livelihood
has been applied, and the present serious crisis in the War of Resistance
is the result. The war situation having become so critical, it is high time
that the Kuomintang applied the Three People's Principles in full, or otherwise
it will be too late to repent. It is the duty of the Communist Party to raise
its voice and tirelessly and persuasively explain all this to the Kuomintang
and the whole nation so that the genuinely revolutionary Three People's
Principles, the Three Great Policies and Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Testament are
fully and thoroughly applied throughout the country, and the Anti-Japanese
National United Front is broadened and consolidated.
THE EIGHTH ROUTE ARMY IN THE WAR OF RESISTANCE

Question: Please tell me about the Eighth Route Army in which so
many people are interested--for instance, about its strategy and tactics,
its political work, and so on.

Answer: Indeed a large number of people have become interested in
its activities since the Red Army was redesignated as the Eighth Route Army
and went to the front. I shall now give you a general account.

First about its field operations. Strategically, the Eighth Route Army is
centring them on Shansi. As you know, it has won many victories. Examples
are the battle of Pinghsingkuan, the recapture of Chingping, Pinglu and Ningwu,
the recovery of Laiyuan and Kuangling, the capture of Tzechingkuan, the cutting
of the three main supply routes of the Japanese troops (between Tatung and
Yenmenkuan, between Weihsien and Pinghsingkuan, and between Shuohsien and
Ningwu), the assault on the rear of the Japanese forces south of Yenmenkuan,
the recapture twice over of Pinghsingkuan and Yenmenkuan, and the recent
recovery of Chuyang and Tanghsien. The Japanese troops in Shansi are being
strategically encircled by the Eighth Route Army and other Chinese troops.
We may say with certainty that the Japanese troops will meet with the most
stubborn resistance in northern China. If they try to ride roughshod over
Shansi, they will certainly encounter greater difficulties than ever.

Next about strategy and tactics. We are doing what the other Chinese troops
have not done, i.e., operating chiefly on the enemy's flanks and
rear. This way of fighting is vastly different from purely frontal defence.
We are not against employing part of the forces in frontal operations, for
that is necessary. But the main forces must be used against the enemy's flanks
and it is essential to adopt encircling and outflanking tactics in order
to attack the enemy independently and with the initiative in our hands, for
that is the only way to destroy his forces and preserve our own. Furthermore,
the use of some of our armed forces against the enemy's rear is particularly
effective, because they can disrupt his supply lines and bases. Even the
frontal forces should rely mainly on "counter assault" and not on purely
defensive tactics. One important reason for the military setbacks in the
last few months has been the use of unsuitable methods of fighting. The methods
of fighting employed by the Eighth Route Army are what we call guerrilla
and mobile warfare applied independently and with the initiative in our hands.
In principle these methods are basically the same as those we used during
the civil war, but there are certain differences. For example, at the present
stage, in order to facilitate our surprise attacks on the enemy's flanks
and rear over an extensive area, we divide our forces more often than we
concentrate them. Since the armed forces of the country as a whole are
numerically strong, some of them should be used for frontal defence and some
dispersed to carry on guerrilla operations, but the main forces should always
be concentrated against the enemy's flanks. The first essential in war is
to preserve oneself and to destroy the enemy, and for this purpose it is
necessary to wage guerrilla and mobile warfare independently and with the
initiative in our hands and to avoid all passive and inflexible tactics.
If a vast number of troops wage mobile warfare with the Eighth Route Army
assisting them by guerrilla warfare, our victory will be certain.

Next about political work. Another highly significant and distinctive feature
of the Eighth Route Army is its political work, which is guided by three
basic principles. First, the principle of unity between officers and men,
which means eradicating feudal practices in the army, prohibiting beating
and abuse, building up a conscious discipline, and sharing weal and woe--as
a result of which the entire army is closely united. Second, the principle
of unity between the army and the people, which means maintaining a discipline
that forbids the slightest violation of the people's interests, conducting
propaganda among the masses, organizing and arming them, lightening their
financial burdens and suppressing the traitors and collaborators who do harm
to the army and the people--as a result of which the army is closely united
with the people and welcomed everywhere. Third, the principle of disintegrating
the enemy troops and giving lenient treatment to prisoners of war. Our victory
depends not only upon our military operations but also upon the disintegration
of the enemy troops. Although our measures for disintegrating the enemy troops
and for treating prisoners of war leniently have not yielded conspicuous
results as yet, they will certainly do so in the future. Moreover, in line
with the second of the three principles, the Eighth Route Army replenishes
its forces not by coercion but by the much more effective method of arousing
the people to volunteer for the front.

Although Hopei, Chahar and Sulyuan and part of Shansi have been lost, we
are not at all discouraged but are resolutely calling upon the entire army
to co-ordinate with the friendly armies and fight with grim determination
to defend Shansi and recover the lost territories. The Eighth Route Army
will co-ordinate its actions with those of other Chinese troops in order
to maintain the resistance in Shansi; this will be very important for the
war as a whole, and especially for the war in northern China.

Question: In your opinion, can these good points of the Eighth Route
Army also be acquired by the other Chinese armies?

Answer: Certainly they can. In 1924-27 the spirit of the Kuomintang
troops was broadly similar to that of the Eighth Route Army today. The Communist
Party and the Kuomintang were then co-operating in organizing armed forces
of a new type which, beginning with only two regiments, rallied round themselves
many other troops and won their first victory when they defeated Chen
Chiung-ming. These forces later grew into an army corps and still more troops
came under its influence; only then did the Northern Expedition take place.
A fresh spirit prevailed among these forces; on the whole there was unity
between officers and men and between the army and the people, and the army
was filled with a revolutionary militancy. The system of Party representatives
and of political departments, adopted for the first time in China, entirely
changed the complexion of these armed forces. The Red Army, which was founded
in 1927, and the Eighth Route Army of today have inherited this system and
developed it. In the revolutionary period of 1924-27, the armed forces which
were imbued with this new spirit naturally employed methods of fighting
consistent with their political outlook, operating not in a passive and
inflexible way but with initiative and with an eagerness to take the offensive,
and consequently they were victorious in the Northern Expedition. It is troops
of this kind we need on the battlefields today. We do not necessarily need
them in millions; with a nucleus of a few hundred thousand such men, we can
defeat Japanese imperialism. We deeply esteem the armies throughout the country
for their heroic sacrifices since the War of Resistance began, but there
are lessons to be learned from the bloody battles that have been fought.

Question: Japanese army discipline being what it is, will not your
policy of giving lenient treatment to prisoners of war prove ineffective?
For instance, the Japanese command may kill the prisoners when you release
them and the Japanese army as a whole will not understand the meaning of
your policy.

Answer: That is impossible. The more they kill, the more sympathy
will be aroused for the Chinese forces among the Japanese soldiers. Such
facts cannot be concealed from the rank and file. We will persevere in this
policy of ours. For instance, we shall not change it even if the Japanese
army carries out its declared intention of using poison-gas against the Eighth
Route Army. We shall go on giving lenient treatment to captured Japanese
soldiers and to those captured junior officers who have fought us under coercion;
we shall not insult or abuse them, but shall set them free after explaining
to them the identity of the interests of the people of the two countries.
Those who do not want to go back may serve in the Eighth Route Army. If an
international brigade appears on the anti-Japanese battle front, they may
join it and take up arms against Japanese imperialism.
CAPITULATIONISM IN THE WAR OF RESISTANCE


Question: I understand that while carrying on the war, Japan is
spreading peace rumours in Shanghai. What are her real objectives?

Answer: After succeeding in certain of their plans, the Japanese
imperialists will once again put up a smokescreen of peace in order to attain
three objectives. They are: (1) to consolidate the positions already captured
for use as a strategic springboard for further offensives; (2) to split China's
anti-Japanese front; and (3) to break up the international front of support
for China. The present peace rumours are simply the first smoke-bomb. The
danger is that there are certain vacillating elements in China who are ready
to succumb to the enemy's wiles and that the traitors and collaborators are
manoeuvering among them and spreading all kinds of rumours in their efforts
to make China capitulate to the Japanese aggressors.

Question: As you see it, what could this danger lead to?

Answer: There can be only two courses of development: either the
Chinese people will overcome capitulationism, or capitulationism will prevail,
with the result that the anti-Japanese front will be split and China will
be plunged into disorder.

Question: Which of the two is the more likely?

Answer: The whole Chinese people demand that the war be fought to
a finish. If a section of the ruling group takes the road of capitulation,
the rest who remain firm will certainly oppose it and carry on resistance
together with the people. Of course it would be a misfortune for China's
anti-Japanese front. But I am sure that the capitulationists cannot win mass
support and that the masses will overcome capitulationism, persevere in the
war and achieve victory.

Question: May I ask how capitulationism can be overcome?

Answer: Both by words, that is, by exposing the danger of
capitulationism, and by deeds, that is, by organizing the masses to stop
the capitulationist activities. Capitulationism has its roots in national
defeatism or national pessimism, that is, in the idea that having lost some
battles, China has no strength left to fight Japan. These pessimists do not
realize that failure is the mother of success, that the lessons learned from
failures are the basis for future triumphs. They see the defeats but not
the successes in the War of Resistance, and in particular they fail to see
that our defeats contain the elements of victory, while the enemy's victories
contain the elements of defeat. We must show the masses of the people the
victorious prospects of the war and help them to understand that our defeats
and difficulties are temporary and that, as long as we keep on fighting in
spite of all setbacks, the final victory will be ours. Deprived of a mass
base, the capitulationists will have no chance to play their tricks, and
the anti-Japanese front will be consolidated.
DEMOCRACY AND THE WAR OF RESISTANCE


Question: What is the meaning of "democracy" as put forward by the
Communist Party in its programme? Does it not conflict with a "wartime
government"?

Answer: Not at all. The Communist Party put forward the slogan of
a "democratic republic" as early as August 1936. Politically and organizationally
this slogan signifies: (1) The state and government must not belong to a
single class but must be based on the alliance of all the anti-Japanese classes
to the exclusion of traitors and collaborators, and must include the workers,
the peasants and other sections of the petty bourgeoisie. (2) The organizational
form of such a government will be democratic centralism, which is at once
democratic and centralized, with the two seeming opposites of democracy and
centralization united in a definite form. (3) This government will grant
the people all the necessary political freedoms, especially the freedom to
organize and train and arm themselves for self-defence. In these three respects,
it can be seen that a democratic republic in no way conflicts with a wartime
government, but is precisely the form of state and government advantageous
to the War of Resistance.

Question: Is not "democratic centralism" a self -contradictory term?

Answer: We must look not only at the term but at the reality. There
is no impassable gulf between democracy and centralism, both of which are
essential for China. On the one hand, the government we want must be truly
representative of the popular will; it must have the support of the broad
masses throughout the country and the people must be free to support it and
have every opportunity of influencing its policies. This is the meaning of
democracy. On the other hand, the centralization of administrative power
is also necessary, and once the policy measures demanded by the people are
transmitted to their own elected government through their representative
body, the government will carry them out and will certainly be able to do
so smoothly, so long as it does not go against the policy adopted in accordance
with the people's will. This is the meaning of centralism. Only by adopting
democratic centralism can a government be really strong, and this system
must be adopted by China's government of national defence in the anti-Japanese
war.

Question: This does not correspond to a war cabinet, does it?

Answer: It does not correspond to some of the war cabinets of the
past.

Question: Have there ever been any war cabinets of this kind?

Answer: Yes. Systems of government in wartime may generally be divided
into two kinds, as determined by the nature of the war--one kind is democratic
centralism and the other absolute centralism. All wars in history may be
divided into two kinds according to their nature: just wars and unjust wars.
For instance, the Great War in Europe some twenty years ago was an unjust,
imperialist war. The governments of the imperialist countries forced the
people to fight for the interests of imperialism and thus went against the
people's interests, these circumstances necessitating a type of government
such as the Lloyd George government in Britain. Lloyd George repressed the
British people, forbidding them to speak against the imperialist war and
banning organizations or assemblies that expressed popular opinion against
the war; even though Parliament remained, it was merely the organ of a group
of imperialists, a parliament which rubber-stamped the war budget. The absence
of unity between the government and the people in a war gives rise to a
government of absolute centralism with all centralism and no democracy. But
historically there have also been revolutionary wars, e.g., in France,
Russia, and present-day Spain. In such wars the government does not fear
popular disapproval, because the people are most willing to wage this kind
of war; far from fearing the people, it endeavours to arouse them and encourages
them to express their views so that they will actively participate in the
war, because the government rests upon the people's voluntary support. China's
war of national liberation has the full approval of the people and cannot
be won without their participation; therefore democratic centralism becomes
a necessity. In the Northern Expedition of 1926-27, too, the victories were
achieved through democratic centralism. Thus it can be seen that when the
aims of a war directly reflect the interests of the people, the more democratic
the government, the more effectively can the war be prosecuted. Such a government
need have no fear that the people will oppose the war; rather it should be
worried lest the people remain inactive or indifferent to the war. The nature
of a war determines the relationship between the government and the people--this
is a law of history.

Question: Then what steps are you prepared to take for this system
of government to be instituted?

Answer: The key question is co-operation between the Kuomintang
and the Communist Party.

Question: Why?

Answer: For the last fifteen years, the relationship between the
Kuomintang and the Communist Party has been the decisive political factor
in China. The co-operation of the two parties in 1924-27 resulted in the
victories of the first revolution. The split between the two parties in 1927
resulted in the unfortunate situation of the last decade. However, the
responsibility for the split was not ours; we were compelled to resist the
Kuomintang's oppression, and we persisted in holding high the glorious banner
of China's liberation. Now the third stage has come, and the two parties
must co-operate fully on a definite programme in order to resist Japan and
save the nation. Through our ceaseless efforts, the establishment of co-operation
has at last been announced, but the point is that both sides must accept
a common programme and act upon it. An essential part of such a programme
is the setting up of a new system of government.

Question: How can the new system be set up through the cooperation
of the two parties?

Answer: We are proposing a reconstruction of the government apparatus
and the army system. We propose that a provisional national assembly be convened
to meet the present emergency. Delegates to this assembly should be chosen
in due proportion from the various anti-Japanese political parties, anti-Japanese
armies and anti-Japanese popular and business organizations, as Dr. Sun Yat-sen
suggested in 1924. This assembly should function as the supreme organ of
state authority to decide on the policies for saving the nation, adopt a
constitutional programme and elect the government. We hold that the War of
Resistance has reached a critical turning point and that only the immediate
convening of such a national assembly vested with authority and representative
of the popular will can regenerate China's political life and overcome the
present crisis. We are exchanging views with the Kuomintang about this proposal
and hope to obtain its agreement.

Question: Has not the National Government announced that the national
assembly has been called off?

Answer: It was right to call it off. What has been called off is
the national assembly which the Kuomintang was preparing to convene; according
to the Kuomintang's stipulations it would not have had the slightest power,
and the procedure for its election was entirely in conflict with the popular
will. Together with the people of all sections of society, we disapproved
of that kind of national assembly. The provisional national assembly we are
proposing is radically different from the one that has been called off. The
convening of this provisional national assembly will undoubtedly impart a
new spirit to the whole country and provide the essential prerequisite for
reconstructing the government apparatus and the army and for mobilizing the
entire people. On this hinges the favourable turn in the War of Resistance.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Situation and Tasks in the Anti-Japanese War After the Fall of Shanghai and Taiyuan







THE SITUATION AND TASKS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR AFTER THE FALL OF
  SHANGHAI AND TAIYUAN 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

 THE SITUATION AND TASKS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR AFTER THE FALL OF SHANGHAI
  AND TAIYUAN

 November 12, 1937

[This was the outline for a report made by Comrade Mao Tse-tung in Yenan,
in November 1937 at a meeting of Party activists. It met with immediate
opposition from the Right opportunists in the Party, and not until
the Sixth Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee in October 1938
was the Right deviation basically overcome.] 
  

I. THE PRESENT SITUATION IS ONE OF TRANSITION  A WAR
  OF PARTIAL RESISTANCE TO A WAR OF TOTAL RESISTANCE


1. We support any kind of war of resistance, even though partial, against
the invasion of Japanese imperialism. For partial resistance is a step forward
from non-resistance, and to a certain extent it is revolutionary in character
and is a war in defence of the motherland.

2. However, a war of partial resistance by the government alone without the
mass participation of the people will certainly fail, as we have already
pointed out (at the meeting of Party activists in Yenan in April of this
year, at the Party's National Conference in May, and in the resolution
[1] of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee
in August). For it is not a national revolutionary war in the full sense,
not a people's war.

3. We stand for a national revolutionary war in the full sense, a war in
which the entire people are mobilized, in other words, total resistance.
For only such resistance constitutes a people's war and can achieve the goal
of defending the motherland.

4. Although the war of partial resistance advocated by the Kuomintang also
constitutes a national war and is revolutionary in character to a certain
extent, its revolutionary character is far from complete. Partial resistance
is bound to lead to defeat in the war; it can never successfully defend the
motherland.

5. Herein lies the difference in principle between the stand of the Communist
Party and the present stand of the Kuomintang with regard to resistance.
If Communists forget this difference in principle, they will be unable to
guide the War of Resistance correctly, they will be powerless to overcome
the Kuomintang's one-sidedness, and they will debase themselves to the point
of abandoning their principles and reduce their Party to the level of the
Kuomintang. That would be a crime against the sacred cause of the national
revolutionary war and the defence of the motherland.

6. In a national revolutionary war in the full sense, in a war of total
resistance, it is essential to put into effect the Ten-Point Programme for
Resisting Japan and Saving the Nation proposed by the Communist Party, and
it is essential to have a government and an army that will enforce this programme
in its entirety.

7. The situation after the fall of Shanghai and Taiyuan is as follows:

  (1) In northern China, regular warfare in which the Kuomintang played the
  chief role has ended, and guerrilla warfare in which the Communist Party
  is playing the chief role has become primary. In Kiangsu and Chekiang Provinces,
  the Japanese aggressors have broken through the Kuomintang's battle lines
  and are advancing on Nanking and the Yangtse valley. It is already dear that
  the Kuomintang's partial resistance cannot last long.
  
  (2) In their own imperialist interests, the governments of Britain, the United
  States and France have indicated that they will help China, but so far there
  has been only verbal sympathy and no practical aid whatsoever.
  
  (3) The German and Italian fascists are doing everything to assist Japanese
  imperialism.
  
  (4) The Kuomintang is still unwilling to make any fundamental change in its
  one-party dictatorship and autocratic rule over the people, through which
  it is carrying on partial resistance.


This is one side of the picture. The other side is seen in the
following:

  (1) The political influence of the Communist Party and the Eighth Route Army
  is spreading fast and far, and they are being acclaimed throughout the country
  as "the saviours of the nation". The Communist Party and the Eighth Route
  Army are determined to keep up the guerrilla warfare in northern China, so
  as to defend the whole country, tie down the Japanese aggressors and hinder
  them from attacking the Central Plains and the Northwest.
  
  (2) The mass movement has developed a step further.
  
  (3) The national bourgeoisie is leaning towards the left.
  
  (4) Forces favouring reforms are growing within the Kuomintang.
  
  (5) The movement to oppose Japan and aid China is spreading among the people
  of the world.
  
  (6) The Soviet Union is preparing to give practical assistance to China.
  


This is the other side of the picture.

8. Therefore, the present situation is one of transition from partial to
total resistance. While partial resistance cannot last long, total resistance
has not yet begun. The transition from one to the other, the gap in time,
is fraught with danger.

9. In this period, China's partial resistance may develop in one of
three directions:

The first is the ending of partial resistance and its replacement by total
resistance. This is what the majority of the nation demands, but the Kuomintang
is still undecided.

The second is the ending of armed resistance and its replacement by capitulation.
This is what the Japanese aggressors, the collaborators and the pro-Japanese
elements demand, but the majority of the Chinese people oppose it.

The third is the coexistence of armed resistance and capitulation in China.
This could come about as a result of the intrigues of the Japanese aggressors,
the collaborators and the pro-Japanese elements to split China's anti-Japanese
front when they kind it impossible to attain the second direction. They are
now engineering something of this kind. Indeed this danger is very grave.

10. Judging from the present situation, the domestic and international factors
which prevent capitulationism from winning out have the upper hand. These
factors include: Japan's persistence in its policy of subjugating China,
which leaves China no alternative but to fight; the existence of the Communist
Party and the Eighth Route Army; the wishes of the Chinese people; the wishes
of the majority of the Kuomintang members; the anxiety of Britain, the United
States and France lest capitulation by the Kuomintang damage their interests;
the existence of the Soviet Union and its policy of helping China; the high
hopes which the Chinese people place (not without foundation) in the Soviet
Union. The proper and co-ordinated use of these factors would not only
frustrate capitulationism and splitting but also overcome the obstructions
to any advance beyond partial resistance.

11. Therefore, the prospect of going over from partial to total resistance
does exist. To strive for this prospect is the urgent common task of all
Chinese Communists, all progressive members of the Kuomintang, and all the
Chinese people.

12. China's anti-Japanese national revolutionary war is now confronting a
grave crisis. This crisis may be prolonged, or it may be overcome fairly
quickly. Internally, the decisive factors are Kuomintang-Communist co-operation
and a change in Kuomintang policy on the basis of this co-operation, and
the strength of the worker and peasant masses. Externally, the decisive factor
is assistance from the Soviet Union.

13. Political and organizational reform of the Kuomintang is both necessary
and possible.[2] The main reasons are Japanese
pressure, the Chinese Communist Party's united front policy, the wishes of
the Chinese people, and the growth of new forces inside the Kuomintang. Our
task is to work for this reform of the Kuomintang as a basis for reforming
the government and the army. This reform undoubtedly requires the consent
of the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang, and we are only in
a position to offer suggestions.

14. The government should be reformed. We have proposed the convening of
a provisional national assembly, which is likewise both necessary and possible.
Undoubtedly this reform also requires the consent of the Kuomintang.

15. The task of reforming the army consists in building up new armies and
reforming the old armies. If a new army of '50,000 to 300,000 men imbued
with a new political spirit can be built up within six to twelve months,
the situation on the anti-Japanese battlefield will begin to mend. Such an
army would influence all the old armies and rally them around itself. This
would provide the military basis for the turn to the strategic counter-offensive
in the War of Resistance. This reform likewise requires the Kuomintang's
consent. The Eighth Route Army ought to have an exemplary role to play in
the course of this reform. And the Eighth Route Army itself should be expanded.


II. CAPITULATIONISM MUST BE COMBATED BOTH INSIDE THE PARTY
  AND THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY 


INSIDE THE PARTY, OPPOSE CLASS CAPITULATIONISM 


16. In 1927 Chen Tu-hsiu's capitulationism led to the failure of the revolution.
No member of our Party should ever forget this historical lesson written
in blood.

17. With regard to the Party's line of an anti-Japanese national united front,
the main danger inside the Party before the Lukouchiao Incident was "Left"
opportunism, that is, closed-doorism, the reason being chiefly that the
Kuomintang had not yet begun to resist Japan.

18. Since the Lukouchiao Incident the main danger inside the Party is no
longer "Left" closed-doorism but Right opportunism, that is, capitulationism,
the reason being chiefly that the Kuomintang has begun to resist Japan.

19. Already in April at the Yenan meeting of Party activists, then again
in May at the National Conference of the Party, and especially in August
at the meeting of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee (the Lochuan
meeting), we posed the following question: Will the proletariat lead the
bourgeoisie in the united front, or the bourgeoisie the proletariat? Will
the Kuomintang draw over the Communist Party, or the Communist Party the
Kuomintang? In relation to the current specific political task this question
means: Is the Kuomintang to be raised to the level of the Ten-Point Programme
for Resisting Japan and Saving the Nation, to the level of the total resistance
advocated by the Communist Party? Or is the Communist Party to sink to the
level of the Kuomintang dictatorship of the landlords and bourgeoisie, to
the level of partial resistance?

20. Why must we pose the question so sharply? The answer is:

On the one hand, we have the Chinese bourgeoisie's proneness to compromise;
the Kuomintang's superiority in material strength; the declaration and the
decisions of the Third Plenary Session of the Central Executive Committee
of the Kuomintang, which slander and insult the Communist Party and cry out
for "an end to the class struggle"; the Kuomintang's yearning for "the
capitulation of the Communist Party" and its widespread propaganda to this
end; Chiang Kai-shek's attempts to place the Communist Party under his control;
the Kuomintang's policy of restricting and weakening the Red Army and the
anti-Japanese democratic base areas; the plan concocted during the Kuomintang's
Lushan Training Course [3] in July "to reduce the
Communist Party's strength by two-fifths in the course of the War of Resistance";
the attempts of the Kuomintang to seduce Communist cadres with offers of
fame and fortune and wine and women; the political capitulation of certain
petty-bourgeois radicals (represented by Chang Nai-chi
[4]); etc.

On the other hand, we have the uneven theoretical level among Communists;
the fact that many of our Party members lack the experience of co-operation
between the two parties gained during the Northern Expedition; the fact that
a large number of Party members are of petty-bourgeois origin; the reluctance
of some Party members to continue a life of bitter struggle; the tendency
towards unprincipled accommodation with the Kuomintang in the united front;
the emergence of a tendency towards a new type of warlordism in the Eighth
Route Army; the emergence of the problem of Communist participation in the
Kuomintang government; the emergence of a tendency towards excessive
accommodation in the anti-Japanese democratic base areas; etc.

We must sharply pose the question of who is to lead and must resolutely combat
capitulationism in view of the grave situation described above.

21. For several months now, and especially since the outbreak of the War
of Resistance, the Central Committee and Party organizations at all levels
have waged a clear-cut and firm struggle against capitulationist tendencies,
actual or potential, have taken various necessary precautions against them
and have achieved good results.

The Central Committee has issued a draft resolution
[5] on the problem of Communist participation in
the government.

A struggle has been started against the tendency towards new warlordism in
the Eighth Route Army. This tendency is manifest in certain individuals who,
since the redesignation of the Red Army, have become unwilling to submit
strictly to Communist Party leadership, have developed individualistic heroism,
taken pride in being given appointments by the Kuomintang (i.e.,
in becoming officials), and so forth. The tendency towards this new type
of warlordism has the same root (the reduction of the Communist Party to
the level of the Kuomintang) and the same result (the alienation of the masses)
as the tendency towards the old type of warlordism, which expressed itself
in beating and abusing people, violating discipline, etc.; it is particularly
dangerous because it is occurring in the period of the Kuomintang-Communist
united front, and it therefore calls for special attention and determined
opposition. Both the system of political commissars, which was abolished
because of Kuomintang intervention, and the system of political departments,
which were renamed "political training offices" for the same reason, have
now been restored. We have initiated and staunchly carried out the new strategic
principle of "independent guerrilla warfare in the mountain regions with
the initiative in our own hands", thus basically ensuring the Eighth Route
Army's successes in fighting and in its other tasks. We have rejected the
Kuomintang's demand that its members should be sent to the Eighth Route Army
units as cadres and have upheld the principle of absolute leadership of the
Eighth Route Army by the Communist Party. Similarly, we have introduced the
principle of "independence and initiative within the united front"in the
revolutionary anti-Japanese base areas. We have corrected the tendency towards
"parliamentarism" [6] (of course not the
parliamentarism of the Second International, which is absent in the Chinese
Party); we have also persisted in our struggle against bandits, enemy spies
and saboteurs.

In Sian we have corrected the tendency towards unprincipled accommodation
in our relations with the Kuomintang and have developed the mass struggle
anew.

In eastern Kansu we have on the whole done the same as in Sian.

In Shanghai we have criticized Chang Nai-chi's line of "issuing fewer calls
and offering more suggestions" and begun to correct the tendency towards
excessive accommodation in the work of the national salvation movement.

In the guerrilla zones in the south--these representing part of the gains
of our decade of sanguinary warfare with the Kuomintang, our strategic
strongholds for the anti-Japanese national revolutionary war in the southern
provinces, and our forces which the Kuomintang tried to wipe out by "encirclement
and suppression" even after the Sian Incident, and which it has tried to
weaken by the newer method of "luring the tiger out of the mountains" even
after the Lukouchiao Incident--we have taken special care (1) to guard against
concentrating our forces regardless of circumstances (which would suit the
Kuomintang's desire to destroy these strongholds), (2) to reject Kuomintang
appointees, and (3) to be on the alert against the danger of another Ho Ming
Incident [7] (i.e., the danger of being
surrounded and disarmed by the Kuomintang).

Our attitude in the Liberation Weekly
[8] has continued to be one of serious
and fair criticism.

22. In order to persevere in armed resistance and win final victory as well
as to turn partial resistance into total resistance, it is necessary to adhere
to the Anti-Japanese National United Front and expand and strengthen it.
No views disruptive of the Kuomintang-Communist united front will be tolerated.
We must still guard against "Left" closed-doorism. But at the same time we
must closely adhere to the principle of independence and initiative in all
our united front work. Our united front with the Kuomintang and other parties
is based on the execution of a definite programme. Without this basis there
can be no united front, and in that case co-operation would become unprincipled
and a manifestation of capitulationism. Thus the key to leading the anti-Japanese
national revolutionary war to victory is to explain, apply and uphold the
principle of "independence and initiative within the united front".

23. What is our purpose in all this? In one respect, it is to hold the ground
we have already won, for this ground is our strategic point of departure
and its loss would mean the end of everything. But our chief purpose is to
extend the ground already won and realize the positive aim of "winning the
masses in their millions for the Anti-Japanese National United Front and
the overthrow of Japanese imperialism". Holding our ground and extending
it are inseparably connected. In the last few months, many more left-wing
members of the petty bourgeoisie have become united under our influence,
the new forces in the Kuomintang camp have grown, the mass struggle in Shansi
has developed, and our Party organizations have expanded in many places.

24. But we must clearly understand that generally speaking the organizational
strength of our Party is still quite small in the country as a whole. The
strength of the masses in the country as a whole is also very small, because
the workers and peasants, the basic sections of the masses, are not yet
organized. All this is due to the Kuomintang's policy of control and repression
on the one hand and the inadequacy of our own work or even its complete absence
on the other. This is the fundamental weakness of our Party in the present
anti-Japanese national revolutionary war. Unless we overcome this weakness,
Japanese imperialism cannot be defeated. To this end we must apply the principle
of "independence and initiative within the united front" and overcome all
tendencies towards capitulation or excessive accommodation.

IN THE COUNTRY AS A WHOLE, OPPOSE NATIONAL
  CAPITULATIONISM


25. The above points deal with class capitulationism. This tendency would
lead the proletariat to accommodate itself to bourgeois reformism and bourgeois
lack of thoroughness. Unless it is overcome, we cannot succeed in carrying
forward the anti-Japanese national revolutionary war, in turning partial
resistance into total resistance and in defending the motherland.

But there is also the other kind of capitulationism, national capitulationism,
which would lead China to accommodate herself to the interests of Japanese
imperialism, make China a Japanese colony and turn the Chinese people into
colonial slaves. This tendency has now appeared in the right wing of the
Anti-Japanese National United Front.

26. The left wing of the Anti-Japanese National United Front is composed
of the Communist-led masses, which include the proletariat, the peasantry
and the urban petty bourgeoisie. Our task is to do our utmost to extend and
consolidate this wing. The accomplishment of this task is the basic prerequisite
for reforming the Kuomintang, the government and the army, for establishing
a unified democratic republic, for turning partial resistance into total
resistance and for overthrowing Japanese imperialism.

27. The intermediate section of the Anti-Japanese National United Front is
composed of the national bourgeoisie and the upper stratum of the petty
bourgeoisie. Those for whom the leading Shanghai newspapers speak are now
tending towards the Left, [9] while some members
of the Fu Hsing Society have begun to vacillate and some members of the C.C.
Clique are also wavering. [10] The armies resisting
Japan have learned severe lessons, and some have begun or are preparing to
introduce reforms. Our task is to help the intermediate section to move forward
and change its stand.

28. The right wing of the Anti-Japanese National United Front consists of
the big landlords and big bourgeoisie, and it is the nerve centre of national
capitulationism. It is inevitable that these people should tend towards
capitulationism, for they fear both the destruction of their property in
the war and the rise of the masses. Many of them are already collaborators,
many have become or are ready to become pro-Japanese, many are vacillating,
and only a few, owing to special circumstances, are firmly anti-Japanese.
Some of them have joined the national united front for the time being under
compulsion and with reluctance. Generally speaking, it will not be long before
they split away. Indeed many of the worst elements among the big landlords
and big bourgeoisie are at this very moment engineering a split in the
Anti-Japanese National United Front. They are manufacturing rumours, and
stories such as "the Communists are engaged in insurrection" and "the Eighth
Route Army is in retreat" are sure to multiply daily. Our task is to combat
national capitulationism resolutely and, in the course of this struggle,
to expand and consolidate the left wing and help the intermediate section
to move forward and change its stand.

THE RELATION BETWEEEN CLASS CAPITULATIONISM AND NATIONAL
  CAPITULATIONISM


29. Class capitulationism is actually the reserve force of national
capitulationism in the anti-Japanese national revolutionary war; it is a
vile tendency that lends support to the camp of the right wing and leads
to defeat in the war. We must fight this tendency inside the Communist Party
and the proletariat and extend the fight to all spheres of our work, in order
to invigorate the struggle against national capitulationism, and in order
to achieve the liberation of the Chinese nation and the emancipation of the
toiling masses.

NOTES 


1. This refers to the "Resolution on the Present Situation
and the Tasks of the Party" adopted by the Political Bureau of the Central
Committee of the Chinese Communist Party at its meeting in Lochuan, northern
Shensi, on August 25, 1937. The full text reads as follows:

  (1) The military provocation by the Japanese aggressors at Lukouchiao and
  their occupation of Peiping and Tientsin represent only the beginning of
  their large-scale invasion of China south of the Great Wall. They
  have already begun their national mobilization for war. Their propaganda
  that they have "no desire to aggravate the situation"is only a smokescreen
  for further attacks.
  
  (2) Under the pressure of the Japanese aggressors' attacks and the Chinese
  people's indignation, the Nanking government is beginning to make up its
  mind to fight. General defence arrangements and actual resistance in some
  places have already started. Full-scale war between China and Japan is
  inevitable. The resistance at Lukouchiao on July 7 marked the starting point
  of China's national war of resistance.
  
  (3) Thus a new stage has opened in China's political situation, the stage
  of actual resistance. The stage of preparation for resistance is over. In
  the present stage the central task is to mobilize all the nation's forces
  for victory in the War of Resistance. The winning of democracy, which was
  not accomplished in the previous stage because of the Kuomintang's unwillingness
  and the inadequate mobilization of the people, is a task that must be fulfilled
  in the course of the struggle for victory in the War of Resistance.
  
  (4) Our differences and disputes with the Kuomintang and other anti-Japanese
  groups in this new stage are no longer about whether to wage war of resistance
  but about how to win victory.
  
  (5) The key to victory in the war now lies in developing the resistance that
  has already begun into a war of total resistance by the whole nation. Only
  through such a war of total resistance can final victory be won. The Ten-Point
  Programme for Resisting Japan and Saving the Nation now proposed by our Party
  spells out concretely the way to win final victory in the War of Resistance.
  
  (6) A great danger lurks in the present state of resistance. The main reason
  for this danger is that the Kuomintang is still unwilling to arouse the whole
  people to take part in the war. Instead, it regards the war as the concern
  of the government alone, and at every turn fears and restricts the people's
  participation in the war, prevents the government and the army from forming
  close ties with the people, denies the people the democratic right to resist
  Japan and save the nation, and refuses to reform the government apparatus
  thoroughly and to turn the government into a national defence government
  of the whole nation. A war of resistance of this kind may achieve partial
  victories, but never final victory. On the contrary, it may end in grievous
  failure.
  
  (7) The existence of serious weaknesses in the War of Resistance may lead
  to many setbacks, retreats, internal splits, betrayals, temporary and partial
  compromises and other such reverses. Therefore it should be realized that
  the war will be an arduous and protracted war. But we are confident that,
  through the efforts of our Party and the whole people, the resistance already
  started will sweep aside all obstacles and continue to advance and develop.
  We must overcome all difficulties and firmly fight for the realization of
  the Ten-Point Programme for victory proposed by our Party. We must firmly
  oppose all wrong policies which run counter to it and combat national
  defeatism and the pessimism and despair it engenders.
  
  (8) Together with the people and the armed forces under the leadership of
  the Party, members of the Communist Party must actively take their stand
  in the forefront of the struggle, become the core of the nation's resistance
  and do their utmost to develop the anti-Japanese mass movement. They must
  never for a moment relax or miss a single opportunity to do propaganda among
  the masses and to organize and arm them. Victory in the War of Resistance
  Against Japan will be certain provided the masses in their millions are really
  organized in the national united front.


2. In the initial period of the War of Resistance, the
Kuomintang and Chiang Kai-shek made a number of promises to introduce various
reforms under popular pressure, but very quickly broke them one after another.
The possibility that the Kuomintang might introduce the reforms desired by
the whole people was not actualized. As Comrade Mao Tse-tung said later in
"On Coalition Government":

All the people, including the Communists and other democrats, earnestly hoped
that the Kuomintang government would seize the opportunity, at a time when
the nation was in peril and the people were filled with enthusiasm, to institute
democratic reforms and put Dr. Sun Yat-sen's revolutionary Three People's
Principles into practice. But their hopes came to nought. (See Selected
Work of Mao Tse-tung, Eng. ed., FLP, Peking, 1965, Vol. III, p. 263.)

3. The Lushan Training Course was set up by Chiang Kai-shek
at Lushan, Kiangsi Province, to train high and middle-ranking officials of
the Kuomintang party and government to form the core of his reactionary regime.

4. Chang Nai-chi was then advocating "issuing fewer calls
and offering more suggestions". But it would have been useless merely to
submit "suggestions" to the Kuomintang, since it was following a policy of
oppression. Calls had to be made directly to the masses, in order to arouse
them to struggle against the Kuomintang. Otherwise, it would have been impossible
to keep up the war against Japan or to resist Kuomintang reaction. Chang
Nai-chi was wrong on this point, and gradually he realized his mistake.

5. This refers to the "Draft Resolution of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China Concerning the Communist Party's
Participation in the Government" which was drawn up on September 25, 1937.
The full text reads as follows:

  (1) The present situation in the anti-Japanese war urgently requires a united
  front government representing the whole nation, for only such a government
  can effectively lead the anti-Japanese national revolutionary war and defeat
  Japanese imperialism. The Communist Party is ready to participate in such
  a government, that is, to undertake administrative responsibilities in the
  government directly and officially and play an active part in it. But such
  a government does not yet exist. What exists today is still the government
  of the Kuomintang one-party dictatorship.
  
  (2) The Communist Party of China can participate in the government only when
  it is changed from a one-party dictatorship of the Kuomintang into a united
  front government of the whole nation, that is, when the present Kuomintang
  government (a) accepts the fundamentals of the Ten-Point Programme for Resisting
  Japan and Saving the Nation proposed by our Party and promulgates an
  administrative programme in accordance therewith; (b) begins to show by deeds
  the sincerity of its efforts to carry out this programme and achieves definite
  results; and (c) permits the legal existence of Communist Party organizations
  and guarantees the Communist Party freedom to mobilize, organize and educate
  the masses.
  
  (3) Before the Central Committee of the Party decides to participate in the
  Central Government, members of the Communist Party must not as a rule participate
  in any local government or in any administrative councils or committees attached
  to the administrative organs of the government, central or local. For such
  participation would only obscure the distinctive features of the Communist
  Party, prolong the Kuomintang's dictatorship and hinder rather than help
  the effort to bring a unified democratic government into being.
  
  (4) However, members of the Communist Party may participate in the local
  governments of certain particular regions, such as battle areas, where the
  old authorities find it impossible to rule as before and are on the whole
  willing to put the Communist Party's policies into effect, where the Communist
  Party is free to operate openly, and where the present emergency makes Communist
  participation a necessity in the opinion both of the people and of the
  government. Still more so in the Japanese-occupied areas, the Communist Party
  should come forward openly as the organizer of the anti-Japanese united front
  governments.
  
  (5) Before the Communist Party officially joins the government, it is permissible
  in principle for Party members to participate in representative bodies, such
  as an all-China national assembly, for the purpose of discussing a democratic
  constitution and policies to save the nation. Thus, the Communist Party should
  strive to get its members elected to such assemblies and use them as a forum
  for propagating the Party's views, so as to mobilize the people and rally
  them round the Party and promote the establishment of a unified democratic
  government.
  
  (6) Given a definite common programme and the principle of absolute equality,
  the Central Committee of the Communist Party or its local branches may form
  united front organizations with the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang
  or its local headquarters, such as various joint committees (e.g., national
  revolutionary leagues, committees for mass movements and committees for
  mobilization in the war zones), and through such joint activities the Communist
  Party should achieve co-operation with the Kuomintang.
  
  (7) With the redesignation of the Red Army as part of the National Revolutionary
  Army and the change of the organ of Red political power into the Government
  of the Special Region, their representatives may, by virtue of the legal
  status they have acquired, join all the military and mass organizations which
  further the resistance to Japan and the salvation of the nation.
  
  (8) It is most essential to maintain absolutely independent Communist Party
  leadership in what was originally the Red Army and in all the guerrilla units,
  and Communists must not show any vacillation on this matter of principle.


6."Parliamentarism" here refers to the proposal of some
Party comrades that the system of political power in the revolutionary base
areas, the system of people's representative conferences, should be changed
into the bourgeois parliamentary system.

7. The Ho Ming Incident took place after the outbreak of
the anti-Japanese war. In October 1934, when the Central Red Army moved
northward, Red Army guerrilla units stayed behind and maintained guerrilla
warfare in extremely difficult circumstances in fourteen areas in the eight
southern provinces of Kiangsi, Fukien, Kwangtung, Hunan, Hupeh, Honan, Chekiang
and Anhwei. When the anti-Japanese war began, these units, acting on instructions
from the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, entered into
negotiations with the Kuomintang for the cessation of civil war and organized
themselves into a single army (namely, the New Fourth Army which later stubbornly
fought the Japanese on the southern and northern banks of the Yangtse River)
and moved to the front to resist Japan. But Chiang Kai-shek plotted to exploit
these negotiations for the purpose of wiping out the guerrilla units. Ho
Ming was one of the guerrilla leaders in the Fukien-Kwangtung border area
which was one of the fourteen guerrilla areas. He was not on the alert against
Chiang Kai-shek's plot, with the result that more than one thousand of the
guerrillas under his command were surrounded and disarmed by the Kuomintang
forces after they assembled.

8. Founded in Yenan in 1937, the Liberation Weekly
was the organ of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.
It was superseded by the Liberation Daily in 1941.

9. They were that section of the national bourgeoisie for
whom newspapers like the Shanghai Shen Pao served as a vehicle.

10. The Pu Hsing Society and the C.C. Clique, two fascist
organizations within the Kuomintang, were headed by Chiang Kai-shek and Chen
Li-fu respectively. They served the oligarchic interests of the big landlords
and the big bourgeoisie. But many petty-bourgeois elements had joined them
under compulsion or had been duped into joining. The text refers to the section
of the Fu Hsing Society consisting mainly of lower and middle-ranking officers
in the Kuomintang army and to the section of the C.C. Clique consisting
mainly of members not in power.

 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Proclamation by the Government of the Shensi-Kansu ningsia Border Region and the Rear Headquarters of the Eighth Route Army







PROCLAMATION BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE SHENSI-KANSU-NINGSIA BORDER
  REGION AND THE REAR HEADQUARTERS OF THE EIGHTH ROUTE ARMY 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  PROCLAMATION BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE SHENSI-KANSU-NINGSIA BORDER REGION
  AND THE REAR HEADQUARTERS OF THE EIGHTH ROUTE ARMY


May 15, 1938

[This proclamation was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Government
of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the Rear Headquarters of the
Eighth Route Army with a view to countering disruptive activities by the
Chiang Kai-shek clique. Shortly after the establishment of Kuomintang-Communist
cooperation, the Chiang Kai-shek clique began to plot disruption against
the revolutionary forces under Communist leadership. The disruption of the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region was part of their plot. Comrade Mao Tse-tung
maintained that a firm stand was necessary to defend the interests of the
revolution. The proclamation dealt a blow at the opportunist stand of some
Party members in the anti-Japanese united front with regard to the intrigues
of the Chiang clique.]
  

Be it hereby proclaimed: Ever since the Lukouchiao Incident, all our patriotic
countrymen have been firmly waging the War of Resistance. Officers and men
at the front are shedding their blood and sacrificing their lives. All political
parties and groups have united in good faith. All sections of the people
have joined forces to save the nation. This points to a bright future for
the Chinese nation and affords a firm guarantee for victory over Japan. All
our fellow-countrymen must continue along this line of advance. The army
and the people of out Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region
[1] have followed the Government's leadership and
devoted their efforts to the cause of national salvation. Whatever they have
done has been just and honourable. Under bitter hardships, they have struggled
on tirelessly and uncomplainingly. The people throughout the country are
unanimous in praising them. For their part the Border Region Government and
the Rear Headquarters will encourage the people of the whole region to continue
their efforts to the very end. Nobody will be allowed to neglect his duty
and nothing will be allowed to undermine the cause of national salvation.
However, recent investigations in the Border Region have disclosed that,
disregarding the public interest, some persons are using various means to
force the peasants to return land and houses that have been distributed to
them, to compel debtors to pay back old cancelled loans,
[2] to coerce the people into changing the democratic
system that has been built up, or to disrupt the military, economic, cultural
and mass organizations that have been established. Some of them are even
acting as spies, conspiring with bandits, inciting our soldiers to mutiny,
making surveys and maps of our region, secretly collecting information, or
openly spreading propaganda against the Border Region Government. Clearly,
all these activities are violations of the basic principle of unity for
resistance to Japan, run counter to the will of the people of the Border
Region, and are intended to foment internal dissension, disrupt the united
front, damage the people's interests, undermine the prestige of the Border
Region Government and increase the difficulties of mobilization against Japan.
The reason is that a handful of die-herds are behaving unscrupulously to
the detriment of the national interest. Some are even serving as tools of
the Japanese aggressors, using various guises to camouflage their conspiratorial
activities. For several months, reports demanding our daily attention have
been steadily pouring in from people in the counties requesting us to put
a stop to such activities. With a view to strengthening the anti-Japanese
forces, consolidating the rear against Japan, and safeguarding the interests
of the people, the Government and the Rear Headquarters find it imperative
to proscribe the above-mentioned activities. Accordingly, we hereby unequivocally
proclaim:

(1) The Government and the Rear Headquarters, in order to protect the rights
already secured by the people, forbid any unauthorized change in the distribution
of land or houses and in the cancellation of debts made within the areas
under the jurisdiction of the Border Region Government before internal peace
was established.

(2) The Government and the Rear Headquarters will protect the activities
of all the military, political, economic, cultural and mass organizations
which were in existence when internal peace was established and which have
since advanced and expanded in accordance with the principle of the united
front, will promote their progress, and stop all intrigues and disruptive
activities against them.

(3) The Government and the Rear Headquarters, resolutely carrying out the
Programme of Armed Resistance and National Reconstruction' will gladly initiate
and promote any undertaking that serves the cause of resistance to Japan
and national salvation. We welcome sincere assistance from people in every
quarter. But to guard against impostors and keep out traitors, we prohibit
any person, whatever his activities, from entering and staying in the Border
Region unless he secures permission and written authorization from the Government
and the Rear Headquarters.

(4) In this tense period of armed resistance, it is right and proper for
the people to report any person who tries to sabotage, engage in disruption,
stir up sedition or ferret out military secrets within the boundaries of
the Border Region. Upon valid evidence, persons so charged may be arrested
on the spot. If convicted, offenders will be punished with due severity.

These four regulations must be observed by all members of the armed forces
and all civilians throughout the Border Region, and no violation whatsoever
will be permitted. Henceforward, should any lawless person dare to plot
disruption, the Border Region Government and the Rear Headquarters will enforce
these regulations to the letter and will accept no plea of ignorance.

This proclamation is hereby issued with the full force of the law.

NOTES


1. The Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region was the revolutionary
base area which was gradually built up after 1931 through revolutionary guerrilla
war in northern Shensi. When the Central Red Army arrived in northern Shensi
after the Long March, it became the central base area of the revolution and
the seat of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party. It was
named the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region after the formation of the
Anti-Japanese National United Front in 1937, and it included twenty-three
counties along the common borders of the three provinces.

2. By 1936 most places in the Border Region had carried
out the policy of confiscating the land of the landlords and distributing
it among the peasants and cancelling the old debts of the peasants. After
1936, in order to facilitate the formation of a broad anti-Japanese national
united front, the Chinese Communist Party changed its policy for the country
as a whole to one of reduction of rent and interest; at the same time, however,
it resolutely protected the gains already secured by the peasants in the
land reform.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Problems of Strategy in Guerilla War Against Japan







PROBLEMS OF STRATEGY IN GUERRILLA WAR AGAINST JAPAN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  PROBLEMS OF STRATEGY IN GUERRILLA WAR AGAINST JAPAN


May 1938

[In the early days of the War of Resistance Against Japan, many people
inside and outside the Party belittled the important strategic role of guerrilla
warfare and pinned their hopes on regular warfare alone, and particularly
on the operations of the Kuomintang forces. Comrade Mao Tse-tung refuted
this view and wrote this article to show the correct road of development
for anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare. As a result, the Eighth Route Army and
the New Fourth Army, which had just over 40,000 men when the War of Resistance
began in 1937, grew to a great army of one million by the time Japan surrendered
in 1945, established many revolutionary base areas, played a great part in
the war and thus, throughout this period, made Chiang Kai-shek afraid to
capitulate to Japan or launch a nation-wide civil war. In 1946, when Chiang
Kai-shek did launch a nation-wide civil war, the People's Liberation Army,
formed out of the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies, was strong enough to
deal with his attacks.] 



CHAPTER I


WHY RAISE THE QUESTION OF STRATEGY IN GUERRILLA WAR?


In the War of Resistance Against Japan, regular warfare is primary and
guerrilla warfare supplementary. This point has already been correctly settled.
Thus, it seems there are only tactical problems in guerrilla warfare. Why
then raise the question of strategy?

If China were a small country in which the role of guerrilla warfare was
only to render direct support over short distances to the campaigns of the
regular army, there would, of course, be only tactical problems but no strategic
ones. On the other hand, if China were a country as strong as the Soviet
Union and the invading enemy could either be quickly expelled, or, even though
his expulsion were to take some time, he could not occupy extensive areas,
then again guerrilla warfare would simply play a supporting role in campaigns,
and would naturally involve only tactical but not strategic problems.

The question of strategy in guerrilla war does arise, however, in the case
of China, which is neither small nor like the Soviet Union, but which is
both a large and a weak country. This large and weak country is being attacked
by a small and strong country, but the large and weak country is in an era
of progress; this is the source of the whole problem. It is in these
circumstances that vast areas have come under enemy occupation and that the
war has become a protracted one. The enemy is occupying vast areas of this
large country of ours, but Japan is a small country, she does not have sufficient
soldiers and has to leave many gaps in the occupied areas, so that our
anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare consists primarily not in interior-line
operations in support of the campaigns of the regular troops but in independent
operations on exterior lines; furthermore, China is progressive, that is
to say, she has a staunch army and broad masses of people, both led by the
Communist Party, so that, far from being small-scale, our anti-Japanese guerrilla
warfare is in fact large-scale warfare. Hence the emergence of a whole series
of problems, such as the strategic defensive, the strategic offensive, etc.
The protracted nature of the war and its attendant ruthlessness have made
it imperative for guerrilla warfare to undertake many unusual tasks; hence
such problems as those of the base areas, the development of guerrilla warfare
into mobile warfare, and so on. For all these reasons, China's guerrilla
warfare against Japan has broken out of the bounds of tactics to knock at
the gates of strategy, and it demands examination from the viewpoint of strategy.
The point that merits our particular attention is that such extensive as
well as protracted guerrilla warfare is quite new in the entire history of
war. This is bound up with the fact that we are now in the Nineteen Thirties
and Nineteen Forties and that we now have the Communist Party and the Red
Army. Herein lies the heart of the matter. Our enemy is probably still cherishing
fond dreams of emulating the Mongol conquest of the Sung Dynasty, the Manchu
conquest of the Ming Dynasty, the British occupation of North America and
India, the Latin occupation of Central and South America, etc. But such dreams
have no practical value in present-day China because there are certain factors
present in the China of today which were absent in those historical instances,
and one of them is guerrilla warfare, which is quite a new phenomenon. If
our enemy overlooks this fact, he will certainly come to grief.

These are the reasons why our anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare, though occupying
only a supplementary place in the War of Resistance as a whole, must nevertheless
be examined from the viewpoint of strategy.

Why not, then, apply to guerrilla warfare the general strategic principles
of the War of Resistance?

The question of strategy in our anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare is indeed
closely linked with the question of strategy in the War of Resistance as
a whole, because they have much in common. On the other hand, guerrilla warfare
is different from regular warfare and has its own peculiarities, and consequently
many peculiar elements are involved in the question of strategy in guerrilla
warfare. Without modification it is impossible to apply the strategic principles
of the War of Resistance in general to guerrilla warfare with its own
peculiarities.

CHAPTER II


THE BASIC PRINCIPLE OF WAR IS TO PRESERVE ONESELF AND DESTROY
  THE ENEMY 


Before discussing the question of strategy in guerrilla warfare in concrete
terms, a few words are needed on the fundamental problem of war.

All the guiding principles of military operations grow out of the one basic
principle: to strive to the utmost to preserve one's own strength and destroy
that of the enemy. In a revolutionary war, this principle is directly linked
with basic political principles. For instance, the basic political principle
of China's War of Resistance Against Japan, i.e., its political
aim, is to drive out Japanese imperialism and build an independent, free
and happy new China. In terms of military action this principle means the
use of armed force to defend our motherland and to drive out the Japanese
invaders. To attain this end, the operations of the armed units take the
form of doing their utmost to preserve their own strength on the one hand
and destroy the enemies on the other. How then do we justify the encouragement
of heroic sacrifice in war? Every war exacts a price, sometimes an extremely
high one. Is this not in contradiction with "preserving oneself"? In fact,
these is no contradiction at all; to put it more exactly; sacrifice and
self-preservation are both opposite and complementary to each other. For
such sacrifice is essential not only for destroying the enemy but also for
preserving oneself--partial and temporary "non-preservation" (sacrifice,
or paying the price) is necessary for the sake of general and permanent
preservation. From this basic principle stems the series of principles guiding
military operations, all of which--from the principles of shooting (taking
cover to preserve oneself, and making full use of fire-power to destroy the
enemy) to the principles of strategy--are permeated with the spirit of this
basic principle. All technical, tactical and strategic principles represent
applications of this basic principle. The principle of preserving oneself
and destroying the enemy is the basis of all military principles.

CHAPTER III


SIX SPECIFIC PROBLEMS OF STRATEGY IN GUERRILLA WAR AGAINST
  JAPAN


Now let us see what policies or principles have to be adopted in guerrilla
operations against Japan before we can attain the object of preserving ourselves
and destroying the enemy. Since the guerrilla units in the War of Resistance
(and in all other revolutionary wars) generally grow out of nothing and expand
from a small to a large force, they must preserve themselves and, moreover,
they must expand. Hence the question is, what policies or principles have
to be adopted before we can attain the object of preserving and expanding
ourselves and destroying the enemy?

Generally speaking, the main principles are as follows: (1) the use of
initiative, flexibility and planning in conducting offensives within the
defensive, battles of quick decision within protracted war, and exterior-line
operations within interior-line operations; (2) co-ordination with regular
warfare; (3) establishment of base areas; (4) the strategic defensive and
the strategic offensive; (5) the development of guerrilla warfare into mobile
warfare; and (6) correct relationship of command. These six items constitute
the whole of the strategic programme for guerrilla war against Japan and
are the means necessary for the preservation and expansion of our forces,
for the destruction and expulsion of the enemy, for co-ordination with regular
warfare and the winning of final victory.

CHAPTER IV


INITIATIVE, FLEXIBILITY AND PLANNING IN CONDUCTING OFFENSIVES
  WITHIN THE DEFENSIVE, BATTLES OF QUICK DECISION WITHIN PROTRACTED WAR, AND
  EXTERIOR-LINE OPERATIONS WITHIN INTERIOR-LINE OPERATIONS


Here the subject may be dealt with under four headings: (1) the relationship
between the defensive and the offensive, between protractedness and quick
decision, and between the interior and exterior lines; (2) the initiative
in all operations; (3) flexible employment of forces; and (4) planning in
all operations.

To start with the first.

If we take the War of Resistance as a whole, the fact that Japan is a strong
country and is attacking while China is a weak country and is defending herself
makes our war strategically a defensive and protracted war. As far as the
operational lines are concerned, the Japanese are operating on exterior and
we on interior lines. This is one aspect of the situation. But there is another
aspect which is just the reverse. The enemy forces, though strong (in arms,
in certain qualities of their men, and certain other factors), are numerically
small, whereas our forces, though weak (likewise, in arms, in certain qualities
of our men, and certain other factors), are numerically very large. Added
to the fact that the enemy is an alien nation invading our country while
we are resisting his invasion on our own soil, this determines the following
strategy. It is possible and necessary to use tactical offensives within
the strategic defensive, to fight campaigns and battles of quick decision
within a strategically protracted war and to fight campaigns and battles
on exterior lines within strategically interior lines. Such is the strategy
to be adopted in the War of Resistance as a whole. It holds true both for
regular and for guerrilla warfare. Guerrilla warfare is different only in
degree and form. Offensives in guerrilla warfare generally take the form
of surprise attacks. Although surprise attacks can and should be employed
in regular warfare too, the degree of surprise is less. In guerrilla warfare,
the need to bring operations to a quick decision is very great, and our
exterior-line ring of encirclement of the enemy in campaigns and battles
is very small. All these distinguish it from regular warfare.

Thus it can be seen that in their operations guerrilla units have to concentrate
the maximum forces, act secretly and swiftly, attack the enemy by surprise
and bring battles to a quick decision, and that they must strictly avoid
passive defence, procrastination and the dispersal of forces before engagements.
Of course, guerrilla warfare includes not only the strategic but also the
tactical defensive. The latter embraces, among other things, containing and
outpost actions during battles; the disposition of forces for resistance
at narrow passes, strategic points, rivers or villages in order to deplete
and exhaust the enemy; and action to cover withdrawal. But the basic principle
of guerrilla warfare must be the offensive, and guerrilla warfare is more
offensive in its character than regular warfare. The offensive, moreover,
must take the form of surprise attacks, and to expose ourselves by ostentatiously
parading our forces is even less permissible in guerrilla warfare than in
regular warfare. From the fact that the enemy is strong and we are weak it
necessarily follows that, in guerrilla operations in general even more than
in regular warfare, battles must be decided quickly, though on some occasions
guerrilla fighting may be kept up for several days, as in an assault on a
small and isolated enemy force cut off from help. Because of its dispersed
character, guerrilla warfare can spread everywhere, and in many of its tasks,
as in harassing, containing and disrupting the enemy and in mass work, its
principle is dispersal of forces; but a guerrilla unit, or a guerrilla formation,
must concentrate its main forces when it is engaged in destroying the enemy,
and especially when it is striving to smash an enemy attack. "Concentrate
a big force to strike at a small section of the enemy force" remains a principle
of field operations in guerrilla warfare.

Thus it can also be seen that, if we take the War of Resistance as a whole,
we can attain the aim of our strategic defensive and finally defeat Japanese
imperialism only through the cumulative effect of many offensive campaigns
and battles in both regular and guerrilla warfare, namely, through the cumulative
effect of many victories in offensive actions. Only through the cumulative
effect of many campaigns and battles of quick decision, namely, the cumulative
effect of many victories achieved through quick decision in offensive campaigns
and battles, can we attain our goal of strategic protractedness, which means
gaining time to increase our capacity to resist while hastening or awaiting
changes in the international situation and the internal collapse of the enemy,
in order to be able to launch a strategic counter-offensive and drive the
Japanese invaders out of China. We must concentrate superior forces and fight
exterior-line operations in every campaign or battle, whether in the stage
of strategic defensive or in that of strategic counter-offensive, in order
to encircle and destroy the enemy forces, encircling part if not all of them,
destroying part if not all of the forces we have encircled, and inflicting
heavy casualties on the encircled forces if we cannot capture them in large
numbers. Only through the cumulative effect of many such battles of annihilation
can we change the relative position as between the enemy and ourselves,
thoroughly smash his strategic encirclement--that is, his scheme of exterior-line
operations--and finally, in co-ordination, with international forces and
the revolutionary struggles of the Japanese people, surround the Japanese
imperialists and deal them the coup de grace. These results are
to be achieved mainly through regular warfare, with guerrilla warfare making
a secondary contribution. What is common to both, however, is the accumulation
of many minor victories to make a major victory. Herein lies the great strategic
role of guerrilla warfare in the War of Resistance.

Now let us discuss initiative, flexibility and planning in guerrilla warfare.

What is initiative in guerrilla warfare?

In any war, the opponents contend for the initiative, whether on a battlefield,
in a battle area, in a war zone or in the whole war, for the initiative means
freedom of action for an army. Any army which, losing the initiative, is
forced into a passive position and ceases to have freedom of action, faces
the danger of defeat or extermination. Naturally, gaining the initiative
is harder in strategic defensive and interior-line operations and easier
in offensive exterior-line operations. However, Japanese imperialism has
two basic weaknesses, namely, its shortage of troops and the fact that it
is fighting on foreign soil. Moreover, its underestimation of China's strength
and the internal contradictions among the Japanese militarists have given
rise to many mistakes in command, such as piecemeal reinforcement, lack of
strategic coordination, occasional absence of a main direction for attack,
failure to grasp opportunities in some operations and failure to wipe out
encircled forces, all of which may be considered the third weakness of Japanese
imperialism. Thus, despite the advantage of being on the offensive and operating
on exterior lines, the Japanese militarists are gradually losing the initiative,
because of their shortage of troops (their small territory, small population,
inadequate resources, feudalistic imperialism, etc.), because of the fact
that they are fighting on foreign soil (their war is imperialist and barbarous)
and because of their stupidities in command. Japan is neither willing nor
able to conclude the war at present, nor has her strategic offensive yet
come to an end, but, as the general trend shows, her offensive is confined
within certain limits, which is the inevitable consequence of her three
weaknesses; she cannot go on indefinitely till she swallows the whole of
China. Already there are signs that Japan will one day find herself in an
utterly passive position. China, on the other hand, was in a rather passive
position at the beginning of the war, but, having gained experience, she
is now turning to the new policy of mobile warfare, the policy of taking
the offensive, seeking quick decisions and operating on exterior lines in
campaigns and battles, which, together with the policy of developing
widespread guerrilla warfare, is helping China to build up a position of
initiative day by day.

The question of the initiative is even more vital in guerrilla warfare. For
most guerrilla units operate in very difficult circumstances, fighting without
a rear, with their own weak forces facing the enemy's strong forces, lacking
experience (when the units are newly organized), being separated, etc.
Nevertheless, it is possible to build up the initiative in guerrilla warfare,
the essential condition being to seize on the enemy's three weaknesses. Taking
advantage of the enemy's shortage of troops (from the viewpoint of the war
as a whole), the guerrilla units can boldly use vast areas as their fields
of operation; taking advantage of the fact that the enemy is an alien invader
and is pursuing a most barbarous policy, the guerrilla units can boldly enlist
the support of millions upon millions of people; and taking advantage of
the stupidities in the enemy's command, the guerrilla units can give full
scope to their resourcefulness. While the regular army must seize on all
these weaknesses of the enemy and turn them to good account in order to defeat
him, it is even more important for the guerrilla units to do so. As for the
guerrilla units' own weaknesses, they can be gradually reduced in the course
of the struggle. Moreover, these weaknesses sometimes constitute the very
condition for gaining the initiative. For example, it is precisely because
the guerrilla units are small that they can mysteriously appear and disappear
in their operations behind enemy lines, without the enemy's being able to
do anything about them, and thus enjoy a freedom of action such as massive
regular armies never can.

When the enemy is making a converging attack from several directions' a guerrilla
unit can exercise initiative only with difficulty and can lose it all too
easily. In such a case, if its appraisals and dispositions are wrong, it
is liable to get into a passive position and consequently fail to smash the
converging enemy attack. This may occur even when the enemy is on the defensive
and we are on the offensive. For the initiative results from making a correct
appraisal of the situation (both our own and that of the enemy) and from
making the correct military and political dispositions. A pessimistic appraisal
out of accord with the objective conditions and the passive dispositions
ensuing from it will undoubtedly result in the loss of the initiative and
throw one into a passive position. On the other hand, an over-optimistic
appraisal out of accord with the objective conditions and the risky
(unjustifiably risky) dispositions ensuing from it will also result in the
loss of the initiative and eventually land one in a position similar to that
of the pessimists. The initiative is not an innate attribute of genius, but
is something an intelligent leader attains through open-minded study and
correct appraisal of the objective conditions and through correct military
and political dispositions. It follows that the initiative is not ready-made
but is something that requires conscious effort.

When forced into a passive position through some incorrect appraisal and
disposition or through overwhelming pressure, a guerrilla unit must strive
to extricate itself. How this can be done depends on the circumstances. In
many cases it is necessary to "move away". The ability to move is the distinctive
feature of a guerrilla unit. To move away is the principal method for getting
out of a passive position and regaining the initiative. But it is not the
sole method. The moment when the enemy is most energetic and we are in the
greatest difficulties is often the very moment when things begin to turn
against him and in our favour. Frequently a favourable situation recurs and
the initiative is regained as a result of "holding out a little longer".

Next, let us deal with flexibility.

Flexibility is a concrete expression of the initiative. The flexible employment
of forces is more essential in guerrilla warfare than in regular warfare.

A guerrilla commander must understand that the flexible employment of his
forces is the most important means of changing the situation as between the
enemy and ourselves and of gaining the initiative. The nature of guerrilla
warfare is such that guerrilla forces must be employed flexibly in accordance
with the task in hand and with such circumstances as the state of the enemy,
the terrain and the local population, and the chief ways of employing the
forces are dispersal, concentration and shifting of position. In employing
his forces, a guerrilla commander is like a fisherman casting his net, which
he should be able to spread wide as well as draw in tight. When casting his
net, the fisherman has to ascertain the depth of the water, the speed of
the current and the presence or absence of obstructions; similarly, when
dispersing his units, a guerrilla commander must take care not to incur losses
through ignorance of the situation or through miscalculated action. Just
as the fisherman must keep a grip on the cord in order to draw his net in
tight, so the guerrilla commander must maintain liaison and communication
with all his forces and keep enough of his main forces at hand. Just as a
frequent change of position is necessary in fishing, so a frequent shift
of position is necessary for a guerrilla unit. Dispersal, concentration and
shifting of position are the three ways of flexibly employing forces in guerrilla
warfare.

Generally speaking, the dispersal of guerrilla units, or "breaking up the
whole into parts", is employed chiefly: (1) when we want to threaten the
enemy with a wide frontal attack because he is on the defensive, and there
is temporarily no chance to mass our forces for action; (2) when we want
to harass and disrupt the enemy throughout an area where his forces are weak;
(3) when we are unable to break through the enemy's encirclement and try
to slip away by making ourselves less conspicuous; (4) when we are restricted
by terrain or supplies; or (5) when we are carrying on mass work over a wide
area. But whatever the circumstances, when dispersing for action we should
pay attention to the following: (1) we should never make an absolutely
even dispersal of forces, but should keep a fairly large part in an area
convenient for manoeuvre, so that any possible exigency can be met and there
is a centre of gravity for the task being carried out in dispersion; and
(2) we should assign to the dispersed units clearly defined tasks, fields
of operation, time limits for actions, places for reassembly and ways and
means of liaison.

Concentration of forces, or "assembling the parts into a whole", is the method
usually applied to destroy an enemy when he is on the offensive and sometimes
to destroy some of his stationary forces when he is on the defensive.
Concentration of forces does not mean absolute concentration, but the massing
of the main forces for use in one important direction while retaining or
dispatching part of the forces for use in other directions to contain, harass
or disrupt the enemy, or to carry on mass work.

Although the flexible dispersal or concentration of forces according to
circumstances is the principal method in guerrilla warfare, we must also
know how to shift (or transfer) our forces flexibly. When the enemy feels
seriously threatened by guerrillas, he will send troops to attack or suppress
them. Hence the guerrilla units will have to take stock of the situation.
If advisable, they should fight where they are; if not, they should lose
no time in shifting elsewhere. Sometimes, in order to crush the enemy units
one by one, guerrilla units which have destroyed an enemy force in one place
may immediately shift to another so as to wipe out a second enemy force;
sometimes, finding it inadvisable to fight in one place, they may have to
disengage quickly and fight the enemy elsewhere. If the enemy's forces in
a certain place present a particularly serious threat, the guerrilla units
should not linger, but should move off with lightning speed. In general,
shifts of position should be made with secrecy and speed. In order to mislead,
decoy and confuse the enemy, they should constantly use stratagems, such
as making a feint to the east but attacking in the west, appearing now in
the south and now in the north, hit-and-run attacks, and night actions.

Flexibility in dispersal, concentration and shifts of position is a concrete
expression of the initiative in guerrilla warfare, whereas rigidness and
inertia inevitably lead to passivity and cause unnecessary losses. But a
commander proves himself wise not just by recognition of the importance of
employing his forces flexibly but by skill in dispersing, concentrating or
shifting them in good time according to the specific circumstances. This
wisdom in sensing changes and choosing the right moment to act is not easily
acquired; it can be gained only by those who study with a receptive mind
and investigate and ponder diligently. Prudent consideration of the circumstances
is essential to prevent flexibility from turning into impulsive action.

Lastly, we come to planning.

Without planning, victories in guerrilla warfare are impossible. Any idea
that guerrilla warfare can be conducted in haphazard fashion indicates either
a flippant attitude or ignorance of guerrilla warfare. The operations in
a guerrilla zone as a whole, or those of a guerrilla unit or formation, must
be preceded by as thorough planning as possible, by preparation in advance
for every action. Grasping the situation, setting the tasks, disposing the
forces, giving military and political training, securing supplies, putting
the equipment in good order, making proper use of the people's help, etc.--all
these are part of the work of the guerrilla commanders, which they must carefully
consider and conscientiously perform and check up on. There can be no initiative,
no flexibility, and no offensive unless they do so. True, guerrilla conditions
do not allow as high a degree of planning as do those of regular warfare,
and it would be a mistake to attempt very thorough planning in guerrilla
warfare. But it is necessary to plan as thoroughly as the objective conditions
permit, for it should be understood that fighting the enemy is no joke.

The above points serve to explain the first of the strategic principles of
guerrilla warfare, the principle of using initiative, flexibility and planning
in conducting offensives within the defensive, battles of quick decision
within protracted war, and exterior-line operations within interior-line
operations. It is the key problem in the strategy of guerrilla warfare. The
solution of this problem provides the major guarantee of victory in guerrilla
warfare so far as military command is concerned.

Although a variety of matters have been dealt with here, they all revolve
around the offensive in campaigns and battles. The initiative can be decisively
grasped only after victory in an offensive. Every offensive operation must
be organized on our initiative and not launched under compulsion. Flexibility
in the employment of forces revolves around the effort to take the offensive,
and planning likewise is necessary chiefly in order to ensure success in
offensive operations. Measures of tactical defence are meaningless if they
are divorced from their role of giving either direct or indirect support
to an offensive. Quick decision refers to the tempo of an offensive, and
exterior lines refer to its scope. The offensive is the only means of destroying
the enemy and is also the principal means of self-preservation, while pure
defence and retreat can play only a temporary and partial role in
self-preservation and are quite useless for destroying the enemy.

The principle stated above is basically the same for both regular and guerrilla
war; it differs to some degree only in its form of expression. But in guerrilla
war it is both important and necessary to note this difference. It is precisely
this difference in form which distinguishes the operational methods of guerrilla
war from those of regular war. If we confuse the two different forms in
which the principle is expressed, victory in guerrilla war will be
impossible.

CHAPTER V


CO-ORDINATION WITH REGULAR WARFARE


The second problem of strategy in guerrilla warfare is its coordination with
regular warfare. It is a matter of clarifying the relation between guerrilla
and regular warfare on the operational level, in the light of the nature
of actual guerrilla operations. An understanding of this relation is very
important for effectiveness in defeating the enemy.

There are three kinds of co-ordination between guerrilla and regular warfare,
co-ordination in strategy, in campaigns and in battles.

Taken as a whole, guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines, which cripples
the enemy, pins him down, disrupts his supply lines and inspires the regular
forces and the people throughout the country, is co-ordinated with regular
warfare in strategy. Take the case of the guerrilla warfare in the three
northeastern provinces. Of course, the question of co-ordination did not
arise before the nation-wide War of Resistance, but since the war began the
significance of such coordination has become obvious. Every enemy soldier
the guerrillas kill there, every bullet they make the enemy expend, every
enemy soldier they stop from advancing south of the Great Wall, can be reckoned
a contribution to the total strength of the resistance. It is, moreover,
clear that they are having a demoralizing effect on the whole enemy army
and all Japan and a heartening effect on our whole army and people. Still
clearer is the role in strategic co-ordination played by the guerrilla warfare
along the Peiping-Suiyuan, Peiping-Hankow, Tientsin-Pukow, Tatung-Puchow,
Chengting-Taiyuan and Shanghai-Hangchow Railways. Not only are the guerrilla
units performing the function of co-ordination with the regular forces in
our present strategic defensive, when the enemy is on the strategic offensive;
not only will they co-ordinate with the regular forces in disrupting the
enemy's hold on the occupied territory, after he concludes his strategic
offensive and switches to the safeguarding of his gains; they will also
co-ordinate with the regular forces in driving out the enemy forces and
recovering all the lost territories, when the regular forces launch the strategic
counter-offensive. The great role of guerrilla warfare in strategic coordination
must not be overlooked. The commanders both of the guerrilla units and of
the regular forces must clearly understand this role.

In addition, guerrilla warfare performs the function of coordination with
regular warfare in campaigns. For instance, in the campaign at Hsinkou, north
of Taiyuan, the guerrillas played a remarkable role in co-ordination both
north and south of Yenmenkuan by wrecking the Tatung-Puchow Railway and the
motor roads running through Pinghsingkuan and Yangfangkou. Or take another
instance. After the enemy occupied Fenglingtu, guerrilla warfare, which was
already widespread throughout Shansi Province and was conducted mainly by
the regular forces, played an even greater role through co-ordination with
the defensive campaigns west of the Yellow River in Shensi Province and south
of the Yellow River in Honan Province. Again, when the enemy attacked southern
Shantung, the guerrilla warfare in the five provinces of northern China
contributed a great deal through co-ordination with the campaigns of our
army. In performing a task of this sort, the leaders of each guerrilla base
behind the enemy lines, or the commanders of a guerrilla formation temporarily
dispatched there, must dispose their forces well and, by adopting different
tactics suited to the time and place, move energetically against the enemy's
most vital and vulnerable spots in order to cripple him, pin him down, disrupt
his supply lines, inspire our armies campaigning on the interior lines, and
so fulfil their duty of co-ordinating with the campaign. If each guerrilla
zone or unit goes it alone without giving any attention to co-ordinating
with the campaigns of the regular forces, its role in strategic co-ordination
will lose a great deal of its significance, although it will still play some
such role in the general strategy. All guerrilla commanders should give this
point serious attention. To achieve co-ordination in campaigns, it is absolutely
necessary for all larger guerrilla units and guerrilla formations to have
radio equipment.

Finally, co-ordination with the regular forces in battles, in actual fighting
on the battlefield, is the task of all guerrilla units in the vicinity of
an interior-line battlefield. Of course, this applies only to guerrilla units
operating close to the regular forces or to units of regulars dispatched
on temporary guerrilla missions. In such cases, a guerrilla unit has to perform
whatever task it is assigned by the commander of the regular forces, which
is usually to pin down some of the enemy's forces, disrupt his supply lines,
conduct reconnaissance, or act as guides for the regular forces. Even without
such an assignment the guerrilla unit should carry out these tasks on its
own initiative. To sit by idly, neither moving nor fighting, or to move about
without fighting, would be an intolerable attitude for a guerrilla unit.

CHAPTER VI


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF BASE AREAS 


The third problem of strategy in anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare is the
establishment of base areas, which is important and essential because of
the protracted nature and ruthlessness of the war. The recovery of our lost
territories will have to await the nation-wide strategic counter-offensive;
by then the enemy's front will have extended deep into central China and
cut it in two from north to south, and a part or even a greater part of our
territory will have fallen into the hands of the enemy and become his rear.
We shall have to extend guerrilla warfare all over this vast enemy-occupied
area, make a front out of the enemy's rear, and force him to fight ceaselessly
throughout the territory he occupies. Until such time as our strategic
counteroffensive is launched and so long as our lost territories are not
recovered, it will be necessary to persist in guerrilla warfare in the enemy's
rear, certainly for a fairly long time, though one cannot say definitely
for how long. This is why the war will be a protracted one. And in order
to safeguard his gains in the occupied areas, the enemy is bound to step
up his anti-guerrilla measures and, especially after the halting of his strategic
offensive, to embark on relentless suppression of the guerrillas. With
ruthlessness thus added to protractedness, it will be impossible to sustain
guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines without base areas.

What, then, are these base areas? They are the strategic bases on which the
guerrilla forces rely in performing their strategic tasks and achieving the
object of preserving and expanding themselves and destroying and driving
out the enemy. Without such strategic bases, there will be nothing to depend
on in carrying out any of our strategic tasks or achieving the aim of the
war. It is a characteristic of guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines that
it is fought without a rear, for the guerrilla forces are severed from the
country's general rear. But guerrilla warfare could not last long or grow
without base areas. The base areas, indeed, are its rear.

History knows many peasant wars of the "roving rebel" type, but none of them
ever succeeded. In the present age of advanced communications and technology,
it would be all the more groundless to imagine that one can win victory by
fighting in the manner of roving rebels. However, this roving-rebel idea
still exists among impoverished peasants, and in the minds of guerrilla
commanders it becomes the view that base areas are neither necessary nor
important. Therefore ridding the minds of guerrilla commanders of this idea
is a prerequisite for deciding on a policy of establishing base areas. The
question of whether or not to have base areas and of whether or not to regard
them as important, in other words, the conflict between the idea of establishing
base areas and that of fighting like roving rebels, arises in all guerrilla
warfare, and, to a certain extent, our anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare is
no exception. Therefore the struggle against the roving-rebel ideology is
an inevitable process. Only when this ideology is thoroughly overcome and
the policy of establishing base areas is mutated and applied will there be
conditions favourable for the maintenance of guerrilla warfare over a long
period.

Now that the necessity and importance of base areas have been made clear,
let us pass on to the following problems which must be understood and solved
when it comes to establishing the base areas. These problems are the types
of base areas, the guerrilla zones and the base areas, the conditions for
establishing base areas, their consolidation and expansion, and the forms
in which we and the enemy encircle one another.

1. THE TYPES OF BASE AREAS


Base areas in anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare are mainly of three types,
those in the mountains, those on the plains and those in the river-lake-estuary
regions.

The advantage of setting up base areas in mountainous regions is obvious,
and those which have been, are being or will be established in the Changpai,
[1] Wutai, [2] Taihang,
[3] Taishan, [4] Yenshan
[5] and Maoshan [6] Mountains
all belong to this type. They are all places where anti-Japanese guerrilla
warfare can be maintained for the longest time and are important strongholds
for the War of Resistance. We must develop guerrilla warfare and set up base
areas in all the mountainous regions behind the enemy lines.

Of course, the plains are less suitable than the mountains, but it is by
no means impossible to develop guerrilla warfare or establish any base areas
there. Indeed, the widespread guerrilla warfare in the plains of Hopei and
of northern and northwestern Shantung proves that it is possible to develop
guerrilla warfare in the plains. While there is as yet no evidence on the
possibility of setting up base areas there and maintaining them for long,
it has been proved that the setting up of temporary base areas is possible,
and it should be possible to set up base areas for small units or for seasonal
use. On the one hand, the enemy does not have enough troops at his disposal
and is pursuing a policy of unparalleled brutality, and on the other hand,
China has a vast territory and vast numbers of people who are resisting Japan;
the objective conditions for spreading guerrilla warfare and setting up temporary
base areas in the plains are therefore fulfilled. Given competent military
command, it should of course be possible to establish bases for small guerrilla
units there, bases which are long-term but not
fixed.[7] Broadly speaking, when the strategic
offensive of the enemy is brought to a halt and he enters the stage of
safeguarding his occupied areas, he will undoubtedly launch savage attacks
on all the guerrilla base areas, and those in the plains will naturally be
the first to bear the brunt. The large guerrilla formations operating on
the plains will be unable to keep on fighting there for long and will gradually
have to move up into the mountains as the circumstances require, as for instance,
from the Hopei Plain to the Wutai and Taihang Mountains, or from the Shantung
Plain to Taishan Mountain and the Shantung Peninsula in the east. But in
the circumstances of our national war it is not impossible for numerous small
guerrilla units to keep going in various counties over the vast plains and
adopt a fluid way of fighting, i.e., by shifting their bases from
place to place. It is definitely possible to conduct seasonal guerrilla warfare
by taking advantage of the "green curtain" of tall crops in summer and of
the frozen rivers in winter. As the enemy has no strength to spare now and
will never be able to attend to everything even when he has the strength
to spare, it is absolutely necessary for us to decide on the policy, for
the present, of spreading guerrilla warfare far and wide and setting up temporary
base areas in the plains and, for the future, of preparing to keep up guerrilla
warfare by small units, if only seasonally, and of creating base areas which
are not fixed.

Objectively speaking, the possibilities of developing guerrilla warfare and
establishing base areas are greater in the river-lake-estuary regions than
in the plains, though less than in the mountains. The dramatic battles fought
by "pirates" and "water-bandits", of which our history is full, and the guerrilla
warfare round the Hunghu Lake kept up for several years in the Red Army period,
both testify to the possibility of developing guerrilla warfare and of
establishing base areas in the river-lake-estuary regions. So far, however,
the political parties and the masses who are resisting Japan have given this
possibility little attention. Though the subjective conditions are as yet
lacking, we should undoubtedly turn our attention to this possibility and
start working on it. As one aspect in the development of our nation-wide
guerrilla warfare, we should effectively organize guerrilla warfare in the
Hungtse Lake region north of the Yangtse River, in the Taihu Lake region
south of the Yangtse, and in all river-lake-estuary regions in the enemy-occupied
areas along the rivers and on the seacoast, and we should create permanent
base areas in and near such places. By overlooking this aspect we are virtually
providing the enemy with water transport facilities; this is a gap in our
strategic plan for the War of Resistance which must be filled in good time.

2. GUERRILLA ZONES AND BASE AREAS


In guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines, there is a difference between
guerrilla zones and base areas. Areas which are surrounded by the enemy but
whose central parts are not occupied or have been recovered, like some counties
in the Wutai mountain region (i.e., the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei border
area) and also some places in the Taihang and Taishan mountain regions, are
ready-made bases for the convenient use of guerrilla units in developing
guerrilla warfare. But elsewhere in these areas the situation is different,
as for instance in the eastern and northern sections of the Wutai mountain
region, which include parts of western Hopei and southern Chahar, and in
many places east of Paoting and west of Tsangchow. When guerrilla warfare
began, the guerrillas could not completely occupy these places but could
only make frequent raids; they are areas which are held by the guerrillas
when they are there and by the puppet regime when they are gone, and are
therefore not yet guerrilla bases but only what may be called guerrilla zones.
Such guerrilla zones will be transformed into base areas when they have gone
through the necessary processes of guerrilla warfare, that is, when large
numbers of enemy troops have been annihilated or defeated there, the puppet
regime has been destroyed, the masses have been roused to activity, anti-Japanese
mass organizations have been formed, people's local armed forces have been
developed, and anti-Japanese political power has been established. By the
expansion of our base areas we mean the addition of areas such as these to
the bases already established.

In some places, for example, eastern Hopei, the whole area of guerrilla
operations has been a guerrilla zone from the very beginning. The puppet
regime is of long standing there, and from the beginning the whole area of
operations has been a guerrilla zone both for the people's armed forces that
have grown out of local uprisings and for the guerrilla detachments dispatched
from the Wutai Mountains. At the outset of their activities, all they could
do was to choose some fairly good spots there as temporary rear or base areas.
Such places will not be transformed from guerrilla zones into relatively
stable base areas until the enemy forces are destroyed and the work of arousing
the people is in full swing.

Thus the transformation of a guerrilla zone into a base area is an arduous
creative process, and its accomplishment depends on the extent to which the
enemy is destroyed and the masses are aroused.

Many regions will remain guerrilla zones for a long time. In these regions
the enemy will not be able to set up stable puppet regimes, however much
he tries to maintain control, while we, on our part, will not be able to
achieve the aim of establishing anti-Japanese political power, however much
we develop guerrilla warfare. Examples of this kind are to be found in the
enemy-occupied regions along the railway lines, in the neighbourhood of big
cities and in certain areas in the plains.

As for the big cities, the railway stops and the areas in the plains which
are strongly garrisoned by the enemy, guerrilla warfare can only extend to
the fringes and not right into these places which have relatively stable
puppet regimes. This is another kind of situation.

Mistakes in our leadership or strong enemy pressure may cause a reversal
of the state of affairs described above, i.e., a guerrilla base
may turn into a guerrilla zone, and a guerrilla zone may turn into an area
under relatively stable enemy occupation. Such changes are possible, and
they deserve special vigilance on the part of guerrilla commanders.

Therefore, as a result of guerrilla warfare and the struggle between us and
the enemy, the entire enemy-occupied territory will fall into the following
three categories: first, anti-Japanese bases held by our guerrilla units
and our organs of political power; second, areas held by Japanese imperialism
and its puppet regimes; and third, intermediate zones contested by both sides,
namely, guerrilla zones. Guerrilla commanders have the duty to expand the
first and third categories to the maximum and to reduce the second category
to the minimum. This is the strategic task of guerrilla warfare.

3. CONDITIONS FOR ESTABLISHING BASE AREAS


The fundamental conditions for establishing a base area are that there should
be anti-Japanese armed forces, that these armed forces should be employed
to inflict defeats on the enemy and that they should arouse the people to
action. Thus the establishment of a base area is first and foremost a matter
of building an armed force. Leaders in guerrilla war must devote their energy
to building one or more guerrilla units, and must gradually develop them
in the course of struggle into guerrilla formations or even into units and
formations of regular troops. The building up of an armed force is the key
to establishing a base area; if there is no armed force or if the armed force
is weak, nothing can be done. This constitutes the first condition.

The second indispensable condition for establishing a base area is that the
armed forces should be used in co-ordination with the people to defeat the
enemy. All places under enemy control are enemy, and not guerrilla,
base areas, and obviously cannot be transformed into guerrilla base areas
unless the enemy is defeated. Unless we repulse the enemy's attacks and defeat
him, even places held by the guerrillas will come under enemy control, and
then it will be impossible to establish base areas.

The third indispensable condition for establishing a base area is the use
of all our strength, including our armed forces, to arouse the masses for
struggle against Japan. In the course of this struggle we must arm the people,
i.e., organize self-defence corps and guerrilla units. In the course
of this struggle, we must form mass organizations, we must organize the workers,
peasants, youth, women, children, merchants and professional people--according
to the degree of their political consciousness and fighting enthusiasm--into
the various mass organizations necessary for the struggle against Japanese
aggression, and we must gradually expand them. Without organization, the
people cannot give effect to their anti-Japanese strength. In the course
of this struggle, we must weed out the open and the hidden traitors, a task
which can be accomplished only by relying on the strength of the people.
In this struggle, it is particularly important to arouse the people to establish,
or to consolidate, their local organs of anti-Japanese political power. Where
the original Chinese organs of political power have not been destroyed by
the enemy, we must reorganize and strengthen them with the support of the
broad masses, and where they have been destroyed by the enemy, we should
rebuild them by the efforts of the masses. They are organs of political power
for carrying out the policy of the Anti-Japanese National United Front and
should unite all the forces of the people to fight against our sole enemy,
Japanese imperialism, and its jackals, the traitors and reactionaries.

A base area for guerrilla war can be truly established only with the gradual
fulfillment of the three basic conditions, i.e., only after the
anti-Japanese armed forces are built up, the enemy has suffered defeats and
the people are aroused.

Mention must also be made of geographical and economic conditions. As for
the former, we have already discussed three different categories in the earlier
section on the types of base areas, and here we need only mention one major
requirement, namely, that the area must be extensive. In places surrounded
by the enemy on all sides, or on three sides, the mountainous regions naturally
offer the best conditions for setting up base areas which can hold out for
a long time, but the main thing is that there must be enough room for the
guerrillas to maneuver, namely, the areas have to be extensive. Given an
extensive area, guerrilla warfare can be developed and sustained even in
the plains, not to mention the river-lake-estuary regions. By and large,
the vastness of China's territory and the enemy's shortage of troops provide
guerrilla warfare in China with this condition. This is an important, even
a primary condition, as far as the possibility of waging guerrilla warfare
is concerned, and small countries like Belgium which lack this condition
have few or no such possibilities.[8] In China,
this condition is not something which has to be striven for, nor does it
present a problem; it is there physically, waiting only to be exploited.

So far as their physical setting is concerned, the economic conditions resemble
the geographical conditions. For now we are discussing the establishment
of base areas not in a desert, where no enemy is to be found, but behind
the enemy lines; every place the enemy can penetrate already has its Chinese
inhabitants and an economic basis for subsistence, so that the question of
choice of economic conditions in establishing base areas simply does not
arise. Irrespective of the economic conditions, we should do our utmost to
develop guerrilla warfare and set up permanent or temporary base areas in
all places where Chinese inhabitants and enemy forces are to be found. In
a political sense, however, the economic conditions do present a problem,
a problem of economic policy which is of immense importance to the establishment
of base areas. The economic policy of the guerrilla base areas must follow
the principles of the Anti-Japanese National United Front by equitably
distributing the financial burden and protecting commerce. Neither the local
organs of political power nor the guerrilla units must violate these principles,
or otherwise the establishment of base areas and the maintenance of guerrilla
warfare would be adversely affected. The equitable distribution of the financial
burden means that "those with money should contribute money", while the peasants
should supply the guerrilla units with grain within certain limits. The
protection of commerce means that the guerrilla units should be highly
disciplined and that the confiscation of shops, except those owned by proved
traitors, should be strictly prohibited. This is no easy matter, but the
policy is set and must be put into effect.

4. THE CONSOLIDATION AND EXPANSION OF BASE AREAS


In order to confine the enemy invaders to a few strongholds, that is, to
the big cities and along the main communication lines, the guerrillas must
do all they can to extend guerrilla warfare from their base areas as widely
as possible and hem in all the enemy's strongholds, thus threatening his
existence and shaking his morale while expanding the base areas. This is
essential. In this context, we must oppose conservatism in guerrilla warfare.
Whether originating in the desire for an easy life or in overestimation of
the enemy's strength, conservatism can only bring losses in the War of Resistance
and is harmful to guerrilla warfare and to the base areas themselves. At
the same time, we must not forget the consolidation of the base areas, the
chief task being to arouse and organize the masses and to train guerrilla
units and local armed forces. Such consolidation is needed for maintaining
protracted warfare and also for expansion, and in its absence energetic expansion
is impossible. If we attend only to expansion and forget about consolidation
in our guerrilla warfare, we shall be unable to withstand the enemy's attacks,
and consequently not only forfeit the possibility of expansion but also endanger
the very existence of the base areas. The correct principle is expansion
with consolidation, which is a good method and allows us to take the offensive
or the defensive as we choose. Given a protracted war, the problem of
consolidating and expanding base areas constantly arises for every guerrilla
unit. The concrete solution depends, of course, on the circumstances. At
one time, the emphasis may be on expansion, i.e., on expanding the
guerrilla zones and increasing the number of guerrillas. At another, the
emphasis may be on consolidation, i.e., on organizing the masses
and training the troops. As expansion and consolidation differ in nature,
and as the military dispositions and other tasks will differ accordingly,
an effective solution of the problem is possible only if we alternate the
emphasis according to time and circumstances.

5. FORMS IN WHICH WE AND THE ENEMY ENCIRCLE ONE
  ANOTHER


Taking the War of Resistance as a whole, there is no doubt that we are
strategically encircled by the enemy, because he is on the strategic offensive
and is operating on exterior lines while we are on the strategic defensive
and are operating on interior lines. This is the first form of enemy
encirclement. We on our part encircle each of the enemy columns advancing
on us along separate routes, because we apply the policy of the offensive
and of exterior-line operations in campaigns and battles by using numerically
preponderant forces against these enemy columns advancing on us from exterior
lines. This is the first form of our encirclement of the enemy. Next, if
we consider the guerrilla base areas in the enemy's rear, each area taken
singly is surrounded by the enemy on all sides, like the Wutai mountain region,
or on three sides, like the northwestern Shansi area. This is the second
form of enemy encirclement. However, if one considers all the guerrilla base
areas together and in their relation to the battle fronts of the regular
forces, one can see that we in turn surround a great many enemy forces. In
Shansi Province, for instance, we have surrounded the Tatung-Puchow Railway
on three sides (the east and west flanks and the southern end) and the city
of Taiyuan on all sides; and there are many similar instances in Hopei and
Shantung Provinces. This is the second form of our encirclement of the enemy.
Thus there are two forms of encirclement by the enemy forces and two forms
of encirclement by our own--rather like a game of
weichi.[9] Campaigns and battles
fought by the two sides resemble the capturing of each other's pieces, and
the establishment of strongholds by the enemy and of guerrilla base areas
by us resembles moves to dominate spaces on the board. It is in the matter
of "dominating the spaces" that the great strategic role of guerrilla base
areas in the rear of the enemy is revealed. We are raising this question
in the War of Resistance in order that the nation's military authorities
and the guerrilla commanders in all areas should place on the agenda the
development of guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines and the establishment
of base areas wherever possible, and carry this out as a strategic task.
If on the international plane we can create an anti-Japanese front in the
Pacific region, with China as one strategic unit, and the Soviet Union and
other countries which may join it as other strategic units, we shall then
have one more form of encirclement against the enemy than he has against
us and bring about exterior-line operations in the Pacific region by which
to encircle and destroy fascist Japan. To be sure, this is of little practical
significance at present, but such a prospect is not impossible.

CHAPTER VII


THE STRATEGIC DEFENSIVE AND THE STRATEGIC OFFENSIVE IN GUERRILLA
  WAR 


The fourth problem of strategy in guerrilla war concerns the strategic defensive
and the strategic offensive. This is the problem of how the policy of offensive
warfare, which we mentioned in our discussion of the first problem, is to
be carried out in practice, when we are on the defensive and when we are
on the offensive in our guerrilla warfare against Japan.

Within the nation-wide strategic defensive or strategic offensive (to be
more exact, the strategic counter-offensive), small-scale strategic defensives
and offensives take place in and around each guerrilla base area. By strategic
defensive we mean our strategic situation and policy when the enemy is on
the offensive and we are on the defensive; by strategic offensive we mean
our strategic situation and policy when the enemy is on the defensive and
we are on the offensive.

1. THE STRATEGIC DEFENSIVE IN GUERRILLA WAR


After guerrilla warfare has broken out and grown to a considerable extent,
the enemy will inevitably attack the guerrilla base areas, especially in
the period when his strategic offensive against the country as a whole is
brought to an end and he adopts the policy of safeguarding his occupied areas.
It is essential to recognize the inevitability of such attacks, for otherwise
the guerrilla commanders will be caught wholly unprepared, and in the face
of heavy enemy attacks they will undoubtedly become alarmed and confused
and their forces will be routed.

To wipe out the guerrillas and their base areas, the enemy frequently resorts
to converging attacks. For instance, in each of the four or five "punitive
expeditions" directed against the Wutai mountain region, the enemy made a
planned advance in three, four or even six or seven columns simultaneously.
The larger the scale of the guerrilla fighting, the more important the position
of the base areas, and the greater the threat to the enemy's strategic centres
and vital communication lines, the fiercer will be the enemy's attacks.
Therefore, the fiercer the enemy's attacks on a guerrilla area, the greater
the indication that the guerrilla warfare there is successful and is being
effectively coordinated with the regular fighting.

When the enemy launches a converging attack in several columns, the guerrilla
policy should be to smash it by counter-attack. It can be easily smashed
if each advancing enemy column consists of only one unit, whether big or
small, has no follow-up units and is unable to station troops along the route
of advance, construct blockhouses or build motor roads. When the enemy launches
a converging attack, he is on the offensive and operating on exterior lines,
while we are on the defensive and operating on interior lines. As for our
dispositions, we should use our secondary forces to pin down several enemy
columns, while our main force should launch surprise attacks (chiefly in
the form of ambushes) in a campaign or battle against a single enemy column,
striking it when it is on the move. The enemy, though strong, will be weakened
by repeated surprise attacks and will often withdraw when he is halfway;
the guerrilla units can then make more surprise attacks during the pursuit
and weaken him still further. The enemy generally occupies the county towns
or other towns in our base areas before he stops his offensive or begins
to withdraw, and we should encircle these towns, cutting off his grain supply
and severing his communications, so that when he cannot hold out and begins
to retreat, we can seize the opportunity to pursue and attack him. After
smashing one column, we should shift our forces to smash another, and, by
smashing them one by one, shatter the converging attack.

A big base area like the Wutai mountain region forms a military area, which
is divided into four or five, or even more, military subareas, each with
its own armed forces operating independently. By employing the tactics described
above, these forces have often smashed the enemy's attacks simultaneously
or successively.

In our plan of operations against a converging attack by the enemy, we generally
place our main force on interior lines. But when we have the strength to
spare, we should use our secondary forces (such as the county or the district
guerrilla units, or even detachments of the main force) on exterior lines
to disrupt the enemy's communications and pin down his reinforcements. Should
the enemy stay put in our base area, we may reverse the tactics, namely,
leave some of our forces in the base area to invest the enemy while employing
the main force to attack the region whence he has come and to step up our
activities there, in order to induce him to withdraw and attack our main
force; this is the tactic of "relieving the state of Chao by besieging the
state of Wei".[10]

In the course of operations against a converging attack, the local anti-Japanese
self-defence corps and all the mass organizations should mobilize for action
and in every way help our troops to fight the enemy. In fighting the enemy,
it is important both to enforce local martial law and, as far as possible,
to "strengthen our defence works and clear the fields". The purpose of the
former is to suppress traitors and prevent the enemy from getting information,
and of the latter to assist our own operations (by strengthening our defence
works) and prevent the enemy from getting food (by clearing the herds). "Clearing
the fields" means harvesting the crops as soon as they are ripe.

When the enemy retreats, he often burns down the houses in the cities and
towns he has occupied and razes the villages along his route, with the purpose
of destroying the guerrilla base areas; but in so doing he deprives himself
of shelter and food in his next offensive, and the damage recoils upon his
own head. This is a concrete illustration of what we mean by one and the
same thing having two contradictory aspects.

A guerrilla commander should not think of abandoning his base area and shifting
to another, unless it proves impossible, after repeated operations to smash
the enemy's heavy converging attacks. In these circumstances he must guard
against pessimism. So long as the leaders do not blunder in matters of principle,
it is generally possible to smash the converging attacks and hold on to the
base areas in the mountainous regions. It is only in the plains that, when
confronted by a heavy converging attack, the guerrilla commander should consider
other measures in the light of the specific circumstances, namely, leaving
many small units for scattered operations, while temporarily shifting large
guerrilla formations to some mountainous region, so that they can return
and resume their activities in the plains once the main forces of the enemy
move away.

Generally speaking, the Japanese cannot adopt the principle of blockhouse
warfare, which the Kuomintang employed in the days of the civil war, because
their forces are inadequate in relation to China's vast territory. However,
we should reckon with the possibility that they may use it to some extent
against those guerrilla base areas which pose a particular threat to their
vital positions, but even in such circumstances we should be prepared to
keep up guerrilla warfare in those areas. Since we have had the experience
of being able to maintain guerrilla warfare during the civil war, there is
not the slightest doubt of our greater capacity to do so in a national war.
Though, in point of relative military strength, the enemy can throw forces
that are vastly superior in quantity as well as in quality against some of
our base areas, there remain the insoluble national contradiction between
us and the enemy and the unavoidable weaknesses of his command. Our victories
are based on thorough work among the masses and flexible tactics in our
operations.

2. THE STRATEGIC OFFENSIVE IN GUERRILLA WAR


After we have smashed an enemy offensive and before the enemy starts a new
offensive, he is on the strategic defensive and we are on the strategic
offensive.

At such times our operational policy is not to attack enemy forces which
are entrenched in defensive positions and which we are not sure of defeating,
but systematically to destroy or drive out the small enemy units and puppet
forces in certain areas, which our guerrilla units are strong enough to deal
with, and to expand our areas, arouse the masses for struggle against Japan,
replenish and train our troops and organize new guerrilla units. If the enemy
still remains on the defensive when these tasks are under way, we can expand
our new areas still further and attack weakly garrisoned cities and communication
lines and hold them for as long as circumstances permit. These are all tasks
of the strategic offensive, and the purpose is to take advantage of the fact
that the enemy is on the defensive so that we may effectively build up our
own military and mass strength, effectively reduce the enemy's strength and
prepare to smash the enemy methodically and vigorously when he mounts an
offensive again.

It is essential to rest and train our troops, and the best time for doing
so is when the enemy is on the defensive. It is not a question of shutting
ourselves off from everything else for rest and training, but of funding
time for rest and training while expanding our areas, mopping up small enemy
units and arousing the people. This is usually also the time for tackling
the difficult problem of getting food supplies, bedding, clothing, etc.

It is also the time for destroying the enemy's communication lines on a large
scale, hampering his transport and giving direct support to the regular forces
in their campaigns.

At such times the guerrilla base areas, guerrilla zones and guerrilla units
are in high spirits, and the areas devastated by the enemy are gradually
rehabilitated and revived. The people in the enemy-occupied territories are
also delighted, and the fame of the guerrillas resounds everywhere. On the
other hand, in the camp of the enemy and his running dogs, the traitors,
panic and disintegration are mounting, while there is growing hatred of the
guerrillas and their base areas and preparations to deal with them are
intensified. During the strategic offensive, therefore, it is impermissible
for the guerrilla commanders to become so elated as to underrate the enemy
and forget to strengthen unity in their own ranks and to consolidate their
base areas and their forces. At such times, they must skilfully watch the
enemy's every move for signs of any new offensive against us, so that the
moment it comes they can wind up their strategic offensive in good order,
turn to the strategic defensive and thereby smash the enemy's offensive

CHAPTER VIII


DEVELOPMENT OF GUERRILLA WAR INTO MOBILE WAR


The fifth problem of strategy in guerrilla war against Japan is its development
into mobile war, a development which is necessary and possible because the
war is protracted and ruthless. If China could speedily defeat the Japanese
invaders and recover her lost territories, and if the war were neither protracted
nor ruthless, this would not be necessary. But as, on the contrary, the war
is protracted and ruthless, guerrilla warfare cannot adapt itself to such
a war except by developing into mobile warfare. Since the war is protracted
and ruthless, it is possible for the guerrilla units to undergo the necessary
steeling and gradually to transform themselves into regular forces, so that
their mode of operations is gradually regularized and guerrilla warfare develops
into mobile warfare. The necessity and possibility of this development must
be clearly recognized by the guerrilla commanders if they are to persist
in, and systematically carry out, the policy of turning guerrilla warfare
into mobile warfare.

In many places, such as the Wutai mountain region, the present guerrilla
warfare owes its growth to the strong detachments sent there by the regular
forces. The operations there, though generally of a guerrilla character,
have contained an element of mobile warfare from the very beginning. This
element will gradually increase as the war goes on. Herein lies the advantage
which makes possible the swift expansion of the present anti-Japanese guerrilla
warfare and its rapid development to a higher level; thus the conditions
for guerrilla warfare are far superior to what they were in the three
northeastern provinces.

To transform guerrilla units waging guerrilla warfare into regular forces
waging mobile warfare, two conditions are necessary--an increase in numbers,
and an improvement in quality. Apart from directly mobilizing the people
to join the forces, increased numbers can be attained by amalgamating small
units, while better quality depends on steeling the fighters and improving
their weapons in the course of the war.

In amalgamating small units, we must, on the one hand, guard against localism,
whereby attention is concentrated exclusively on local interests and
centralization is impeded, and, on the other, guard against the purely military
approach, whereby local interests are brushed aside.

Localism exists among the local guerrilla units and local governments, which
are frequently preoccupied with local considerations to the neglect of the
general interest, or which prefer to act each on its own because they are
unaccustomed to acting in larger groups. The commanders of the main guerrilla
units or of the guerrilla formations must take this into account and adopt
the method of gradual amalgamation of part of the local units, allowing the
localities to keep some of their forces and expand their guerrilla warfare;
the commanders should draw these units into joint operations and then bring
about their amalgamation without breaking up their original organization
or reshuffling their cadres, so that the small groups may integrate smoothly
into the larger group.

As against localism, the purely military approach represents the wrong viewpoint
held in the main forces by those who are bent on expanding their own strength
and who neglect to assist the local armed units. They do not realize that
the development of guerrilla warfare into mobile warfare means not the
abandonment of guerrilla warfare but the gradual formation, in the midst
of widespread guerrilla warfare, of a main force capable of conducting mobile
warfare, a force around which there must still be numerous guerrilla units
carrying on extensive guerrilla operations. These guerrilla units are powerful
auxiliaries to the main force and serve as inexhaustible reserves for its
continuous growth. Therefore, if a commander of a main force has made the
mistake of neglecting the interests of the local population and the local
government as a result of a purely military approach, he must correct it
in order that the expansion of the main force and the multiplication of the
local armed units may both receive due attention.

To raise the quality of the guerrilla units it is imperative to raise their
political and organizational level and improve their equipment, military
technique, tactics and discipline, so that they gradually pattern themselves
on the regular forces and shed their guerrilla ways. Politically, it is
imperative to get both the commanders and the fighters to realize the necessity
of raising the guerrilla units to the level of the regular forces, to encourage
them to strive towards this end, and to guarantee its attainment by means
of political work. Organizationally, it is imperative gradually to fulfil
all the requirements of a regular formation in the following respects--military
and political organs, staff and working methods, a regular supply system,
a medical service, etc. In the matter of equipment, it is imperative to acquire
better and more varied weapons and increase the supply of the necessary
communications equipment. In the matter of military technique and tactics,
it is imperative to raise the guerrilla units to the level required of a
regular formation. In the matter of discipline, it is imperative to raise
the level so that uniform standards are observed, every order is executed
without fail and all slackness is eliminated. To accomplish all these tasks
requires a prolonged effort, and it cannot be done overnight; but that is
the direction in which we must develop. Only thus can a main force be built
up in each guerrilla base area and mobile warfare emerge for more effective
attacks on the enemy. Where detachments or cadres have been sent in by the
regular forces, the goal can be achieved more easily. Hence all the regular
forces have the responsibility of helping the guerrilla units to develop
into regular units.

CHAPTER IX


THE RELATIONSHIP OF COMMAND


The last problem of strategy in guerrilla war against Japan concerns the
relationship of command. A correct solution of this problem is one of the
prerequisites for the unhampered development of guerrilla warfare.

Since guerrilla units are a lower level of armed organization characterized
by dispersed operations, the methods of command in guerrilla warfare do not
allow as high a degree of centralization as in regular warfare. If any attempt
is made to apply the methods of command in regular warfare to guerrilla warfare,
its great flexibility will inevitably be restricted and its vitality sapped.
A highly centralized command is in direct contradiction to the great flexibility
of guerrilla warfare and must not and cannot be applied to it.

However, guerrilla warfare cannot be successfully developed without some
centralized command. When extensive regular warfare and extensive guerrilla
warfare are going on at the same time, their operations must be properly
co-ordinated; hence the need for a command co-ordinating the two,
i.e., for a unified strategic command by the national general staff
and the war-zone commanders. In a guerrilla zone or guerrilla base area with
many guerrilla units, there are usually one or more guerrilla formations
(sometimes together with regular formations) which constitute the main force,
a number of other guerrilla units, big and small, which represent the
supplementary force, and many armed units composed of people not withdrawn
from production; the enemy forces there usually form a unified complex to
concert their operations against the guerrillas. Consequently, the problem
arises of setting up a unified or centralized command in such guerrilla zones
or base areas.

Hence, as opposed both to absolute centralization and to absolute
decentralization, the principle of command in guerrilla war should be centralized
strategic command and decentralized command in campaigns and battles.

Centralized strategic command includes the planning and direction of guerrilla
warfare as a whole by the state, the co-ordination of guerrilla warfare with
regular warfare in each war zone, and the unified direction of all the
anti-Japanese armed forces in each guerrilla zone or base area. Here lack
of harmony, unity and centralization is harmful, and every effort must be
made to ensure all three. In general matters, that is, matters of strategy,
the lower levels should report to the i higher and follow their instructions
so as to ensure concerted action. Centralization, however, stops at this
point, and it would likewise be harmful to go beyond it and interfere with
the lower levels in matters of detail like the specific dispositions for
a campaign or battle. For such details must be settled in the light of specific
conditions, which change from time to time and from place to place and are
quite beyond the knowledge of the distant higher levels of command. This
is what is meant by the principle of decentralized command in campaigns and
battles. The same principle generally applies in regular operations, especially
when communications are inadequate. In a word, it means guerrilla warfare
waged independently and with the initiative in our hands within the framework
of a unified strategy.

Where a guerrilla base area constitutes a military area divided into sub-areas,
each comprising several counties, each of which is again divided into districts,
the relationship between the various levels, from the headquarters of the
military area and sub-areas down to the county and district governments,
is one of consecutive subordination, and every armed force must, according
to its nature, be under the direct command of one of these. On the principle
that has been enunciated, in the relationship of command at these levels
matters of general policy should be centralized in the higher levels, while
actual operations should be carried out in the light of the specific
circumstances by the lower levels, which should have the right of independent
action. If a higher level has something to say about the actual operations
undertaken at a lower level, it can and should advance its views as
"instructions" but must not issue hard and fast "commands". The more extensive
the area, the more complex the situation and the greater the distance between
the higher and the lower levels, the more advisable it becomes to allow greater
independence to the lower levels in their actual operations and thus give
those operations a character conforming more closely to the local requirements,
so that the lower levels and the local personnel may develop the ability
to work independently, cope with complicated situations, and successfully
expand guerrilla warfare. For an armed unit or bigger formation which is
engaged in a concentrated operation, the principle to be applied is one of
centralization in its internal relationship of command, since the situation
is clear to the higher command; but the moment this unit or formation breaks
up for dispersed action, the principle of centralization in general matters
and of decentralization in details should be applied, for then the specific
situation cannot be clear to the higher command.

Absence of centralization where it is needed means negligence by the higher
levels or usurpation of authority by the lower levels, neither of which can
be tolerated in the relationship between higher and lower levels, especially
in the military sphere. If decentralization is not effected where it should
be, that means monopolization of power by the higher levels and lack of
initiative on the part of the lower levels, neither of which can be tolerated
in the relationship between higher and lower levels, especially in the command
of guerrilla warfare. The above principles constitute the only correct policy
for solving the problem of the relationship of command.

NOTES


1. The Changpai mountain range is situated on the northeastern
border of China. After the Japanese invasion on September 18, 1931, the region
became a base area for the anti-Japanese guerrillas led by the Chinese Communist
Party.

2. The Wutai mountain range is situated on the borders
between Shansi, Hopei and what was then Chahar Province. In October 1937
the Eighth Route Army led by the Chinese Communist Party started building
the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei anti-Japanese base area with the Wutai mountain region
as its centre.

3. The Taihang mountain range is situated on the borders
between Shansi, Hopei and Honan Provinces. In November 1937 the Eighth Route
Army started building the southeastern Shansi anti-Japanese base area with
the Taihang mountain region as its centre.

4. The Taishan Mountain is one of the chief peaks of the
Tai-Yi mountain range in central Shantung. In the winter of 1937 the guerrilla
forces led by the Communist Party started building the central Shantung
anti-Japanese base area with the Tai-Yi mountain region as its centre.

5. The Yenshan mountain range is situated on the border
of Hopei and what was then Jehol Province. In the summer of 1938 the Eighth
Route Army started building the eastern Hopei anti-Japanese base area with
the Yenshan mountain region as its centre.

6. The Maoshan Mountains are in southern Kiangsu. In June
1938 the New Fourth Army led by the Communist Party started building the
southern Kiangsu anti-Japanese base area with the Maoshan mountain region
as its centre.

7. Experience gained in the War of Resistance proved that
it was possible to establish long-term and, in many places, stable base areas
in the plains. This was due to their vastness and big populations, the
correctness of the Communist Party's policies, the extensive mobilization
of the people and the enemy's shortage of troops. Comrade Mao Tse-tung affirmed
this possibility more definitely in later directives.

8. Ever since the end of World War II, the national and
democratic revolutionary movement has been surging forward in Asia, Africa
and Latin America. In many countries the people, led by their own revolutionary
and progressive forces, have carried on sustained armed struggles to overthrow
the dark rule of imperialism and reaction. This demonstrates that in the
new historical circumstances--when the socialist camp, the revolutionary
forces of the people in the colonial countries and the forces of the people
striving for democracy and progress in all countries are taking giant strides
forward, when the world capitalist system is weakening still further, and
when the colonial rule of imperialism is heading for disintegration--the
conditions under which the people of various countries conduct guerrilla
warfare today need not be quite the same as those which were necessary in
the days of the guerrilla warfare waged by the Chinese people against Japan.
In other words, guerrilla war can be victoriously waged in a county which
is not large in territory, as for instance, in Cuba, Algeria, Laos and southern
Viet Nam.

9. Weichi is an old Chinese game, in which the
two players try to encircle each ocher's pieces on the board. When a player's
pieces are encircled, they are counted as "dead" (captured). But if there
is a sufficient number of blank spaces among the encircled pieces, then the
latter are still "alive" (not captured).

10. In 353 BC the state of Wei laid siege to Hantan, capital
of the state of Chao. The king of the state of Chi, an ally of Chao, ordered
his generals Tien Chi and Sun Pin to aid Chao with their troops. Knowing
that the crack forces of Wei had entered Chao and left their own territory
weakly garrisoned, General Sun Pin attacked the state of Wei whose troops
withdrew to defend their own country. Taking advantage of their exhaustion,
the troops of Chi engaged and routed them at Kueiling (northeast of the present
Horse County in Shantung). The siege of Hanean, capital of Chao, was thus
lifted. Since then Chinese strategists have referred to similar tactics as
"relieving the state of Chao by besieging the state of Wei".

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On Protracted War







ON PROTRACTED WAR 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON PROTRACTED WAR


May 1938

[This series of lectures was delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung from May
26 to June 3, 1938, at the Yenan Association for the Study of the War of
Resistance Against Japan.] 
  

STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM


1. It will soon be July 7, the first anniversary of the great War of Resistance
Against Japan. Rallying in unity, persevering in resistance and persevering
in the united front, the forces of the whole nation have been valiantly fighting
the enemy for almost a year. The people of the whole world are attentively
following this war, which has no precedent in the history of the East, and
which will go down as a great war in world history too. Every Chinese suffering
from the disasters of the war and fighting for the survival of his nation
daily yearns for victory. But what actually will be the course of the war?
Can we win? Can we win quickly? Many people are talking about a protracted
war, but why is it a protracted war? How to carry on a protracted war? Many
people are talking about Final victory, but why will final victory be ours?
How shall we strive for final victory? Not everyone has found answers to
these questions; in fact, to this day most people have not done so. Therefore
the defeatist exponents of the theory of national subjugation have come forward
to tell people that China will be subjugated, that final victory will not
be China's. On the other hand, some impetuous friends have come forward to
tell people that China will win very quickly without having to exert any
great effort. But are these views correct? We have said all along they are
not. However, most people have not yet grasped what we have been saying.
This is partly because we did not do enough propaganda and explanatory work,
and partly because the development of objective events had not yet fully
and clearly revealed their inherent nature and their features to the people,
who were thus not in a position to foresee the over-all trend and the outcome
and hence to decide on a complete set of policies and tactics. Now things
are better, the experience of ten months of war has been quite sufficient
to explode the utterly baseless theory of national subjugation and to dissuade
our impetuous friends from their theory of quick victory. In these circumstances
many people are asking for a comprehensive explanation. All the more so with
regard to protracted war, not only because of the opposing theories of national
subjugation and quick victory but also because of the shallow understanding
of its nature. "Our four hundred million people have been making a concerted
effort since the Lukouchiao Incident, and the final victory will belong to
China." This formula has a wide currency. It is a correct formula but needs
to be given more content. Our perseverance in the War of Resistance and in
the united front has been possible because of many factors. Internally, they
comprise all the political parties in the country from the Communist Party
to the Kuomintang, all the people from the workers and peasants to the
bourgeoisie, and all the armed forces from the regular forces to the guerrillas;
internationally, they range from the land of socialism to justice-loving
people in all countries; in the camp of the enemy, they range from those
people in Japan who are against the war to those Japanese soldiers at the
front who are against the war. In short, all these forces have contributed
in varying degrees to our War of Resistance. Every man with a conscience
should salute them. We Communists, together with all the other ant-Japanese
political parties and the whole people, have no other course than to strive
to unite all forces for the defeat of the diabolical Japanese aggressors.
July 1 this year will be the 17th anniversary of the founding
of the Communist Party of China. A serious study of protracted war is necessary
in order to enable every Communist to play a better and greater part in the
War of Resistance. Therefore my lectures will be devoted to such a study.
I shall try to speak on all the problems relevant to the protracted war,
but I cannot possibly go into everything in one series of lectures.

2. All the experience of the ten months of war proves the error both of the
theory of China's inevitable subjugation and of the theory of China's quick
victory. The former gives rise to the tendency to compromise and the latter
to the tendency to underestimate the enemy. Both approaches to the problem
are subjective and one-sided, or, in a word, unscientific.

3. Before the War of Resistance, there was a great deal of talk about national
subjugation. Some said, "China is inferior in arms and is bound to lose in
a war." Others said, "If China offers armed resistance, she is sure to become
another Abyssinia." Since the beginning of the war, open talk of national
subjugation has disappeared, but secret talk, and quite a lot of it too,
still continues. For instance, from time to time an atmosphere of compromise
arises and the advocates of compromise argue that "the continuance of the
war spells subjugation".[1] In a letter from Hunan
a student has written:

  In the countryside everything seems difficult. Doing propaganda work on my
  own, I have to talk to people when and where I find them. The people I have
  talked to are by no means ignoramuses; they all have some understanding of
  what is going on and are very interested in what I have to say. But when
  I run into my own relatives, they always say: "China cannot win; she is doomed."
  They make one sick ! Fortunately, they do not go around spreading their views,
  otherwise things would really be bad. The peasants would naturally put more
  stock in what they say.


Such exponents of the theory of China's inevitable subjugation form the social
basis of the tendency to compromise. They are to be found everywhere in China,
and therefore the problem of compromise is liable to crop up within the
anti-Japanese front at any time and will probably remain with us right until
the end of the war. Now that Hsuchow has fallen and Wuhan is in danger, it
will not be unprofitable, I think, to knock the bottom out of the theory
of national subjugation.

4. During these ten months of war all kinds of views which are indicative
of impetuosity have also appeared. For instance, at the outset of the war
many people were groundlessly optimistic, underestimating Japan and even
believing that the Japanese could not get as far as Shansi. Some belittled
the strategic role of guerrilla warfare in the War of Resistance and doubted
the proposition, "With regard to the whole, mobile warfare is primary and
guerrilla warfare supplementary; with regard to the parts, guerrilla warfare
is primary and mobile warfare supplementary." They disagreed with the Eighth
Route Army's strategy, "Guerrilla warfare is basic, but lose no chance for
mobile warfare under favourable conditions", which they regarded as a
"mechanical" approach.[2] During the battle of
Shanghai some people said: "If we can fight for just three months, the
international situation is bound to change, the Soviet Union is bound to
send troops, and the war will be over." They pinned their hopes for the future
of the War of Resistance chiefly on foreign
aid.[3] After the Taierhchuang
victory,[4] some people maintained that the Hsuchow
campaign should be fought as a "quasi-decisive campaign" and that the policy
of protracted war should be changed. They said such things as, "This campaign
marks the last desperate struggle of the enemy," or, "If we win, the Japanese
warlords will be demoralized and able only to await their Day of
Judgement."[5] The victory at Pinghsingkuan turned
some people's heads, and further victory at Taierhchuang has turned more
people's heads. Doubts have arisen as to whether the enemy will attack Wuhan.
Many people think "probably not", and many others "definitely not". Such
doubts may affect all major issues. For instance, is our anti-Japanese strength
already sufficient? Some people may answer affirmatively, for our present
strength is already sufficient to check the enemy's advance, so why increase
it? Or, for instance, is the slogan "Consolidate and expand the Anti-Japanese
National United Front" still correct? Some people may answer negatively,
for the united front in its present state is already strong enough to repulse
the enemy, so why consolidate and expand it? Or, for instance, should our
efforts in diplomacy and international propaganda be intensified? Here again
the answer may be in the negative. Or, for instance, should we proceed in
earnest to reform the army system and the system of government, develop the
mass movement, enforce education for national defence, suppress traitors
and Trotskyites, develop war industries and improve the people's livelihood?
Or, for instance, are the slogans calling for the defence of Wuhan, of Canton
and of the Northwest and for the vigorous development of guerrilla warfare
in the enemy's rear still correct? The answers might all be in the negative.
There are even some people who, the moment a slightly favourable turn occurs
in the war situation, are prepared to intensify the "friction" between the
Kuomintang and the Communist Party, diverting attention from external to
internal matters. This almost invariably occurs whenever a comparatively
big battle is won or the enemy's advance comes to a temporary halt. All the
above can be termed political and military short-sightedness. Such talk,
however plausible, is actually specious and groundless. To sweep away such
verbiage should help the victorious prosecution of the War of Resistance.

5. The question now is: Will China be subjugated? The answer is, No,
she will not be subjugated, but will win final victory. Can China win quickly?
The answer is, No, she cannot win quickly, and the War of Resistance will
be a protracted war.

6. As early as two years ago, we broadly indicated the main arguments on
these questions. On July 16, 1936, five months before the Sian Incident and
twelve months before the Lukouchiao Incident, in an interview with the American
correspondent, Mr. Edgar Snow, I made a general estimate of the situation
with regard to war between China and Japan and advanced various principles
for winning victory. The following excerpts may serve as a reminder:

Question: Under what conditions do you think China can defeat and
  destroy the forces of Japan?
  
Answer: Three conditions are required: first, the establishment
  of an anti-Japanese united front in China; second, the formation of an
  international anti-Japanese united front; third, the rise of the revolutionary
  movement of the people in Japan and the Japanese colonies. From the standpoint
  of the Chinese people, the unity of the people of China is the most important
  of the three conditions.
  
Question: How long do you think such a war would last?
  
Answer: That depends on the strength of China's anti-Japanese united
  front and many other conditioning factors involving China and Japan. That
  is to say, apart from China's own strength, which is the main thing,
  international help to China and the help rendered by the revolution in Japan
  are also important. If China's anti-Japanese united front is greatly expanded
  and effectively organized horizontally and vertically, if the necessary help
  is given to China by those governments and peoples which recognize the Japanese
  imperialist menace to their own interests and if revolution comes quickly
  in Japan, the war will speedily be brought to an end and China will speedily
  win victory. If these conditions are not realized quickly, the war will be
  prolonged. But in the end, just the same, Japan will certainly be defeated
  and China will certainly be victorious. Only the sacrifices will be great
  and there will be a very painful period.
  
Question: What is your opinion of the probable course of development
  of such a war, politically and militarily?
  
Answer: Japan's continental policy is already fixed, and those who
  think they can halt the Japanese advance by making compromises with Japan
  at the expense of more Chinese territory and sovereign rights are indulging
  in mere fantasy. We definitely know that the lower Yangtse valley and our
  southern seaports are already included in the continental programme of Japanese
  imperialism. Moreover, Japan wants to occupy the Philippines, Siam, Indo-China,
  the Malay Peninsula and the Dutch East Indies in order to cut off other countries
  from China and monopolize the southwestern Pacific. This is Japan's maritime
  policy. In such a period, China will undoubtedly be in an extremely difficult
  position. But the majority of the Chinese people believe that such difficulties
  can be overcome; only the rich in the big port cities are defeatists because
  they are afraid of losing their property. Many people think it would be
  impossible for China to continue the war, once her coastline is blockaded
  by Japan. This is nonsense. To refute them we need only cite the war history
  of the Red Army. In the present War of Resistance Against Japan, China's
  position is much superior to that of the Red Army in the civil war. China
  is a vast country, and even if Japan should succeed in occupying a section
  of China with as many as 100 to 200 million people, we would still be far
  from defeated. We would still have ample strength to fight against Japan,
  while the Japanese would have to fight defensive battles in their rear throughout
  the war. The heterogeneity and uneven development of China's economy are
  rather advantageous in the war of resistance. For example, to sever Shanghai
  from the rest of China would definitely not be as disastrous to China as
  would be the severance of New York from the rest of the United States. Even
  if Japan blockades the Chinese coastline, it is impossible for her to blockade
  China's Northwest, Southwest and West. Thus, once more the central point
  of the problem is the unity of the entire Chinese people and the building
  up of a nation-wide anti-Japanese front. This is what we have long been
  advocating.
  
Question: If the war drags on for a long time and Japan is not
  completely defeated, would the Communist Party agree to the negotiation of
  a peace with Japan and recognize her rule in northeastern China?
  
Answer: No. Like the people of the whole country, the Chinese Communist
  Party will not allow Japan to retain an inch of Chinese territory.
  
Question: What, in your opinion, should be the main strategy and
  tactics to be followed in this "war of liberation"?
  
Answer: Our strategy should be to employ our main forces to operate
  over an extended and fluid front. To achieve success, the Chinese troops
  must conduct their warfare with a high degree of mobility on extensive
  battlefields, making swift advances and withdrawals, swift concentrations
  and dispersals. This means large-scale mobile warfare, and not positional
  warfare depending exclusively on defence works with deep trenches, high
  fortresses and successive rows of defensive positions. It does not mean the
  abandonment of all the vital strategic points, which should be defended by
  positional warfare as long as profitable. But the pivotal strategy must be
  mobile warfare. Positional warfare is also necessary, but strategically it
  is auxiliary and secondary. Geographically the theatre of the war is so vast
  that it is possible for us to conduct mobile warfare most effectively. In
  the face of the vigorous actions of our forces, the Japanese army will have
  to be cautious. Its war-machine is ponderous and slow-moving, with limited
  efficiency. If we concentrate our forces on a narrow front for a defensive
  war of attrition, we would be throwing away the advantages of our geography
  and economic organization and repeating the mistake of Abyssinia. In the
  early period of the war, we must avoid any major decisive battles, and must
  first employ mobile warfare gradually to break the morale and combat
  effectiveness of the enemy troops.
  
  Besides employing trained armies to carry on mobile warfare, we must organize
  great numbers of guerrilla units among the peasants. One should know that
  the anti-Japanese volunteer units in the three northeastern provinces are
  only a minor demonstration of the latent power of resistance that can be
  mobilized from the peasants of the whole country. The Chinese peasants have
  very great latent power; properly organized and directed, they can keep the
  Japanese army busy twenty-four hours a day and worry it to death. It must
  be remembered that the war will be fought in China, that is to say, the Japanese
  army will be entirely surrounded by the hostile Chinese people, it will be
  forced to move in all its provisions and guard them, it must use large numbers
  of troops to protect its lines of communications and constantly guard against
  attacks and it needs large forces to garrison Manchuria and Japan as well.
  
  In the course of the war, China will be able to capture many Japanese soldiers
  and seize many weapons and munitions with which to arm herself; at the same
  time China will win foreign aid to reinforce the equipment of her troops
  gradually. Therefore China will be able to conduct positional warfare in
  the latter period of the war and make positional attacks on the Japanese-occupied
  areas. Thus Japan's economy will crack under the strain of China's long
  resistance and the morale of the Japanese forces will break under the trial
  of innumerable battles. On the Chinese side, however, the growing latent
  power of resistance will be constantly brought into play and large numbers
  of revolutionary people will be pouring into the front lines to fight for
  their freedom. The combination of all these and other factors will enable
  us to make the final and decisive attacks on the fortifications and bases
  in the Japanese-occupied areas and drive the Japanese forces of aggression
  out of China.


The above views have been proved correct in the light of the experience of
the ten months of war and will also be borne out in the future.

7. As far back as August 25, 1937, less than two months after the Lukouchiao
Incident, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party clearly pointed
out in its "Resolution on the Present Situation and the Tasks of the Party":

  The military provocation by the Japanese aggressors at Lukouchiao and their
  occupation of Peiping and Tientsin represent only the beginning of their
  large-scale invasion of China south of the Great Wall. They have already
  begun their national mobilization for war. Their propaganda that they have
  "no desire to aggravate the situation" is only a smokescreen for further
  attacks.
  
  The resistance at Lukouchiao on July 7 marked the starting point of China's
  national War of Resistance.
  
  Thus a new stage has opened in China's political situation, the stage of
  actual resistance. The stage of preparation for resistance is over. In the
  present stage the central task is to mobilize all the nation's forces for
  victory in the War of Resistance.
  
  The key to victory in the war now lies in developing the resistance that
  has already begun into a war of total resistance by the whole nation. Only
  through such a war of total resistance can final victory be won.
  
  The existence of serious weaknesses in the War of Resistance may lead to
  many setbacks, retreats, internal splits, betrayals, temporary and partial
  compromises and other such reverses. Therefore it should be realized that
  the war will be an arduous and protracted war. But we are confident that,
  through the efforts of our Party and the whole people, the resistance already
  started will sweep aside all obstacles and continue to advance and develop.


The above thesis, too, has been proved correct in the light of the experience
of the ten months of war and will also be borne out in the future.

8. Epistemologically speaking, the source of all erroneous views on war lies
in idealist and mechanistic tendencies on the question. People with such
tendencies are subjective and one-sided in their approach to problems. They
either indulge in groundless and purely subjective talk, or, basing themselves
upon a single aspect or a temporary manifestation, magnify it with similar
subjectivity into the whole of the problem. But there are two categories
of erroneous views, one comprising fundamental, and therefore consistent,
errors which are hard to correct, and the other comprising accidental, and
therefore temporary, errors which are easy to correct. Since both are wrong,
both need to be corrected. Therefore, only by opposing idealist and mechanistic
tendencies and taking an objective and all-sided view in making a study of
war can we draw correct conclusions on the question of war.

THE BASIS OF THE PROBLEM


9. Why is the War of Resistance Against Japan a protracted war? Why will
the final victory be China's? What is the basis for these statements?

The war between China and Japan is not just any war, it is specifically a
war of life and death between semi-colonial and semi-feudal China and imperialist
Japan, fought in the Nineteen Thirties. Herein lies the basis of the whole
problem. The two sides in the war have many contrasting features, which will
be considered in turn below.

10. The Japanese side. First, Japan is a powerful imperialist country,
which ranks first in the East in military, economic and political-organizational
power, and is one of the five or six foremost imperialist countries of the
world. These are the basic factors in Japan's war of aggression. The
inevitability of the war and the impossibility of quick victory for China
are due to Japan's imperialist system and her great military, economic and
political-organizational power. Secondly, however, the imperialist character
of Japan's social economy determines the imperialist character of her war,
a war that is retrogressive and barbarous. In the Nineteen Thirties, the
internal and external contradictions of Japanese imperialism have driven
her not only to embark on an adventurist war unparalleled in scale but also
to approach her final collapse. In terms of social development, Japan is
no longer a thriving country; the war will not lead to the prosperity sought
by her ruling classes but to the very reverse, the doom of Japanese imperialism.
This is what we mean by the retrogressive nature of Japan's war. It is this
reactionary quality, coupled with the military-feudal character of Japanese
imperialism, that gives rise to the peculiar barbarity of Japan's war. All
of which will arouse to the utmost the class antagonisms within Japan, the
antagonism between the Japanese and the Chinese nations, and the antagonism
between Japan and most other countries of the world. The reactionary and
barbarous character of Japan's war constitutes the primary reason for her
inevitable defeat. Thirdly, Japan's war is conducted on the basis of her
great military, economic and political-organizational power, but at the same
time it rests on an inadequate natural endowment. Japan's military, economic
and political-organizational power is great but quantitatively inadequate.
Japan is a comparatively small country, deficient in manpower and in military,
financial and material resources, and she cannot stand a long war. Japan's
rulers are endeavouring to resolve this difficulty through war, but again
they will get the very reverse of what they desire; that is to say, the war
they have launched to resolve this difficulty will eventually aggravate it
and even exhaust Japan's original resources. Fourthly and lastly, while Japan
can get international support from the fascist countries, the international
opposition she is bound to encounter will be greater than her international
support. This opposition will gradually grow and eventually not only cancel
out the support but even bear down upon Japan herself. Such is the law that
an unjust cause finds meagre support, and such is the consequence of the
very nature of Japan's war. To sum up, Japan's advantage lies in her great
capacity to wage war, and her disadvantages lie in the reactionary and barbarous
nature of her war, in the inadequacy of her manpower and material resources,
and in her meagre international support. These are the characteristics on
the Japanese side.

11. The Chinese side. First, we are a semi-colonial and semi-feudal
country. The Opium War, [6] the Taiping Revolution,
[7] the Reform Movement of 1898,
[8] the Revolution of 1911
[9] and the Northern Expedition
[10]--the revolutionary or reform movements which
aimed at extricating China from her semi-colonial and semi-feudal state--all
met with serious setbacks, and China remains a semi-colonial and semi-feudal
country. We are still a weak country and manifestly inferior to the enemy
in military, economic and political-organizational power. Here again one
can find the basis for the inevitability of the war and the impossibility
of quick victory for China. Secondly, however, China's liberation movement,
with its cumulative development over the last hundred years, is now different
from that of any previous period. Although the domestic and foreign forces
opposing it have caused it serious setbacks, at the same time they have tempered
the Chinese people. Although China today is not so strong as Japan militarily,
economically, politically and culturally, yet there are factors in China
more progressive than in any other period of her history. The Communist Party
of China and the army under its leadership represent these progressive factors.
It is on the basis of this progress that China's present war of liberation
can be protracted and can achieve final victory. By contrast with Japanese
imperialism, which is declining, China is a country rising like the morning
sun. China's war is progressive, hence its just character. Because it is
a just war, it is capable of arousing the nation to unity, of evoking the
sympathy of the people in Japan and of winning the support of most countries
in the world. Thirdly, and again by contrast with Japan, China is a very
big country with vast territory, rich resources, a large population and plenty
of soldiers, and is capable of sustaining a long war. Fourthly and lastly,
there is broad international support for China stemming from the progressive
and just character of her war, which is again exactly the reverse of the
meagre support for Japan's unjust cause. To sum up, China's disadvantage
lies in her military weakness, and her advantages lie in the progressive
and just character of her war, her great size and her abundant international
support. These are China's characteristics.

12. Thus it can be seen that Japan has great military, economic and
political-organizational power, but that her war is reactionary and barbarous,
her manpower and material resources are inadequate, and she is in an unfavourable
position internationally. China, on the contrary, has less military, economic
and political-organizational power, but she is in her era of progress, her
war is progressive and just, she is moreover a big country, a factor which
enables her to sustain a protracted war, and she will be supported by most
countries. The above are the basic, mutually contradictory characteristics
of the Sino-Japanese war. They have determined and are determining all the
political policies and military strategies and tactics of the two sides;
they have determined and are determining the protracted character of the
war and its outcome, namely, that the final victory will go to China
and not to Japan. The war is a contest between these characteristics. They
will change in the course of the war, each according to its own nature; and
from this everything else will follow. These characteristics exist objectively
and are not invented to deceive people; they constitute all the basic elements
of the war, and are not incomplete fragments; they permeate all major and
minor problems on both sides and all stages of the war, and they are not
matters of no consequence. If anyone forgets these characteristics in studying
the Sino-Japanese war, he will surely go wrong; and even though some of his
ideas win credence for a time and may seem right, they will inevitably be
proved wrong by the course of the war. On the basis of these characteristics
we shall now proceed to explain the problems to be dealt with.

REFUTATION OF THE THEORY OF NATIONAL SUBJUGATION


13. The theorists of national subjugation, who see nothing but the contrast
between the enemy's strength and our weakness, used to say, "Resistance will
mean subjugation," and now they are saying, "The continuance of the war spells
subjugation." We shall not be able to convince them merely by stating that
Japan, though strong; is small, while China, though weak, is large. They
can adduce historical instances, such as the destruction of the Sung Dynasty
by the Yuan and the destruction of the Ming Dynasty by the Ching, to prove
that small but strong country can vanquish a large but weak one and, moreover,
that a backward country can vanquish an advanced one. If we say these events
occurred long ago and do not prove the point, they can cite the British
subjugation of India to prove that a small but strong capitalist country
can vanquish a large but weak and backward country. Therefore, we have to
produce other grounds before we can silence and convince all the subjugationists,
and supply everyone engaged in propaganda with adequate arguments to persuade
those who are still confused or irresolute and so strengthen their faith
in the War of Resistance.

14. What then are the grounds we should advance? The characteristics of the
epoch. These characteristics are concretely reflected in Japan's retrogression
and paucity of support and in China's progress and abundance of support.

15. Our war is not just any war, it is specifically a war between China and
Japan fought in the Nineteen Thirties. Our enemy, Japan, is first of all
a moribund imperialist power; she is already in her era of decline and is
not only different from Britain at the time of the subjugation of India,
when British capitalism was still in the era of its ascendancy, but also
different from what she herself was at the time of World War I twenty years
ago. The present war was launched on the eve of the general collapse of world
imperialism and, above all, of the fascist countries; that is the very reason
the enemy has launched this adventurist war, which is in the nature of a
last desperate struggle. Therefore, it is an inescapable certainty that it
will not be China but the ruling circles of Japanese imperialism which will
be destroyed as a result of the war. Moreover, Japan has undertaken this
war at a time when many countries have been or are about to be embroiled
in war, when we are all fighting or preparing to fight against barbarous
aggression, and China's fortunes are linked with those of most of the countries
and peoples of the world. This is the root cause of the opposition Japan
has aroused and will increasingly arouse among those countries and peoples.

16. What about China? The China of today cannot be compared with the China
of any other historical period. She is a semi-colony and a semi-feudal society,
and she is consequently considered a weak country. But at the same time,
China is historically in her era of progress; this is the primary reason
for her ability to defeat Japan. When we say that the War of Resistance Against
Japan is progressive we do not mean progressive in the ordinary or general
sense, nor do we mean progressive in the sense that the Abyssinian war against
Italy, or the Taiping Revolution or the Revolution of 1911 were progressive,
we mean progressive in the sense that China is progressive today. In what
way is the China of today progressive? She is progressive because she is
no longer a completely feudal country and because we already have some capitalism
in China, we have a bourgeoisie and a proletariat, we have vast numbers of
people who have awakened or are awakening, we have a Communist Party, we
have a politically progressive army--the Chinese Red Army led by the Communist
Party--and we have the tradition and the experience of many decades of
revolution, and especially the experience of the seventeen years since the
founding of the Chinese Communist Party. This experience has schooled the
people and the political parties of China and forms the very basis for the
present unity against Japan. If it is said that without the experience of
1905 the victory of 1917 would have been impossible in Russia, then we can
also say that without the experience of the last seventeen years it would
be impossible to win our War of Resistance. Such is the internal situation.

In the existing international situation, China is not isolated in the war,
and this fact too is without precedent in history. In the past, China's wars,
and India's too, were wars fought in isolation. It is only today that we
meet with world-wide popular movements, extraordinary in breadth and depth,
which have arisen or are arising and which are supporting China. The Russian
Revolution of 1917 also received international support, and thus the Russian
workers and peasants won; but that support was not so broad in scale and
deep in nature as ours today. The popular movements in the world today are
developing on a scale and with a depth that are unprecedented. The existence
of the Soviet Union is a particularly vital factor in present-day international
politics, and the Soviet Union will certainly support China with the greatest
enthusiasm; there was nothing like this twenty years ago. All these factors
have created and are creating important conditions indispensable to China's
final victory. Large-scale direct assistance is as yet lacking and will come
only in the future, but China is progressive and is a big country, and these
are the factors enabling her to protract the war and to promote as well as
await international help.

17. There is the additional factor that while Japan is a small country with
a small territory, few resources, a small population and a limited number
of soldiers, China is a big country with vast territory, rich resources,
a large population and plenty of soldiers, so that, besides the contrast
between strength and weakness, there is the contrast between a small country,
retrogression and meagre support and a big country, progress and abundant
support. This is the reason why China will never be subjugated. It follows
from the contrast between strength and weakness that Japan can ride roughshod
over China for a certain time and to a certain extent, that China must
unavoidably travel a hard stretch of road, and that the War of Resistance
will be a protracted war and not a war of quick decision; nevertheless, it
follows from the other contrast--a small country, retrogression and meagre
support versus a big country, progress and abundant support--that Japan cannot
ride roughshod over China indefinitely but is sure to meet final defeat,
while China can never be subjugated but is sure to win final victory.

18. Why was Abyssinia vanquished? First, she was not only weak but also small.
Second, she was not as progressive as China; she was an old country passing
from the slave to the serf system, a country without any capitalism or bourgeois
political parties, let alone a Communist Party, and with no army such as
the Chinese army, let alone one like the Eighth Route Army. Third, she was
unable to hold out and wait for international assistance and had to fight
her war in isolation. Fourth, and most important of all, there were mistakes
in the direction of her war against Italy. Therefore Abyssinia was subjugated.
But there is still quite extensive guerrilla warfare in Abyssinia, which,
if persisted in, will enable the Abyssinians to recover their country when
the world situation changes.

19. If the subjugationists quote the history of the failure of liberation
movements in modern China to prove their assertions first that "resistance
will mean subjugation", and then that "the continuance of the war spells
subjugation", here again our answer is, "Times are different." China herself,
the internal situation in Japan and the international environment are all
different now. It is a serious matter that Japan is stronger than before
while China in her unchanged semi-colonial and semi-feudal position is still
fairly weak. It is also a fact that for the time being Japan can still control
her people at home and exploit international contradictions in order to invade
China. But during a long war, these things are bound to change in the opposite
direction. Such changes are not yet accomplished facts, but they will become
so in future. The subjugationists dismiss this point. As for China, we already
have new people, a new political party, a new army and a new policy of resistance
to Japan, a situation very different from that of over a decade ago, and
what is more, all these will inevitably make further progress. It is true
that historically the liberation movements met with repeated setbacks with
the result that China could not accumulate greater strength for the present
War of Resistance--this is a very painful historical lesson, and never again
should we destroy any of our revolutionary forces. Yet even on the present
basis, by exerting great efforts we can certainly forge ahead gradually and
increase the strength of our resistance. All such efforts should converge
on the great Anti-Japanese National United Front. As for international support,
though direct and large-scale assistance is not yet in sight, it is in the
making, the international situation being fundamentally different from before.
The countless failures in the liberation movement of modern China had their
subjective and objective causes, but the situation today is entirely different.
Today, although there are many difficulties which make the War of Resistance
arduous--such as the enemy's strength and our weakness, and the fact that
his difficulties are just starting, while our own progress is far from
sufficient--nevertheless many favourable conditions exist for defeating the
enemy; we need only add our subjective efforts, and we shall be able to overcome
the difficulties and win through to victory. These are favourable conditions
such as never existed before in any period of our history, and that is why
the War of Resistance Against Japan, unlike the liberation movements of the
past, will not end in failure.

COMPROMISE OR RESISTANCE? CORRUPTION OR PROGRESS?


20. It has been fully explained above that the theory of national subjugation
is groundless. But there are many people who do not subscribe to this theory;
they are honest patriots, who are nevertheless deeply worried about the present
situation. Two things are worrying them, fear of a compromise with Japan
and doubts about the possibility of political progress. These two vexing
questions are being widely discussed and no key has been found to their solution.
Let us now examine them.

21. As previously explained, the question of compromise has its social roots,
and as long as these roots exist the question is bound to arise. But compromise
will not avail. To prove the point, again we need only look for substantiation
to Japan, China, and the international situation. First take Japan. At the
very beginning of the War of Resistance, we estimated that the time would
come when an atmosphere conducive to compromise would arise, in other words,
that after occupying northern China, Kiangsu and Chekiang, Japan would probably
resort to the scheme of inducing China to capitulate. True enough, she did
resort to the scheme, but the crisis soon passed, one reason being that the
enemy everywhere pursued a barbarous policy and practiced naked plunder.
Had China capitulated, every Chinese would have become a slave without a
country. The enemy's predatory policy, the policy of subjugating China, has
two aspects, the material and the spiritual, both of which are being applied
universally to all Chinese, not only to the people of the lower strata but
also to members of the upper strata; of course the latter are treated a little
more politely, but the difference is only one of degree, not of principle.
In the main the enemy is transplanting into the interior of China the same
old measures he adopted in the three northeastern provinces. Materially,
he is robbing the common people even of their food and clothing, making them
cry out in hunger and cold; he is plundering the means of production, thus
ruining and enslaving China's national industries. Spiritually, he is working
to destroy the national consciousness of the Chinese people. Under the flag
of the "Rising Sun" all Chinese are forced to be docile subjects, beasts
of burden forbidden to show the slightest trace of Chinese national spirit.
This barbarous enemy policy will be carried deeper into the interior of China.
Japan with her voracious appetite is unwilling to stop the war. As was
inevitable, the policy set forth in the Japanese cabinet's statement of January
16, 1938 [11] is still being obstinately carried
out, which has enraged all strata of the Chinese people. This rage is engendered
by the reactionary and barbarous character of Japan's war--"there is no escape
from fate", and hence an absolute hostility has crystallized. It is to be
expected that on some future occasion the enemy will once again resort to
the scheme of inducing China to capitulate and that certain subjugationists
will again crawl out and most probably collude with certain foreign elements
(to be found in Britain, the United States and France, and specially among
the upper strata in Britain) as partners in crime. But the general trend
of events will not permit capitulation; the obstinate and peculiarly barbarous
character of Japan's war has decided this aspect of the question.

22. Second, let us take China. There are three factors contributing to China's
perseverance in the War of Resistance. In the first place the Communist Party,
which is the reliable force leading the people to resist Japan. Next, the
Kuomintang, which depends on Britain and the United States and hence will
not capitulate to Japan unless they tell it to. Finally, the other political
parties and groups, most of which oppose compromise and support the War of
Resistance. With unity among these three, whoever compromises will be standing
with the traitors, and anybody will have the right to punish him. All those
unwilling to be traitors have no choice but to unite and carry on the War
of Resistance to the end; therefore compromise can hardly succeed.

23. Third, take the international aspect. Except for Japan's allies and certain
elements in the upper strata of other capitalist countries, the whole world
is in favour of resistance, and not of compromise by China. This factor
reinforces China's hopes. Today the people throughout the country cherish
the hope that international forces will gradually give China increasing help.
It is not a vain hope; the existence of the Soviet Union in particular encourages
China in her War of Resistance. The socialist Soviet Union, now strong as
never before, has always shared China's joys and sorrows. In direct contrast
to all the members of the upper strata in the capitalist countries who seek
nothing but profits, the Soviet Union considers it its duty to help all weak
nations and all revolutionary wars. That China is not fighting her war in
isolation has its basis not only in international support in general but
in Soviet support in particular. China and the Soviet Union are in close
geographical proximity, which aggravates Japan's crisis and facilitates China's
War of Resistance. Geographical proximity to Japan increases the difficulties
of China's resistance. Proximity to the Soviet Union, on the other hand,
is a favourable condition for the War of Resistance.

24. Hence we may conclude that the danger of compromise exists but can be
overcome. Even if the enemy can modify his policy to some extent, he cannot
alter it fundamentally. In China the social roots of compromise are present,
but the opponents of compromise are in the majority. Internationally, also,
some forces favour compromise but the main forces favour resistance. The
combination of these three factors makes it possible to overcome the danger
of compromise and persist to the end in the War of Resistance.

25. Let us now answer the second question. Political progress at home and
perseverance in the War of Resistance are inseparable. The greater the political
progress, the more we can persevere in the war, and the more we persevere
in the war, the greater the political progress. But, fundamentally, everything
depends on our perseverance in the War of Resistance. The unhealthy phenomena
in various herds under the Kuomintang regime are very serious, and the
accumulation of these undesirable factors over the years has caused great
anxiety and vexation among the broad ranks of our patriots. But there is
no ground for pessimism, since experience in the War of Resistance has already
proved that the Chinese people have made as much progress in the last ten
months as in many years in the past. Although the cumulative effects of long
years of corruption are seriously retarding the growth of the people's strength
to resist Japan, thus reducing the extent of our victories and causing us
losses in the war, yet the over-all situation in China, in Japan and in the
world is such that the Chinese people cannot but make progress. This progress
will be slow because of the factor of corruption, which impedes progress.
Progress and the slow pace of progress are two characteristics of the present
situation, and the second ill accords with the urgent needs of the war, which
is a source of great concern to patriots. But we are in the midst of a
revolutionary war, and revolutionary war is an antitoxin which not only
eliminates the enemy's poison but also purges us of our own filth. Every
just, revolutionary war is endowed with tremendous power, which can transform
many things or clear the way for their transformation. The Sino-Japanese
war will transform both China and Japan; provided China perseveres in the
War of Resistance and in the united front, the old Japan will surely be
transformed into a new Japan and the old China into a new China, and people
and everything else in both China and Japan will be transformed during and
after the war. It is proper for us to regard the anti-Japanese war and our
national reconstruction as interconnected. To say that Japan can also be
transformed is to say that the war of aggression by her rulers will end in
defeat and may lead to a revolution by the Japanese people. The day of triumph
of the Japanese people's revolution will be the day Japan is transformed.
All this is closely linked with China's War of Resistance and is a prospect
we should take into account.

THE THEORY OF NATIONAL SUBJUGATION IS WRONG AND THE THEORY
  OF QUICK VICTORY IS LIKEWISE WRONG


26. In our comparative study of the enemy and ourselves with respect to the
basic contradictory characteristics, such as relative strength, relative
size, progress or reaction, and the relative extent of support, we have already
refuted the theory of national subjugation, and we have explained why compromise
is unlikely and why political progress is possible. The subjugationists stress
the contradiction between strength and weakness and puff it up until it becomes
the basis of their whole argument on the question, neglecting all the other
contradictions. Their preoccupation with the contrast in strength shows their
one-sidedness, and their exaggeration of this one side of the matter into
the whole shows their subjectivism. Thus, if one looks at the matter as a
whole, it will be seen that they have no ground to stand on and are wrong.
As for those who are neither subjugationists nor confirmed pessimists, but
who are in a pessimistic frame of mind for the moment simply because they
are confused by the disparity between our strength and that of the enemy
at a given time and in certain respects or by the corruption in the country,
we should point out to them that their approach also tends to be one-sided
and subjective. But in their case correction is relatively easy; once they
are alerted, they will understand, for they are patriots and their error
s only momentary.

27. The exponents of quick victory are likewise wrong. Either they completely
forget the contradiction between strength and weakness, remembering only
the other contradictions, or they exaggerate China's advantages beyond all
semblance of reality and beyond recognition, or they presumptuously take
the balance of forces at one time and place for the whole situation, as in
the old saying, "A leaf before the eye shuts out Mount Tail" In a word, they
lack the courage to admit that the enemy is strong while we are weak. They
often deny this point and consequently deny one aspect of the truth. Nor
do they have the courage to admit the limitations of our advantages, and
thus they deny another aspect of the truth. The result is that they make
mistakes, big and small, and here again it is subjectivism and one-sidedness
that are doing the mischief. These friends have their hearts in the right
place, and they, too, are patriots. But while "the gentlemen aspirations
are indeed lofty", their views are wrong, and to act according to them would
certainly be to run into a brick wall. For if appraisal does not conform
to reality, action cannot attain its objective; and to act notwithstanding
would mean the army's defeat and the nation's subjugation, so that the result
would be the same as with the defeatists. Hence this theory of quick victory
will not do either.

28. Do we deny the danger of national subjugation? No, we do not. We recognize
that China faces two possible prospects, liberation or subjugation, and that
the two are in violent conflict. Our task is to achieve liberation and to
avert subjugation. The conditions for liberation are China's progress, which
is basic, the enemy's difficulties, and international support. We differ
from the subjugationists. Taking an objective and all-sided view, we recognize
the two possibilities of national subjugation and liberation, stress that
liberation is the dominant possibility, point out the conditions for its
achievement, and strive to secure them. The subjugationists, on the other
hand, taking a subjective and one-sided view, recognize only one possibility,
that of subjugation; they do not admit the possibility of liberation, and
still less point out the conditions necessary for liberation or strive to
secure them. Moreover, while acknowledging the tendency to compromise and
the corruption, we see other tendencies and phenomena which, we indicate,
will gradually prevail and are already in violent conflict with the former;
in addition, we point out the conditions necessary for the healthy tendencies
and phenomena to prevail, and we strive to overcome the tendency to compromise
and to change the state of corruption. Therefore, contrary to the pessimists,
we are not at all down-hearted.

29. Not that we would not like a quick victory; everybody would be in favour
of driving the "devils" out overnight. But we point out that, in the absence
of certain definite conditions, quick victory is something that exists only
in one's mind and not in objective reality, and that it is a mere illusion,
a false theory. Accordingly, having made an objective and comprehensive appraisal
of all the circumstances concerning both the enemy and ourselves, we point
out that the only way to final victory is the strategy of protracted war,
and we reject the groundless theory of quick victory. We maintain that we
must strive to secure all the conditions indispensable to final victory,
and the more fully and the earlier these conditions are secured, the surer
we shall be of victory and the earlier we shall win it. We believe that only
in this way can the course of the war be shortened, and we reject the theory
of quick victory, which is just idle talk and an effort to get things on
the cheap.

WHY A PROTRACTED WAR? 


30. Let us now examine the problem of protracted war. A correct answer to
the question "Why a protracted war?" can be arrived at only on the basis
of all the fundamental contrasts between China and Japan. For instance, if
we say merely that the enemy is a strong imperialist power while we are a
weak semi-colonial and semi-feudal country, we are in danger of falling into
the theory of national subjugation. For neither in theory nor in practice
can a struggle become protracted by simply pitting the weak against the strong.
Nor can it become protracted by simply pitting the big against the small,
the progressive against the reactionary, or abundant support against meagre
support. The annexation of a small country by a big one or of a big country
by a small one is a common occurrence. It often happens that a progressive
country which is not strong is destroyed by a big, reactionary country, and
the same holds for everything that is progressive but not strong. Abundant
or meagre support is an important but a subsidiary factor, and the degree
of its effect depends upon the fundamental factors on both sides. Therefore
when we say that the War of Resistance Against Japan is a protracted war,
our conclusion is derived from the interrelations of all the factors at work
on both sides. The enemy is strong and we are weak, and the danger of subjugation
is there. But in other respects the enemy has shortcomings and we have
advantages. The enemy's advantage can be reduced and his shortcomings aggravated
by our efforts. On the other hand, our advantages can be enhanced and our
shortcoming remedied by our efforts. Hence, we can win final victory and
avert subjugation, while the enemy will ultimately be defeated and will be
unable to avert the collapse of his whole imperialist system.

31. Since the enemy has advantages only in one respect but shortcomings in
all others and we have shortcomings in only one respect but advantages in
all others, why has this produced not a balance, but, on the contrary, a
superior position for him and an inferior position for us at the present
time? Quite clearly, we cannot consider the question in such a formal way.
The fact is that the disparity between the enemy's strength and our own is
now so great that the enemy's shortcomings have not developed, and for the
time being cannot develop, to a degree sufficient to offset his strength,
while our advantages have not developed, and for the time being cannot develop,
to a degree sufficient to compensate for our weakness. Therefore there can
as yet be no balance, only imbalance.

32. Although our efforts in persevering in the War of Resistance and the
united front have somewhat changed the enemy's strength and superiority as
against our weakness and inferiority, there has as yet been no basic change.
Hence during a certain stage of the war, to a certain degree the enemy will
be victorious and we shall suffer defeat. But why is it that in this stage
the enemy's victories and our defeats are definitely restricted in degree
and cannot be transcended by complete victory or complete defeat? The reason
is that, first, from the very beginning the enemy's strength and our weakness
have been relative and not absolute, and that, second, our efforts in persevering
in the War of Resistance and in the united front have further accentuated
this relativeness. In comparison with the original situation, the enemy is
still strong, but unfavourable factors have reduced his strength, although
not yet to a degree sufficient to destroy his superiority, and similarly
we are still weak, but favourable factors have compensated for our weakness,
although not yet to a degree sufficient to transform our inferiority. Thus
it turns out that the enemy is relatively strong and we are relatively weak,
that the enemy is in a relatively superior and we are in a relatively inferior
position. On both sides, strength and weakness, superiority and inferiority,
have never been absolute, and besides, our efforts in persevering in resistance
to Japan and in the united front during the war have brought about further
changes in the original balance of forces between us and the enemy. Therefore,
in this stage the enemy's victory and our defeat are definitely restricted
in degree, and hence the war becomes protracted.

33. But circumstances are continually changing. In the course of the war,
provided we employ correct military and political tactics, make no mistakes
of principle and exert our best efforts, the enemy's disadvantages and China's
advantages will both grow as the war is drawn out, with the inevitable result
that there will be a continual change in the difference in comparative strength
and hence in the relative position of the two sides. When a new stage
is reached, a great change will take place in the balance of forces, resulting
in the enemies defeat and our victory.

34. At present the enemy can still manage to exploit his strength, and our
War of Resistance has not yet fundamentally weakened him. The insufficiency
in his manpower and material resources is not yet such as to prevent his
offensive; on the contrary, they can still sustain his offensive to a certain
extent. The reactionary and barbarous nature of his war, a factor which
intensifies both class antagonisms within Japan and the resistance of the
Chinese nation, has not yet brought about a situation which radically impedes
his advance. The enemy's international isolation is increasing but is not
yet complete. In many countries which have indicated they will help us, the
capitalists dealing in munitions and war materials and bent solely on profit
are still furnishing Japan with large quantities of war supplies,
[12] and their governments
[13] are still reluctant to join the Soviet Union
in practical sanctions against Japan. From all this it follows that our War
of Resistance cannot be won quickly and can only be a protracted war. As
for China, although there has been some improvement with regard to her weakness
in the military, economic, political and cultural spheres in the ten months
of resistance, it is still a long way from what is required to prevent the
enemy's offensive and prepare our counteroffensive. Moreover, quantitatively
speaking, we have had to sustain certain losses. Although all the factors
favourable to us are having a positive effect, it will not be sufficient
to halt the enemy's offensive and to prepare for our counter-offensive unless
we make an immense effort. Neither the abolition of corruption and the
acceleration of progress at home, nor the curbing of the pro-Japanese forces
and the expansion of the anti-Japanese forces abroad, are yet accomplished
facts. From all this it follows that our war cannot be won quickly but can
only be a protracted war.

THE THREE STAGES OF THE PROTRACTED WAR


35. Since the Sino-Japanese war is a protracted one and final victory will
belong to China, it can reasonably be assumed that this protracted war will
pass through three stages. The first stage covers the period of the enemy's
strategic offensive and our strategic defensive. The second stage will be
the period of the enemy's strategic consolidation and our preparation for
the counter-offensive. The third stage will be the period of our strategic
counter-offensive and the enemy's strategic retreat. It is impossible to
predict the concrete situation in the three stages, but certain main trends
in the war may be pointed out in the light of present conditions. The objective
course of events will be exceedingly rich and varied, with many twists and
turns, and nobody can cast a horoscope for the Sino-Japanese war; nevertheless
it is necessary for the strategic direction of the war to make a rough sketch
of its trends. Although our sketch may not be in full accord with the subsequent
facts and will be amended by them, it is still necessary to make it in order
to give firm and purposeful strategic direction to the protracted war.

36. The first stage has not yet ended. The enemy's design is to occupy Canton,
Wuhan and Lanchow and link up these three points. To accomplish this aim
the enemy will have to use at least fifty divisions, or about one and a half
million men, spend from one and a half to two years, and expend more than
ten thousand million yen. In penetrating so deeply, he will encounter immense
difficulties, with consequences disastrous beyond imagination. As for attempting
to occupy the entire length of the Canton-Hankow Railway and the Sian-Lanchow
Railway, he will have to fight perilous battles and even so may not fully
accomplish his design. But in drawing up our operational plan we should base
ourselves on the assumption that the enemy may occupy the three points and
even certain additional areas, as well as link them up, and we should make
dispositions for a protracted war, so that even if he does so, we shall be
able to cope with him. In this stage the form of fighting we should adopt
is primarily mobile warfare, supplemented by guerrilla and positional warfare.
Through the subjective errors of the Kuomintang military authorities, positional
warfare was assigned the primary role in the first phase of this stage, but
it is nevertheless supplementary from the point of view of the stage as a
whole. In this stage, China has already built up a broad united front and
achieved unprecedented unity. Although the enemy has used and will continue
to use base and shameless means to induce China to capitulate in the attempt
to realize his plan for a quick decision and to conquer the whole country
without much effort, he has failed so far, nor is he likely to succeed in
the future. In this stage, in spite of considerable losses, China will make
considerable progress, which will become the main basis for her continued
resistance in the second stage. In the present stage the Soviet Union has
already given substantial aid to China. On the enemy side, there are already
signs of flagging morale, and his army's momentum of attack is less in the
middle phase of this stage than it was in the initial phase, and it will
diminish still further in the concluding phase. Signs of exhaustion are beginning
to appear in his finances and economy; war-weariness is beginning to set
in among his people and troops and within the clique at the helm of the war,
"war frustrations" are beginning to manifest themselves and pessimism about
the prospects of the war is growing.

37. The second stage may be termed one of strategic stalemate. At the tail
end of the first stage, the enemy will be forced to fix certain terminal
points to his strategic offensive owing to his shortage of troops and our
firm resistance, and upon reaching them he will stop his strategic offensive
and enter the stage of safeguarding his occupied areas. In the second stage,
the enemy will attempt to safeguard the occupied areas and to make them his
own by the fraudulent method of setting up puppet governments, while plundering
the Chinese people to the limit; but again he will be confronted with stubborn
guerrilla warfare. Taking advantage of the fact that the enemy's rear is
unguarded, our guerrilla warfare will develop extensively in the first stage,
and many base areas will be established, seriously threatening the enemy's
consolidation of the occupied areas, and so in the second stage there will
still be widespread fighting. In this stage, our form of fighting will be
primarily guerrilla warfare, supplemented by mobile warfare. China will still
retain a large regular army, but she will find it difficult to launch
the strategic counter-offensive immediately because, on the one hand, the
enemy will adopt a strategically defensive position in the big cities and
along the main lines of communication under his occupation and, on the other
hand, China will not yet be adequately equipped technically. Except for the
troops engaged in frontal defence against the enemy, our forces will be switched
in large numbers to the enemy's rear in comparatively dispersed dispositions,
and, basing themselves on all the areas not actually occupied by the enemy
and co-ordinating with the people's local armed forces, they will launch
extensive, fierce guerrilla warfare against enemy-occupied areas, keeping
the enemy on the move as far as possible in order to destroy him in mobile
warfare, as is now being done in Shansi Province. The fighting in the second
stage will be ruthless, and the country will suffer serious devastation.
But the guerrilla warfare will be successful, and if it is well conducted
the enemy may be able to retain only about one-third of his occupied territory,
with the remaining two-thirds in our hands, and this will constitute a great
defeat for the enemy and a great victory for China. By then the enemy-occupied
territory as a whole will fall into three categories: first, the enemy base
areas; second, our base areas for guerrilla warfare; and, third, the guerrilla
areas contested by both sides. The duration of this stage will depend on
the degree of change in the balance of forces between us and the enemy and
on the changes in the international situation; generally speaking, we should
be prepared to see this stage last a comparatively long time and to weather
its hardships. It will be a very painful period for China; the two big problems
will be economic difficulties and the disruptive activities of the traitors.
The enemy will go all out to wreck China's united front, and the traitor
organizations in all the occupied areas will merge into a so-called "unified
government". Owing to the loss of big cities and the hardships of war,
vacillating elements within our ranks will clamour for compromise, and pessimism
will grow to a serious extent. Our tasks will then be to mobilize the whole
people to unite as one man and carry on the war with unflinching perseverance,
to broaden and consolidate the united front, sweep away all pessimism and
ideas of compromise, promote the will to hard struggle and apply new wartime
policies, and so to weather the hardships. In the second stage, we will have
to call upon the whole country resolutely to maintain a united government,
we will have to oppose splits and systematically improve fighting techniques,
reform the armed forces, mobilize the entire people and prepare for the
counter-offensive. The international situation will become still more
unfavourable to Japan and the main international forces will incline towards
giving more help to China, even though there may be talk of "realism" of
the Chamberlain type which accommodates itself to faits accomplis.
Japan's threat to Southeast Asia and Siberia will become greater, and
there may even be another war. As regards Japan, scores of her divisions
will be inextricably bogged down in China. Widespread guerrilla warfare and
the people's anti-Japanese movement will wear down this big Japanese force,
greatly reducing it and also disintegrating its morale by stimulating the
growth of homesickness, war-weariness and even anti-war sentiment. Though
it would be wrong to say that Japan will achieve no results at all in her
plunder of China, yet, being short of capital and harassed by guerrilla warfare,
she cannot possibly achieve rapid or substantial results. This second stage
will be the transitional stage of the entire war; it will be the most trying
period but also the pivotal one. Whether China becomes an independent country
or is reduced to a colony will be determined not by the retention or loss
of the big cities in the first stage but by the extent to which the whole
nation exerts itself in the second. If we can persevere in the War of Resistance,
in the united front and in the protracted war, China will in that stage gain
the power to change from weakness to strength. It will be the second act
in the three-act drama of China's War of Resistance. And through the efforts
of the entire cast it will become possible to perform a most brilliant last
act.

38. The third stage will be the stage of the counter-offensive to recover
our lost territories. Their recovery will depend mainly upon the strength
which China has built up in the preceding stage and which will continue to
grow in the third stage. But China's strength alone will not be sufficient,
and we shall also have to rely on the support of international forces and
on the changes that will take place inside Japan, or otherwise we shall not
be able to win; this adds to China's tasks in international propaganda and
diplomacy. In the third stage, our war will no longer be one of strategic
defensive, but will turn into a strategic counter-offensive manifesting itself
in strategic offensives; and it will no longer be fought on strategically
interior lines, but will shift gradually to strategically exterior lines.
Not until we fight our way to the Yalu River can this war be considered over.
The third stage will be the last in the protracted war, and when we talk
of persevering in the war to the end, we mean going all the way through
this stage. Our primary form of fighting will still be mobile warfare,
but positional warfare will rise to importance. While positional defence
cannot be regarded as important in the first stage because of the prevailing
circumstances, positional attack will become quite important in the third
stage because of the changed conditions and the requirements of the task.
In the third stage guerrilla warfare will again provide strategic support
by supplementing mobile and positional warfare, but it will not be the primary
form as in the second stage.

39. It is thus obvious that the war is protracted and consequently ruthless
in nature. The enemy will not be able to gobble up the whole of China but
will be able to occupy many places for a considerable time. China will not
be able to oust the Japanese quickly, but the greater part of her territory
will remain in her hands. Ultimately the enemy will lose and we will win,
but we shall have a hard stretch of road to travel.

40. The Chinese people will become tempered in the course of this long and
ruthless war. The political parties taking part in the war will also be steeled
and tested. The united front must be persevered in; only by persevering in
the united front can we persevere in the war; and only by persevering in
the united front and in the war can we win final victory. Only thus can all
difficulties be overcome. After travelling the hard stretch of road we shall
reach the highway to victory. This is the natural logic of the war.

41. In the three stages the changes in relative strength will proceed along
the following lines. In the first stage, the enemy is superior and we are
inferior in strength. With regard to our inferiority we must reckon on changes
of two different kinds from the eve of the War of Resistance to the end of
this stage. The first kind is a change for the worse. China's original
inferiority will be aggravated by war losses, namely, decreases in territory,
population, economic strength, military strength and cultural institutions.
Towards the end of the first stage, the decrease will probably be considerable,
especially on the economic side. This point will be exploited by some people
as a basis for their theories of national subjugation and of compromise.
But the second kind of change, the change for the better, must also be noted.
It includes the experience gained in the war, the progress made by the armed
forces, the political progress, the mobilization of the people, the development
of culture in a new direction, the emergence of guerrilla warfare, the increase
in international support, etc. What is on the downgrade in the first stage
is the old quantity and the old quality, the manifestations being mainly
quantitative. What is on the upgrade is the new quantity and the new quality,
the manifestations being mainly qualitative. It is the second kind of change
that provides a basis for our ability to fight a protracted war and win final
victory.

42. In the first stage, changes of two kinds are also occurring on the enemies
side. The first kind is a change for the worse and manifests itself in hundreds
of thousands of casualties, the drain on arms and ammunition, deterioration
of troop morale, popular discontent at home, shrinkage of trade, the expenditure
of over ten thousand million yen, condemnation by world opinion, etc. This
trend also provides a basis for our ability to fight a protracted war and
win final victory. But we must likewise reckon with the second kind of change
on the enemy's side, a change for the better, that is, his expansion in
territory, population and resources. This too is a basis for the protracted
nature of our War of Resistance and the impossibility of quick victory, but
at the same time certain people will use it as a basis for their theories
of national subjugation and of compromise. However, we must take into account
the transitory and partial character of this change for the better on the
enemy's side. Japan is an imperialist power heading for collapse, and her
occupation of China's territory is temporary. The vigorous growth of guerrilla
warfare in China will restrict her actual occupation to narrow zones. Moreover,
her occupation of Chinese territory has created and intensified contradictions
between Japan and other foreign countries. Besides, generally speaking, such
occupation involves a considerable period in which Japan will make capital
outlays without drawing any profits, as is shown by the experience in the
three northeastern provinces. All of which again gives us a basis for demolishing
the theories of national subjugation and of compromise and for establishing
the theories of protracted war and of final victory.

43. In the second stage, the above changes on both sides will continue to
develop. While the situation cannot be predicted in detail, on the whole
Japan will continue on the downgrade and China on the
upgrade.[14] For example, Japan's military and
financial resources will be seriously drained by China's guerrilla warfare,
popular discontent will grow in Japan, the morale of her troops will deteriorate
further, and she will become more isolated internationally. As for China,
she will make further progress in the political, military and cultural spheres
and in the mobilization of the people; guerrilla warfare will develop further;
there will be some new economic growth on the basis of the small industries
and the widespread agriculture in the interior; international support will
gradually increase; and the whole picture will be quite different from what
it is now. This second stage may last quite a long time, during which there
will be a great reversal in the balance of forces, with China gradually rising
and Japan gradually declining. China will emerge from her inferior position,
and Japan will lose her superior position; first the two countries will become
evenly matched, and then their relative positions will be reversed. Thereupon,
China will in general have completed her preparations for the strategic
counter-offensive and will enter the stage of the counter-offensive and the
expulsion of the enemy. It should be reiterated that the change from inferiority
to superiority and the completion of preparations for the counter-offensive
will involve three things, namely, an increase in China's own strength, an
increase in Japan's difficulties, and an increase in international support;
it is the combination of all these forces that will bring about China's
superiority and the completion of her preparations for the counter-offensive.

44. Because of the unevenness in China's political and economic development,
the strategic counter-offensive of the third stage will not present a uniform
and even picture throughout the country in its initial phase but will be
regional in character, rising here and subsiding there. During this stage,
the enemy will not relax his divisive tricks to break China's united front,
hence the task of maintaining internal unity in China will become still more
important, and we shall have to ensure that the strategic counter-offensive
does not collapse halfway through internal dissension. In this period the
international situation will become very favourable to China. China's task
will be to take advantage of it in order to attain complete liberation and
establish an independent democratic state, which at the same time will mean
helping the world anti-fascist movement.

45. China moving from inferiority to parity and then to superiority, Japan
moving from superiority to parity and then to inferiority; China moving from
the defensive to stalemate and then to the counter-offensive, Japan moving
from the offensive to the safeguarding of her gains and then to retreat--such
will be the course of the Sino-Japanese war and its inevitable trend.

46. Hence the questions and the conclusions are as follows: Will China be
subjugated? The answer is, No, she will not be subjugated, but will win final
victory. Can China win quickly? The answer is, No, she cannot win quickly,
and the war must be a protracted one. Are these conclusions correct? I think
they are.

47. At this point, the exponents of national subjugation and of compromise
will again rush in and say, "To move from inferiority to parity China needs
a military and economic power equal to Japan's, and to move from parity to
superiority she will need a military and economic power greater than Japan's.
But this is impossible, hence the above conclusions are not correct."

48. This is the so-called theory that "weapons decide
everything",[15] which constitutes a mechanical
approach to the question of war and a subjective and one-sided view. Our
view is opposed to this; we see not only weapons but also people. Weapons
are an important factor in war, but not the decisive factor; it is people,
not things, that are decisive. The contest of strength is not only a contest
of military and economic power, but also a contest of human power and morale.
Military and economic power is necessarily wielded by people. If the great
majority of the Chinese, of the Japanese and of the people of other countries
are on the side of our War of Resistance Against Japan, how can Japan's military
and economic power, wielded as it is by a small minority through coercion,
count as superiority? And if not, then does not China, though wielding relatively
inferior military and economic power, become the superior? There is no doubt
that China will gradually grow in military and economic power, provided she
perseveres in the War of Resistance and in the united front. As for our enemy,
weakened as he will be by the long war and by internal and external
contradictions, his military and economic power is bound to change in the
reverse direction. In these circumstances, is there any reason why China
cannot become the superior? And that is not all. Although we cannot as yet
count the military and economic power of other countries as being openly
and to any great extent on our side, is there any reason why we will not
be able to do so in the future? If Japan's enemy is not just China, if in
future one or more other countries make open use of their considerable military
and economic power defensively or offensively against Japan and openly help
us, then will not our superiority be still greater? Japan is a small country,
her war is reactionary and barbarous, and she will become more and more isolated
internationally; China is a large country, her war is progressive and just,
and she will enjoy more and more support internationally. Is there any reason
why the long-term development of these factors should not definitely change
the relative position between the enemy and ourselves?

49. The exponents of quick victory, however, do not realize that war is a
contest of strength, and that before a certain change has taken place in
the relative strength of the belligerents, there is no basis for trying to
fight strategically decisive battles and shorten the road to liberation.
Were their ideas to be put into practice, we should inevitably run our heads
into a brick wall. Or perhaps they are just talking for their own pleasure
without really intending to put their ideas into practice. In the end Mr.
Reality will come and pour a bucket of cold water over these chatterers,
showing them up as mere windbags who want to get things on the cheap, to
have gains without pains. We have had this kind of idle chatter before and
we have it now, though not very much so far; but there may be more as the
war develops into the stage of stalemate and then of counter-offensive. But
in the meantime, if China's losses in the first stage are fairly heavy and
the second stage drags on very long, the theories of national subjugation
and of compromise will gain great currency. Therefore, our fire should be
directed mainly against them and only secondarily against the idle chatter
about quick victory.

50. That the war will be protracted is certain, but nobody can predict exactly
how many months or years it will last, as this depends entirely upon the
degree of the change in the balance of forces. All those who wish to shorten
the war have no alternative but to work hard to increase our own strength
and reduce that of the enemy. Specifically, the only way is to strive to
win more battles and wear down the enemy's forces, develop guerrilla warfare
to reduce enemy-occupied territory to a minimum, consolidate and expand the
united front to rally the forces of the whole nation, build up new armies
and develop new war industries, promote political, economic and cultural
progress, mobilize the workers, peasants, businessmen, intellectuals and
other sections of the people, disintegrate the enemy forces and win over
their soldiers, carry on international propaganda to secure foreign support,
and win the support of the Japanese people and other oppressed peoples. Only
by doing all this can we reduce the duration of the war. There is no magic
short-cut.

A WAR OF JIG-SAW PATTERN


51. We can say with certainty that the protracted War of Resistance Against
Japan will write a splendid page unique in the war history of mankind. One
of the special features of this war is the interlocking "jig-saw" pattern
which arises from such contradictory factors as the barbarity of Japan and
her shortage of troops on the one hand, and the progressiveness of China
and the extensiveness of her territory on the other. There have been other
wars of jig-saw pattern in history, the three years' civil war in Russia
after the October Revolution being a case in point. But what distinguishes
this war in China is its especially protracted and extensive character, which
will set a record in history. Its jig-saw pattern manifests itself as follows.

52. Interior and exterior lines. The anti-Japanese war as a whole
is being fought on interior lines; but as far as the relation between the
main forces and the guerrilla units is concerned, the former are on the interior
lines while the latter are on the exterior lines, presenting a remarkable
spectacle of pincers around the enemy. The same can be said of the relationship
between the various guerrilla areas. From its own viewpoint each guerrilla
area is on interior lines and the other areas are on exterior lines; together
they form many battle fronts, which hold the enemy in pincers. In the first
stage of the war, the regular army operating strategically on interior lines
is withdrawing but the guerrilla units operating strategically on exterior
lines will advance with great strides over wide areas to the rear of the
enemy-- they will advance even more fiercely in the second stage--thereby
presenting a remarkable picture of both withdrawal and advance.

53. Possession and non-possession of a rear area. The main forces,
which extend the front lines to the outer limits of the enemy's occupied
areas, are operating from the rear area of the country as a whole. The guerrilla
units, which extend the battle lines into the enemy rear, are separated from
the rear area of the country as a whole. But each guerrilla area has a small
rear of its own, upon which it relies to establish its fluid battle lines.
The case is different with the guerrilla detachments which are dispatched
by a guerrilla area for short-term operations in the rear of the enemy in
the same area; such detachments have no rear, nor do they have a battle line.
"Operating without a rear area" is a special feature of revolutionary war
in the new era, wherever a vast territory, a progressive people, and an advanced
political party and army are to be found; there is nothing to fear but much
to gain from it, and far from having doubts about it we should promote it.

54. Encirclement and counter-encirclement. Taking the war as a whole,
there is no doubt that we are strategically encircled by the enemy because
he is on the strategic offensive and operating on exterior lines while we
are on the strategic defensive and operating on interior lines. This is the
first form of enemy encirclement. We on our part can encircle one or more
of the enemy columns advancing on us along separate routes, because we apply
the policy of fighting campaigns and battles from tactically exterior lines
by using numerically preponderant forces against these enemy columns advancing
on us from strategically exterior lines. This is the first form of our
counter-encirclement of the enemy. Next, if we consider the guerrilla base
areas in the enemy's rear, each area taken singly is surrounded by the enemy
on all sides, like the Wutai Mountains, or on three sides, like the northwestern
Shansi area. This is the second form of enemy encirclement. However, if one
considers all the guerrilla base areas together and in their relation to
the positions of the regular forces, one can see that we in turn surround
a great many enemy forces. In Shansi Province, for instance, we have surrounded
the Tatung-puchow Railway on three sides (the east and west flanks and the
southern end) and the city of Taiyuan on all sides; and there are many similar
instances in Hopei and Shantung Provinces. This is the second form of our
counter-encirclement of the enemy. Thus there are two forms of encirclement
by the enemy forces and two forms of encirclement by our own--rather like
a game of weichi. [16] Campaigns
and battles fought by the two sides resemble the capturing of each other's
pieces, and the establishment of enemy strongholds (such as Talyuan) and
our guerrilla base areas (such as the Wutai Mountains) resembles moves to
dominate spaces on the board. If the game of weichi is extended
to include the world, there is yet a third form of encirclement as between
us and the enemy, namely, the interrelation between the front of aggression
and the front of peace. The enemy encircles China, the Soviet Union, France
and Czechoslovakia with his front of aggression, while we counter-encircle
Germany, Japan and Italy with our front of peace. But our encirclement, like
the hand of Buddha, will turn into the Mountain of Five Elements lying athwart
the Universe, and the modern Sun Wu-kungs
[17]--the fascist aggressors--will finally be buried
underneath it, never to rise again. Therefore, if on the international plane
we can create an anti-Japanese front in the Pacific region, with China as
one strategic unit, with the Soviet Union and other countries which may join
it as other strategic units, and with the Japanese people's movement as still
another strategic unit, and thus form a gigantic net from which the fascist
Sun Wu-kungs can find no escape, then that will be our enemy's day of doom.
Indeed, the day when this gigantic net is formed will undoubtedly be the
day of the complete overthrow of Japanese imperialism. We are not jesting;
this is the inevitable trend of the war.

55. Big areas and little areas. There is a possibility that the
enemy will occupy the greater part of Chinese territory south of the Great
Wall, and only the smaller part will be kept intact. That is one aspect of
the situation. But within this greater part, which does not include the three
northeastern provinces, the enemy can actually hold only the big cities,
the main lines of communication and some of the plains--which may rank first
in importance, but will probably constitute only the smaller part of the
occupied territory in size and population, while the greater part will be
taken up by the guerrilla areas that will grow up everywhere. That is another
aspect of the situation. If we go beyond the provinces south of the Great
Wall and include Mongolia, Sinkiang, Chinghai and Tibet, then the unoccupied
area will constitute the greater part of China's territory, and the
enemy-occupied area will become the smaller part, even with the three
northeastern provinces. That is yet another aspect of the situation. The
area kept intact is undoubtedly important, and we should devote great efforts
to developing it, not only politically, militarily and economically but,
what is also important, culturally. The enemy has transformed our former
cultural centres into culturally backward areas, and we on our part must
transform the former culturally backward areas into cultural centres. At
the same time, the work of developing extensive guerrilla areas behind the
enemy lines is also extremely important, and we should attend to every aspect
of this work, including the cultural. All in all, big pieces of China's
territory, namely, the rural areas, will be transformed into regions of progress
and light, while the small pieces, namely, the enemy-occupied areas and
especially the big cities, will temporarily become regions of backwardness
and darkness.

56. Thus it can be seen that the protracted and far-flung War of Resistance
Against Japan is a war of a jig-saw pattern militarily, politically, economically
and culturally. It is a marvellous spectacle in the annals of war, a heroic
undertaking by the Chinese nation, a magnificent and earth-shaking feat.
This war will not only affect China and Japan, strongly impelling both to
advance, but will also affect the whole world, impelling all nations, especially
the oppressed nations such as India, to march forward. Every Chinese should
consciously throw himself into this war of a jig-saw pattern, for this is
the form of war by which the Chinese nation is liberating itself, the special
form of war of liberation waged by a big semi-colonial country in the Nineteen
Thirties and the Nineteen Forties.

FIGHTING FOR PERPETUAL PEACE


57. The protracted nature of China's anti-Japanese war is inseparably connected
with the fight for perpetual peace in China and the whole world. Never has
there been a historical period such as the present in which war is so close
to perpetual peace. For several thousand years since the emergence of classes,
the life of mankind has been full of wars; each nation has fought countless
wars, either internally or with other nations. In the imperialist epoch of
capitalist society, wars are waged on a particularly extensive scale and
with a peculiar ruthlessness. The first great imperialist war of twenty years
ago was the first of its kind in history, but not the last. Only the war
which has now begun comes close to being the final war, that is, comes close
to the perpetual peace of mankind. By now one-third of the world's population
has entered the war. Look ! Italy, then Japan; Abyssinia, then Spain, then
China. The population of the countries at war now amounts to almost 600 million,
or nearly a third of the total population of the world. The characteristics
of the present war are its uninterruptedness and its proximity to perpetual
peace. Why is it uninterrupted? After attacking Abyssinia, Italy attacked
Spain, and Germany joined in; then Japan attacked China. What will come next?
Undoubtedly Hitler will fight the great powers. "Fascism is war"
[18]--this is perfectly true. There will be no
interruption in the development of the present war into a world war; mankind
will not be able to avoid the calamity of war. Why then do we say the present
war is near to perpetual peace? The present war is the result of the development
of the general crisis of world capitalism which began with World War I; this
general crisis is driving the capitalist countries into a new war and, above
all, driving the fascist countries into new war adventures. This war, we
can foresee, will not save capitalism, but will hasten its collapse. It will
be greater in scale and more ruthless than the war of twenty years ago, all
nations will inevitably be drawn in, it will drag on for a very long time,
and mankind will suffer greatly. But, owing to the existence of the Soviet
Union and the growing political consciousness of the people of the world,
great revolutionary wars will undoubtedly emerge from this war to oppose
all counter-revolutionary wars, thus giving this war the character of a struggle
for perpetual peace. Even if later there should be another period of war,
perpetual world peace will not be far off. Once man has eliminated capitalism,
he will attain the era of perpetual peace, and there will be no more need
for war. Neither armies, nor warships, nor military aircraft, nor poison
gas will then be needed. Thereafter and for all time, mankind will never
again know war. The revolutionary wars which have already begun are part
of the war for perpetual peace. The war between China and Japan, two countries
which have a combined population of over 500 million, will take an important
place in this war for perpetual peace, and out of it will come the liberation
of the Chinese nation. The liberated new China of the future will be inseparable
from the liberated new world of the future. Hence our War of Resistance Against
Japan takes on the character of a struggle for perpetual peace.

58. History shows that wars are divided into two kinds, just and unjust.
All wars that are progressive are just, and all wars that impede progress
are unjust. We Communists oppose all unjust wars that impede progress, but
we do not oppose progressive, just wars. Not only do we Communists not oppose
just wars, we actively participate in them. As for unjust wars, World War
I is an instance in which both sides fought for imperialist interests; therefore
the Communists of the whole world firmly opposed that war. The way to oppose
a war of this kind is to do everything possible to prevent it before it breaks
out and, once it breaks out, to oppose war with war, to oppose unjust war
with just war, whenever possible. Japan's war is an unjust war that impedes
progress, and the peoples of the world, including the Japanese people, should
oppose it and are opposing it. In our country the people and the government,
the Communist Party and the Kuomintang, have all raised the banner of
righteousness in the national revolutionary war against aggression. Our war
is sacred and just, it is progressive and its aim is peace. The aim is peace
not just in one country but throughout the world, not just temporary but
perpetual peace. To achieve this aim we must wage a life-and-death struggle,
be prepared for any sacrifice, persevere to the end and never stop short
of the goal. However great the sacrifice and however long the time needed
to attain it, a new world of perpetual peace and brightness already lies
clearly before us. Our faith in waging this war is based upon the new China
and the new world of perpetual peace and brightness for which we are striving.
Fascism and imperialism wish to perpetuate war, but we wish to put an end
to it in the not too distant future. The great majority of mankind should
exert their utmost efforts for this purpose. The 450 million people of China
constitute one quarter of the world's population, and if by their concerted
efforts they overthrow Japanese imperialism and create a new China of freedom
and equality, they will most certainly be making a tremendous contribution
to the struggle for perpetual world peace. This is no vain hope, for the
whole world is approaching this point in the course of its social and economic
development, and provided that the majority of mankind work together, our
goal will surely be attained in several decades.

MAN'S DYNAMIC ROLE IN WAR


59.We have so far explained why the war is a protracted war and why the final
victory will be China's, and in the main dealt with what protracted war is
and what it is not. Now we shall turn to the question of what to do and what
not to do. How to conduct protracted war and how to win the final victory?
These are the questions answered below. We shall therefore successively discuss
the following problems: man's dynamic role in war, war and politics, political
mobilization for the War of Resistance, the object of war, offence within
defence, quick decisions within a protracted war, exterior lines within interior
lines, initiative, flexibility, planning, mobile warfare, guerrilla warfare,
positional warfare, war of annihilation, war of attrition, the possibilities
of exploiting the enemy's mistakes, the question of decisive engagements
in the anti-Japanese war, and the army and the people as the foundation of
victory. Let us start with the problem of man's dynamic role.

60. When we say we are opposed to a subjective approach to problems, we mean
that we must oppose ideas which are not based upon or do not correspond to
objective facts, because such ideas are fanciful and fallacious and will
lead to failure if acted on. But whatever is done has to be done by human
beings; protracted war and final victory will not come about without human
action. For such action to be effective there must be people who derive ideas,
principles or views from the objective facts, and put forward plans, directives,
policies, strategies and tactics. Ideas, etc. are subjective, while deeds
or actions are the subjective translated into the objective, but both represent
the dynamic role peculiar to human beings. We term this kind of dynamic role
"man's conscious dynamic role", and it is a characteristic that distinguishes
man from all other beings. All ideas based upon and corresponding to objective
facts are correct ideas, and all deeds or actions based upon correct ideas
are correct actions. We must give full scope to these ideas and actions,
to this dynamic role. The anti-Japanese war is being waged to drive out
imperialism and transform the old China into a new China; this can be achieved
only when the whole Chinese people are mobilized and full scope is given
to their conscious dynamic role in resisting Japan. If we just sit by and
take no action, only subjugation awaits us and there will be neither protracted
war nor final victory.

61. It is a human characteristic to exercise a conscious dynamic role. Man
strongly displays this characteristic in war. True, victory or defeat in
war is decided by the military, political, economic and geographical conditions
on both sides, the nature of the war each side is waging and the international
support each enjoys, but it is not decided by these alone; in themselves,
all these provide only the possibility of victory or defeat but do not decide
the issue. To decide the issue, subjective effort must be added, namely,
the directing and waging of war, man's conscious dynamic role in war.

62. In seeking victory, those who direct a war cannot overstep the limitations
imposed by the objective conditions; within these limitations, however, they
can and must play a dynamic role in striving for victory. The stage of action
for commanders in a war must be built upon objective possibilities, but on
that stage they can direct the performance of many a drama, full of sound
and colour, power and grandeur. Given the objective material foundations,
the commanders in the anti-Japanese war should display their prowess and
marshal all their forces to crush the national enemy, transform the present
situation in which our country and society are suffering from aggression
and oppression, and create a new China of freedom and equality; here is where
our subjective faculties for directing war can and must be exercised. We
do not want any of our commanders in the war to detach himself from the objective
conditions and become a blundering hothead, but we decidedly want every commander
to become a general who is both bold and sagacious. Our commanders should
have not only the boldness to overwhelm the enemy but also the ability to
remain masters of the situation throughout the changes and vicissitudes of
the entire war. Swimming in the ocean of war, they must not flounder but
make sure of reaching the opposite shore with measured strokes. Strategy
and tactics, as the laws for directing war, constitute the art of swimming
in the ocean of war.

WAR AND POLITICS


63. "War is the continuation of politics." In this sense war is politics
and war itself is a political action; since ancient times there has never
been a war that did not have a political character. The anti-Japanese war
is a revolutionary war waged by the whole nation, and victory is inseparable
from the political aim of the war--to drive out Japanese imperialism and
build a new China of freedom and equality--inseparable from the general policy
of persevering in the War of Resistance and in the united front, from the
mobilization of the entire people, and from the political principles of the
unity between officers and men, the unity between army and people and the
disintegration of the enemy forces, and inseparable from the effective
application of united front policy, from mobilization on the cultural front,
and from the efforts to win international support and the support of the
people inside Japan. In a word, war cannot for a single moment be separated
from politics. Any tendency among the anti-Japanese armed forces to belittle
politics by isolating war from it and advocating the idea of war as an absolute
is wrong and should be corrected.

64. But war has its own particular characteristics and in this sense it cannot
be equated with politics in general. "War is the continuation of politics
by other . . . means." [19] When politics develops
to a certain stage beyond which it cannot proceed by the usual means, war
breaks out to sweep the obstacles from the way. For instance, the
semi-independent status of China is an obstacle to the political growth of
Japanese imperialism, hence Japan has unleashed a war of aggression to sweep
away that obstacle. What about China? Imperialist oppression has long been
an obstacle to China's bourgeois-democratic revolution, hence many wars of
liberation have been waged in the effort to sweep it away. Japan is now using
war for the purpose of oppressing China and completely blocking the advance
of the Chinese revolution, and therefore China is compelled to wage the War
of Resistance in her determination to sweep away this obstacle. When the
obstacle is removed, our political aim will be attained and the war concluded.
But if the obstacle is not completely swept away, the war will have to continue
till the aim is fully accomplished. Thus anyone who seeks a compromise before
the task of the anti-Japanese war is fulfilled is bound to fail, because
even if a compromise were to occur for one reason or another, the war would
break out again, since the broad masses of the people would certainly not
submit but would continue the war until its political objective was achieved.
It can therefore be said that politics is war without bloodshed while war
is politics with bloodshed.

65. From the particular characteristics of war there arise a particular set
of organizations, a particular series of methods and a particular kind of
process. The organizations are the armed forces and everything that goes
with them. The methods are the strategy and tactics for directing war. The
process is the particular form of social activity in which the opposing armed
forces attack each other or defend themselves against one another, employing
strategy and tactics favourable to themselves and unfavourable to the enemy.
Hence war experience is a particular kind of experience. All who take part
in war must rid themselves of their customary ways and accustom themselves
to war before they can win victory.

POLITICAL MOBILIZATION FOR THE WAR OF RESISTANCE


66. A national revolutionary war as great as ours cannot be won without extensive
and thoroughgoing political mobilization. Before the anti-Japanese war there
was no political mobilization for resistance to Japan, and this was a great
drawback, as a result of which China has already lost a move to the enemy.
After the war began, political mobilization was very far from extensive,
let alone thoroughgoing. It was the enemy's gunfire and the bombs dropped
by enemy airplanes that brought news of the war to the great majority of
the people. That was also a kind of mobilization, but it was done for us
by the enemy, we did not do it ourselves. Even now the people in the remoter
regions beyond the noise of the guns are carrying on quietly as usual. This
situation must change, or otherwise we cannot win in our life-and-death struggle.
We must never lose another move to the enemy; on the contrary, we must make
full use of this move, political mobilization, to get the better of him.
This move is crucial; it is indeed of primary importance, while our inferiority
in weapons and other things is only secondary. The mobilization of the common
people throughout the country will create a vast sea in which to drown the
enemy, create the conditions that will make up for our inferiority m arms
and other things, and create the prerequisites for overcoming every difficulty
in the war. To win victory, we must persevere in the War of Resistance, in
the united front and in the protracted war. But all these are inseparable
from the mobilization of the common people. To wish for victory and yet neglect
political mobilization is like wishing to "go south by driving the chariot
north", and the result would inevitably be to forfeit victory.

67. What does political mobilization mean? First, it means telling the army
and the people about the political aim of the war. It is necessary for every
soldier and civilian to see why the war must be fought and how it concerns
him. The political aim of the war is "to drive out Japanese imperialism and
build a new China of freedom and equality"; we must proclaim this aim to
everybody, to all soldiers and civilians, before we can create an anti-Japanese
upsurge and unite hundreds of millions as one man to contribute their all
to the war. Secondly, it is not enough merely to explain the aim to them;
the steps and policies for its attainment must also be given, that is, there
must be a political programme. We already have the Ten-Point Programme for
Resisting Japan and Saving the Nation and also the Programme of Armed Resistance
and National Reconstruction; we should popularize both of them in the army
and among the people and mobilize everyone to carry them out. Without a
clear-cut, concrete political programme it is impossible to mobilize all
the armed forces and the whole people to carry the war against Japan through
to the end. Thirdly, how should we mobilize them? By word of mouth, by leaflets
and bulletins, by newspapers, books and pamphlets, through plays and films,
through schools, through the mass organizations and through our cadres. What
has been done so far in the Kuomintang areas is only a drop in the ocean,
and moreover it has been done in a manner ill-suited to the people's tastes
and in a spirit uncongenial to them; this must be drastically changed. Fourthly,
to mobilize once is not enough; political mobilization for the War of Resistance
must be continuous. Our job is not to recite our political programme to the
people, for nobody will listen to such recitations; we must link the political
mobilization for the war with developments in the war and with the life of
the soldiers and the people, and make it a continuous movement. This is a
matter of immense importance on which our victory in the war primarily depends.

THE OBJECT OF WAR


68. Here we are not dealing with the political aim of war; the political
aim of the War of Resistance Against Japan has been defined above as "to
drive out Japanese imperialism and build a new China of freedom and equality".
Here we are dealing with the elementary object of war, war as "politics with
bloodshed", as mutual slaughter by opposing armies. The object of war is
specifically "to preserve oneself and destroy the enemy" (to destroy the
enemy means to disarm him or "deprive him of the power to resist", and does
not mean to destroy every member of his forces physically). In ancient warfare,
the spear and the shield were used, the spear to attack and destroy the enemy,
and the shield to defend and preserve oneself. To the present day, all weapons
are still an extension of the spear and the shield. The bomber, the machine-gun,
the long-range gun and poison gas are developments of the spear, while the
air-raid shelter, the steel helmet, the concrete fortification and the gas
mask are developments of the shield. The tank is a new weapon combining the
functions of both spear and shield. Attack is the chief means of destroying
the enemy, but defence cannot be dispensed with. In attack the immediate
object is to destroy the enemy, but at the same time it is self-preservation,
because if the enemy is not destroyed, you will be destroyed. In defence
the immediate object is to preserve yourself, but at the same time defence
is a means of supplementing attack or preparing to go over to the attack.
Retreat is in the category of defence and is a continuation of defence, while
pursuit is a continuation of attack. It should be pointed out that destruction
of the enemy is the primary object of war and self-preservation the secondary,
because only by destroying the enemy in large numbers can one effectively
preserve oneself. Therefore attack, the chief means of destroying the enemy,
is primary, while defence, a supplementary means of destroying the enemy
and a means of self-preservation, is secondary. In actual warfare the chief
role is played by defence much of the time and by attack for the rest of
the time, but if war is taken as a whole, attack remains primary.

69. How do we justify the encouragement of heroic sacrifice in war? Does
it not contradict "self-preservation"? No, it does not; sacrifice and
self-preservation are both opposite and complementary to each other. War
is politics with bloodshed and exacts a price, sometimes an extremely high
price. Partial and temporary sacrifice (non-preservation) is incurred for
the sake of general and permanent preservation. This is precisely why we
say that attack, which is basically a means of destroying the enemy, also
has the function of self-preservation. It is also the reason why defence
must be accompanied by attack and should not be defence pure and simple.

70. The object of war, namely, the preservation of oneself and the destruction
of the enemy, is the essence of war and the basis of all war activities,
an essence which pervades all war activities, from the technical to the
strategic. The object of war is the underlying principle of war, and no
technical, tactical, or strategic concepts or principles can in any way depart
from it. What for instance is meant by the principle of "taking cover and
making full use of fire-power" in shooting? The purpose of the former is
self-preservation, of the latter the destruction of the enemy. The former
gives rise to such techniques as making use of the terrain and its features,
advancing in spurts, and spreading out in dispersed formation. The latter
gives rise to other techniques, such as clearing the field of fire and organizing
a fire-net. As for the assault force, the containing force and the reserve
force in a tactical operation, the first is for annihilating the enemy, the
second for preserving oneself, and the third is for either purpose according
to circumstances--either for annihilating the enemy (in which case it reinforces
the assault force or serves as a pursuit force), or for self-preservation
(in which case it reinforces the containing force or serves as a covering
force). Thus, no technical, tactical, or strategical principles or operations
can in any way depart from the object of war, and this object pervades the
whole of a war and runs through it from beginning to end.

71. In directing the anti-Japanese war, leaders at the various levels must
lose sight neither of the contrast between the fundamental factors on each
side nor of the object of this war. In the course of military operations
these contrasting fundamental factors unfold themselves in the struggle by
each side to preserve itself and destroy the other. In our war we strive
in every engagement to win a victory, big or small, and to disarm a part
of the enemy and destroy a part of his men and materiel. We must
accumulate the results of these partial destructions of the enemy into major
strategic victories and so achieve the final political aim of expelling the
enemy, protecting the motherland and building a new China.

OFFENCE WITHIN DEFENCE, QUICK DECISIONS WITHIN A PROTRACTED
  WAR EXTERIOR LINES WITHIN INTERIOR LINES


72. Now let us examine the specific strategy of the War of Resistance Against
Japan. We have already said that our strategy for resisting Japan is that
of protracted war, and indeed this is perfectly right. But this strategy
is general, not specific. Specifically, how should the protracted war be
conducted? We shall now discuss this question. Our answer is as follows.
In the first and second stages of the war, i.e., in the stages of
the enemy's offensive and preservation of his gains, we should conduct tactical
offensives within the strategic defensive, campaigns and battles of quick
decision within the strategically protracted war, and campaigns and battles
on exterior lines within strategically interior lines. In the third stage,
we should launch the strategic counter-offensive.

73. Since Japan is a strong imperialist power and we are a weak semi-colonial
and semi-feudal country, she has adopted the policy of the strategic offensive
while we are on the strategic defensive. Japan is trying to execute the strategy
of a war of quick decision; we should consciously execute the strategy of
protracted war. Japan is using dozens of army divisions of fairly high combat
effectiveness (now numbering thirty) and part of her navy to encircle and
blockade China from both land and sea, and is using her air force to bomb
China. Her army has already established a long front stretching from Paotow
to Hangchow and her navy has reached Fukien and Kwangtung; thus exterior-line
operations have taken shape on a vast scale. On the other hand, we are in
the position of operating on interior lines. All this is due to the fact
that the enemy is strong while we are weak. This is one aspect of the situation.

74. But there is another and exactly opposite aspect. Japan, though strong,
does not have enough soldiers. China, though weak, has a vast territory,
a large population and plenty of soldiers. Two important consequences follow.
First, the enemy, employing his small forces against a vast country, can
only occupy some big cities and main lines of communication and part of the
plains. Thus there are extensive areas in the territory under his occupation
which he has had to leave ungarrisoned, and which provide a vast arena for
our guerrilla warfare. Taking China as a whole, even if the enemy manages
to occupy the line connecting Canton, Wuhan and Lanchow and its adjacent
areas, he can hardly seize the regions beyond, and this gives China a general
rear and vital bases from which to carry on the protracted war to final victory.
Secondly, in pitting his small forces against large forces, the enemy is
encircled by our large forces. The enemy is attacking us along several routes,
strategically he is on exterior lines while we are on interior lines,
strategically he is on the offensive while we are on the defensive; all this
looks very much to our disadvantage. However, we can make use of our two
advantages, namely, our vast territory and large forces, and, instead of
stubborn positional warfare, carry on flexible mobile warfare, employing
several divisions against one enemy division, several tens of thousands of
our men against ten thousand of his, several columns against one of his columns,
and suddenly encircling and attacking a single column from the exterior lines
of the battlefield. In this way, while the enemy is on exterior lines and
on the offensive in strategic operations, he will be forced to fight on interior
lines and on the defensive in campaigns and battles. And for us, interior
lines and the defensive in strategic operations will be transformed into
exterior lines and the offensive in campaigns and battles. This is the way
to deal with one or indeed with any advancing enemy column. Both the consequences
discussed above follow from the fact that the enemy is small while we are
big. Moreover, the enemy forces, though small, are strong (in arms and in
training) while our forces, though large, are weak (in arms and in training
but not in morale), and in campaigns and battles, therefore, we should not
only employ large forces against small and operate from exterior against
interior lines, but also follow the policy of seeking quick decisions. In
general, to achieve quick decision, we should attack a moving and not a
stationary enemy. We should concentrate a big force under cover beforehand
alongside the route which the enemy is sure to take, and while he is on the
move, advance suddenly to encircle and attack him before he knows what is
happening, and thus quickly conclude the battle. If we fight well, we may
destroy the entire enemy force or the greater part or some part of it, and
even if we do not fight so well, we may still inflict heavy casualties. This
applies to any and every one of our battles. If each month we could win one
sizable victory like that at Pinghsingkuan or Taierhchuang, not to speak
of more, it would greatly demoralize the enemy, stimulate the morale of our
own forces and evoke international support. Thus our strategically protracted
war is translated in the field into battles of quick decision. The enemy's
war of strategic quick decision is bound to change into protracted war after
he is defeated in many campaigns and battles.

75. In a word, the above operational principle for fighting campaigns and
battles is one of "quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines". It
is the opposite of our strategic principle of "protracted defensive warfare
on interior lines", and yet it is the indispensable principle for carrying
out this strategy. If we should use "protracted defensive warfare on interior
lines" as the principle for campaigns and battles too, as we did at the beginning
of the War of Resistance, it would be totally unsuited to the circumstances
in which the enemy is small while we are big and the enemy is strong while
we are weak; in that case we could never achieve our strategic objective
of a protracted war and we would be defeated by the enemy. That is why we
have always advocated the organization of the forces of the entire country
into a number of large field armies, each counterposed to one of the enemy's
field armies but having two, three or four times its strength, and so keeping
the enemy engaged in extensive theatres of war in accordance with the principle
outlined above. This principle of "quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior
lines" can and must be applied in guerrilla as well as in regular warfare.
It is applicable not only to any one stage of the war but to its entire course.
In the stage of strategic counter-offensive, when we are better equipped
technically and are no longer in the position of the weak fighting the strong,
we shall be able to capture prisoners and booty on a large scale all the
more effectively if we continue to employ superior numbers in quick-decision
offensive battles from exterior lines. For instance, if we employ two, three
or four mechanized divisions against one mechanized enemy division, we can
be all the more certain of destroying it. It is common sense that several
hefty fellows can easily beat one.

76. If we resolutely apply "quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior
lines" on a battlefield, we shall not only change the balance of forces on
that battlefield, but also gradually change the general situation. On the
battlefield we shall be on the offensive and the enemy on the defensive,
we shall be employing superior numbers on exterior lines and the enemy inferior
numbers on interior lines, and we shall seek quick decisions, while the enemy,
try as he may, will not be able to protract the fighting in the expectation
of reinforcements; for all these reasons, the enemy's position will change
from strong to weak, from superior to inferior, while that of our forces
will change from weak to strong, from inferior to superior. After many such
battles have been victoriously fought, the general situation between us and
the enemy will change. That is to say, through the accumulation of victories
on many battlefields by quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines,
we shall gradually strengthen ourselves and weaken the enemy, which will
necessarily affect the general balance of forces and bring about changes
in it. When that happens, these changes, together with other factors on our
side and together with the changes inside the enemy camp and a favourable
international situation, will turn the over-all situation between us and
the enemy first into one of parity and then into one of superiority for us.
That will be the time for us to launch the counter-offensive and drive the
enemy out of the country.

77. War is a contest of strength, but the original pattern of strength changes
in the course of war. Here the decisive factor is subjective effort--winning
more victories and committing fewer errors. The objective factors provide
the possibility for such change, but in order to turn this possibility into
actuality both correct policy and subjective effort are essential. It is
then that the subjective plays the decisive role.

INITIATIVE, FLEXIBILITY AND PLANNING


78. In quick-decision offensive campaigns and battles on exterior lines,
as discussed above, the crucial point is the "offensive"; "exterior lines"
refers to the sphere of the offensive and "quick-decision" to its duration.
Hence the name "quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines". It is
the best principle for waging a protracted war and it is also the principle
for what is known as mobile warfare. But it cannot be put into effect without
initiative, flexibility and planning. Let us now study these three questions.

79. We have already discussed man's conscious dynamic role, so why do we
talk about the initiative again? By conscious dynamic role we mean conscious
action and effort, a characteristic distinguishing man from other beings,
and this human characteristic manifests itself most strongly in war; all
this has been discussed already. The initiative here means an army's freedom
of action as distinguished from an enforced loss of freedom. Freedom of action
is the very life of an army and, once it is lost, the army is close to defeat
or destruction. The disarming of a soldier is the result of his losing freedom
of action through being forced into a passive position. The same is true
of the defeat of an army. For this reason both sides in war do all they can
to gain the initiative and avoid passivity. It may be said that the
quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines which we advocate and
the flexibility and planning necessary for its execution are designed to
gain the initiative and thus force the enemy into a passive position and
achieve the object of preserving ourselves and destroying the enemy. But
initiative or passivity is inseparable from superiority or inferiority in
the capacity to wage war. Consequently it is also inseparable from the
correctness or incorrectness of the subjective direction of war. In addition,
there is the question of exploiting the enemy's misconceptions and unpreparedness
in order to gain the initiative and force the enemy into passivity. These
points are analysed below.

80. Initiative is inseparable from superiority in capacity to wage war, while
passivity is inseparable from inferiority in capacity to wage war. Such
superiority or inferiority is the objective basis of initiative or passivity.
It is natural that the strategic initiative can be better maintained and
exercised through a strategic offensive, but to maintain the initiative always
and everywhere, that is, to have the absolute initiative, is possible only
when there is absolute superiority matched against absolute inferiority.
When a strong, healthy man wrestles with an invalid, he has the absolute
initiative. If Japan were not riddled with insoluble contradictions, if,
for instance, she could throw in a huge force of several million or ten million
men all at once, if her financial resources were several times what they
are, if she had no opposition from her own people or from other countries,
and if she did not pursue the barbarous policies which arouse the desperate
resistance of the Chinese people, then she would be able to maintain absolute
superiority and have the absolute initiative always and everywhere. In history,
such absolute superiority rarely appears in the early stages of a war or
a campaign but is to be found towards its end. For instance, on the eve of
Germany's capitulation in World War I, the Entente countries became absolutely
superior and Germany absolutely inferior, so that Germany was defeated and
the Entente countries were victorious; this is an example of absolute superiority
and inferiority towards the end of a war. Again, on the eve of the Chinese
victory at Taierhchuang, the isolated Japanese forces there were reduced
after bitter fighting to absolute inferiority while our forces achieved absolute
superiority, so that the enemy was defeated and we were victorious; this
is an example of absolute superiority and inferiority towards the end of
a campaign. A war or campaign may also end in a situation of relative superiority
or of parity, in which case there is compromise in the war or stalemate in
the campaign. But in most cases it is absolute superiority and inferiority
that decide victory and defeat. All this holds for the end of a war or a
campaign, and not for the beginning. The outcome of the Sino-Japanese war,
it can be predicted, will be that Japan will become absolutely inferior and
be defeated and that China will become absolutely superior and gain victory.
But at present superiority or inferiority is not absolute on either side,
but is relative. With the advantages of her military, economic and
political-organizational power, Japan enjoys superiority over us with our
military, economic and political-organizational weakness, which creates the
basis for her initiative. But since quantitatively her military and other
power is not great and she has many other disadvantages, her superiority
is reduced by her own contradictions. Upon her invasion of China, her superiority
has been reduced still further because she has come up against our vast
territory, large population, great numbers of troops and resolute nation-wide
resistance. Hence, Japan's general position has become one of only relative
superiority, and her ability to exercise and maintain the initiative, which
is thereby restricted, has likewise become relative. As for China, though
placed in a somewhat passive position strategically because of her inferior
strength, she is nevertheless quantitatively superior in territory, population
and troops, and also superior in the morale of her people and army and their
patriotic hatred of the enemy; this superiority, together with other advantages,
reduces the extent of her inferiority in military, economic and other power,
and changes it into a relative strategic inferiority. This also reduces the
degree of China's passivity so that her strategic position is one of only
relative passivity. Any passivity, however, is a disadvantage, and one must
strive hard to shake it off. Militarily, the way to do so is resolutely to
wage quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines, to launch guerrilla
warfare in the rear of the enemy and so secure overwhelming local superiority
and initiative in many campaigns of mobile and guerrilla warfare. Through
such local superiority and local initiative in many campaigns, we can gradually
create strategic superiority and strategic initiative and extricate ourselves
from strategic inferiority and passivity. Such is the interrelation between
initiative and passivity, between superiority and inferiority.

81. From this we can also understand the relationship between initiative
or passivity and the subjective directing of war. As already explained, it
is possible to escape from our position of relative strategic inferiority
and passivity, and the method is to create local superiority and initiative
in many campaigns, so depriving the enemy of local superiority and initiative
and plunging him into inferiority and passivity. These local successes will
add up to strategic superiority and initiative for us and strategic inferiority
and passivity for the enemy. Such a change depends upon correct subjective
direction. Why? Because while we seek superiority and the initiative, so
does the enemy; viewed from this angle, war is a contest in subjective ability
between the commanders of the opposing armies in their struggle for superiority
and for the initiative on the basis of material conditions such as military
forces and financial resources. Out of the contest there emerge a victor
and a vanquished; leaving aside the contrast in objective material conditions,
the victor will necessarily owe his success to correct subjective direction
and the vanquished his defeat to wrong subjective direction. We admit that
the phenomenon of war is more elusive and is characterized by greater uncertainty
than any other social phenomenon, in other words, that it is more a matter
of "probability". Yet war is in no way supernatural, but a mundane process
governed by necessity. That is why Sun Wu Tzu's axiom, "Know the enemy and
know yourself, and you can fight a hundred battles with no danger of defeat",
[20] remains a scientific truth. Mistakes arise
from ignorance about the enemy and about ourselves, and moreover the peculiar
nature of war makes it impossible in many cases to have full knowledge about
both sides; hence the uncertainty about military conditions and operations,
and hence mistakes and defeats. But whatever the situation and the moves
in a war, one can know their general aspects and essential points. It is
possible for a commander to reduce errors and give generally correct direction,
first through all kinds of reconnaissance and then through intelligent inference
and judgement. Armed with the weapon of "generally correct direction", we
can win more battles and transform our inferiority into superiority and our
passivity into initiative. This is how initiative or passivity is related
to the correct or incorrect subjective direction of a war.

82. The thesis that incorrect subjective direction can change superiority
and initiative into inferiority and passivity, and that correct subjective
direction can effect a reverse change, becomes all the more convincing when
we look at the record of defeats suffered by big and powerful armies and
of victories won by small and weak armies. There are many such instances
in Chinese and foreign history. Examples in China are the Battle of Chengpu
between the states of Tsin and Chu, [21] the Battle
of Chengkao between the states of Chu and Han,
[22] the Battle in which Han Hsin defeated the Chao
armies, [23] the Battle of Kunyang between the
states of Hsin and Han, [24] the Battle of Kuantu
between Yuan Shao and Tsao Tsao, [25] the Battle
of Chihpi between the states of Wu and Wei, [26]
the Battle of Yiling between the states of Wu and Shu,
[27] the Battle of Feishui between the states of
Chin and Tsin, [28] etc. Among examples to be found
abroad are most of Napoleon's campaigns and the civil war in the Soviet Union
after the October Revolution. In all these instances, victory was won by
small forces over big and by inferior over superior forces. In every case,
the weaker force, pitting local superiority and initiative against the enemy's
local inferiority and passivity, first inflicted one sharp defeat on the
enemy and then turned on the rest of his forces and smashed them one by one,
thus transforming the over-all situation into one of superiority and initiative.
The reverse was the case with the enemy who originally had superiority and
held the initiative; owing to subjective errors and internal contradictions,
it sometimes happened that he completely lost an excellent or fairly good
position in which he enjoyed superiority and initiative, and became a general
without an army or a king without a kingdom. Thus it can be seen that although
superiority or inferiority in the capacity to wage war is the objective basis
determining initiative or passivity, it is not in itself actual initiative
or passivity; it is only through a struggle, a contest of ability, that actual
initiative or passivity can emerge. In the struggle, correct subjective direction
can transform inferiority into superiority and passivity into initiative,
and incorrect subjective direction can do the opposite. The fact that every
ruling dynasty was defeated by revolutionary armies shows that mere superiority
in certain respects does not guarantee the initiative, much less the final
victory. The inferior side can wrest the initiative and victory from the
superior side by securing certain conditions through active subjective endeavour
in accordance with the actual circumstances.

83. To have misconceptions and to be caught unawares may mean to lose superiority
and initiative. Hence, deliberately creating misconceptions for the enemy
and then springing surprise attacks upon him are two ways--indeed two important
means--of achieving superiority and seizing the initiative. What are
misconceptions? "To see every bush and tree on Mount Pakung as an enemy
soldier" [29] is an example of misconception.
And "making a feint to the east but attacking in the west" is a way of creating
misconceptions among the enemy. When the mass support is sufficiently good
to block the leakage of news, it is often possible by various ruses to succeed
in leading the enemy into a morass of wrong judgements and actions so that
he loses his superiority and the initiative. The saying, "There can never
be too much deception in war", means precisely this. What does "being caught
unawares" mean? It means being unprepared. Without preparedness superiority
is not real superiority and there can be no initiative either. Having grasped
this point, a force which is inferior but prepared can often defeat a superior
enemy by surprise attack. We say an enemy on the move is easy to attack precisely
because he is then off guard, that is, unprepared. These two points--creating
misconceptions among the enemy and springing surprise attacks on him-- mean
transferring the uncertainties of war to the enemy while securing the greatest
possible certainty for ourselves and thereby gaining superiority, the initiative
and victory. Excellent organization of the masses is the prerequisite for
attaining all this. Therefore it is extremely important to arouse all the
people who are opposed to the enemy, to arm themselves to the last man, make
widespread raids on the enemy and also prevent the leakage of news and provide
a screen for our own forces; in this way the enemy will be kept in the dark
about where and when our forces will attack, and an objective basis will
be created for misconceptions and unpreparedness on his part. It was largely
owing to the organized, armed masses of the people that the weak and small
force of the Chinese Red Army was able to win many battles in the period
of the Agrarian Revolutionary War. Logically, a national war should win broader
mass support than an agrarian revolutionary war; however, as a result of
past mistakes [30] the people are in an unorganized
state, cannot be promptly drawn in to serve the cause and are sometimes even
made use of by the enemy. The resolute rallying of the people on a broad
scale is the only way to secure inexhaustible resources to meet all the
requirements of the war. Moreover, it will definitely play a big part in
carrying out our tactics of defeating the enemy by misleading him and catching
him unawares. We are not Duke Hsiang of Sung and have no use for his asinine
ethics.[31] In order to achieve victory we must
as far as possible make the enemy blind and deaf by sealing his eyes and
ears and drive his commanders to distraction by creating confusion in their
minds. The above concerns the way in which the initiative or passivity is
related to the subjective direction of the war. Such subjective direction
is indispensable for defeating Japan.

84. By and large, Japan has held the initiative in the stage of her offensive
by reason of her military power and her exploitation of our subjective errors,
past and present. But her initiative is beginning to wane to some extent
because of her many inherent disadvantages and of the subjective errors she
too has committed in the course of the war (of which more later) and also
because of our many advantages. The enemy's defeat at Taierhchuang and his
predicament in Shansi prove this clearly. The widespread development of guerrilla
warfare in the enemy's rear has placed his garrisons in the occupied areas
in a completely passive position. Although he is still on the offensive
strategically and still holds the initiative, his initiative will end when
his strategic offensive ends. The first reason why the enemy will not be
able to maintain the initiative is that his shortage of troops renders it
impossible for him to carry on the offensive indefinitely. Our offensive
warfare in campaigns and our guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines, together
with other factors, constitute the second reason why he will have to cease
his offensive at a certain limit and will not be able to keep his initiative.
The existence of the Soviet Union and changes in the international situation
constitute the third reason. Thus it can be seen that the enemy's initiative
is limited and can be shattered. If, in military operations, China can keep
up offensive warfare by her main forces in campaigns and battles, vigorously
develop guerrilla warfare in the enemy's rear and mobilize the people on
a broad scale politically, we can gradually build up a position of strategic
initiative.

85. Let us now discuss flexibility. What is flexibility? It is the concrete
realization of the initiative in military operations; it is the flexible
employment of armed forces. The flexible employment of armed forces is the
central task in directing a war, a task most difficult to perform well. In
addition to organizing and educating the army and the people, the business
of war consists in the employment of troops in combat, and all these things
are done to win the fight. Of course it is difficult to organize an army,
etc., but it is even more difficult to employ it, particularly when the weak
are fighting the strong. To do so requires subjective ability of a very high
order and requires the overcoming of the confusion, obscurity and uncertainty
peculiar to war and the discovery of order, clarity and certainty in it;
only thus can flexibility in command be realized.

86. The basic principle of field operations for the War of Resistance Against
Japan is quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines. There are various
tactics or methods for giving effect to this principle, such as dispersion
and concentration of forces, diverging advance and converging attack, the
offensive and the defensive, assault and containment, encirclement and
outflanking, advance and retreat. It is easy to understand these tactics,
but not at all easy to employ and vary them flexibly. Here the three crucial
links are the time, the place and the troops. No victory can be won unless
the time, the place and the troops are well chosen. For example, in attacking
an enemy force on the move, if we strike too early, we expose ourselves and
give the enemy a chance to prepare, and if we strike too late, the enemy
may have encamped and concentrated his forces, presenting us with a hard
nut to crack. This is the question of the time. If we select a point of assault
on the left flank which actually turns out to be the enemy's weak point,
victory will be easy; but if we select the right flank and hit a snag, nothing
will be achieved. This is the question of the place. If a particular unit
of our forces is employed for a particular task, victory may be easy; but
if another unit is employed for the same task, it may be hard to achieve
results. This is the question of the troops. We should know not only how
to employ tactics but how to vary them. For flexibility of command the important
task is to make changes such as from the offensive to the defensive or from
the defensive to the offensive, from advance to retreat or from retreat to
advance, from containment to assault or from assault to containment, from
encirclement to outflanking or from outflanking to encirclement, and to make
such changes properly and in good time according to the circumstances of
the troops and terrain on both sides. This is true of command in campaigns
and strategic command as well as of command in battles.

87. The ancients said: "Ingenuity in varying tactics depends on mother wit";
this "ingenuity", which is what we mean by flexibility, is the contribution
of the intelligent commander. Flexibility does not mean recklessness;
recklessness must be rejected. Flexibility consists in the intelligent
commander's ability to take timely and appropriate measures on the basis
of objective conditions after "judging the hour and sizing up the situation"
(the "situation" includes the enemy's situation, our situation and the terrain),
and this flexibility is "ingenuity in varying tactics". On the basis of this
ingenuity, we can win more victories in quick-decision offensive warfare
on exterior lines, change the balance of forces in our favour, gain the
initiative over the enemy, and overwhelm and crush him so that the final
victory will be ours.

88. Let us now discuss the question of planning. Because of the uncertainty
peculiar to war, it is much more difficult to prosecute war according to
plan than is the case with other activities. Yet, since "preparedness ensures
success and unpreparedness spells failure", there can be no victory in war
without advance planning and preparations. There is no absolute certainty
in war, and yet it is not without some degree of relative certainty. We are
comparatively certain about our own situation. We are very uncertain about
the enemy's, but here too there are signs for us to read, clues to follow
and sequences of phenomena to ponder. These form what we call a degree of
relative certainty, which provides an objective basis for planning in war.
Modern technical developments (telegraphy, radio, airplanes, motor vehicles,
railways, steamships, etc.) have added to the possibilities of planning in
war. However, complete or stable planning is difficult because there is only
very limited and transient certainty in war; such planning must change with
the movement (flow or change) of the war and vary in degree according to
the scale of the war. Tactical plans, such as plans for attack or defence
by small formations or units, often have to be changed several times a day.
A plan of campaign, that is, of action by large formations, can generally
stand till the conclusion of the campaign, in the course of which, however,
it is often changed partially or sometimes even wholly. A strategic plan
based on the over-all situation of both belligerents is still more stable,
but it too is applicable only in a given strategic stage and has to be changed
when the war moves towards a new stage. The making and changing of tactical,
campaign and strategic plans in accordance with scope and circumstance is
a key factor in directing a war; it is the concrete expression of flexibility
in war, in other words, it is also ingenuity in varying one's tactics. Commanders
at all levels in the anti-Japanese war should take note.

89. Because of the fluidity of war, some people categorically deny that war
plans or policies can be relatively stable, describing such plans or policies
as "mechanical". This view is wrong. In the preceding section we fully recognized
that, because the circumstances of war are only relatively certain and the
flow (movement or change) of war is rapid, war plans or policies can be only
relatively stable and have to be changed or revised in good time in accordance
with changing circumstances and the flow of the war; otherwise we would become
mechanists. But one must not deny the need for war plans or policies that
are relatively stable over given periods; to negate this is to negate everything,
including the war itself as well as the negator himself. As both military
conditions and operations are relatively stable, we must grant the relative
stability of the war plans and policies resulting from them. For example,
since both the circumstances of the war in northern China and the dispersed
nature of the Eighth Route Army's operations are relatively stable for a
particular stage, it is absolutely necessary during this stage to acknowledge
the relative stability of the Eighth Route Army's strategic principle of
operation, namely "Guerrilla warfare is basic, but lose no chance for mobile
warfare under favourable conditions." The period of validity of a plan for
a campaign is shorter than that of a strategic plan, and for a tactical plan
it is shorter still, but each is stable over a given period. Anyone denying
this point would have no way of handling warfare and would become a relativist
in war with no settled views, for whom one course is just as wrong or just
as right as another. No one denies that even a plan valid for a given period
is fluid; otherwise, one plan would never be abandoned in favour of another.
But it is fluid within limits, fluid within the bounds of the various war
operations undertaken for carrying it out, but not fluid as to its essence;
in other words it is quantitatively but not qualitatively fluid. Within such
a given period of time, this essence is definitely not fluid, which is what
we mean by relative stability within a given period. In the great river of
absolute fluidity throughout the war there is relative stability at each
particular stretch--such is our fundamental view regarding war plans or policies.

90. Having dealt with protracted defensive warfare on interior lines in strategy
and with quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines in campaigns
and battles, and also with the initiative, flexibility and planning, we can
now sum up briefly. The anti-Japanese war must have a plan. War plans, which
are the concrete application of strategy and tactics, must be flexible so
that they can be adapted to the circumstances of the war. We should always
seek to transform our inferiority into superiority and our passivity into
the initiative so as to change the situation as between the enemy and ourselves.
All these find expression in quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior
lines in campaigns and battles and protracted defensive warfare on interior
lines in strategy.

MOBILE WARFARE, GUERRILLA WARFARE AND POSITIONAL
  WARFARE


91. A war will take the form of mobile warfare when its content is quick-decision
offensive warfare on exterior lines in campaigns and battles within the framework
of the strategy of interior lines, protracted war and defence. Mobile warfare
is the form in which regular armies wage quick-decision offensive campaigns
and battles on exterior lines along extensive fronts and over big areas of
operation. At the same time, it includes "mobile defence", which is conducted
when necessary to facilitate such offensive battles; it also includes positional
attack and positional defence in a supplementary role. Its characteristics
are regular armies, superiority of forces in campaigns and battles, the
offensive, and fluidity.

92. China has a vast territory and an immense number of soldiers, but her
troops are inadequately equipped and trained; the enemy's forces, on the
other hand, are inadequate in number, but better equipped and trained. In
this situation, there is no doubt that we must adopt offensive mobile warfare
as our primary form of warfare, supplementing it by others and integrating
them all into mobile warfare. We must oppose "only retreat, never advance",
which is flightism, and at the same time oppose "only advance, never retreat"
which is desperate recklessness.

93. One of the characteristics of mobile warfare is fluidity, which not only
permits but requires a field army to advance and to withdraw in great strides.
However, it has nothing in common with flightism of the Han Fu-chu
brand.[32] The primary requirement of war is to
destroy the enemy, and the other requirement is self-preservation. The object
of self-preservation is to destroy the enemy, and to destroy the enemy is
in turn the most effective means of self-preservation. Hence mobile warfare
is in no way an excuse for people like Han Pu-chu and can never mean moving
only backward, and never forward; that kind of "moving" which negates the
basic offensive character of mobile warfare would, in practice, "move" China
out of existence despite her vastness.

94. However, the other view, which we call the desperate recklessness of
"only advance, never retreat", is also wrong. The mobile warfare we advocate,
the content of which is quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines
in campaigns and battles, includes positional warfare in a supplementary
role, "mobile defence" and retreat, without all of which mobile warfare cannot
be fully carried out. Desperate recklessness is military short-sightedness,
originating often from fear of losing territory. A man who acts with desperate
recklessness does not know that one characteristic of mobile warfare is fluidity,
which not only permits but requires a field army to advance and to withdraw
in great strides. On the positive side, in order to draw the enemy into a
fight unfavourable to him but favourable to us, it is usually necessary that
he should be on the move and that we should have a number of advantages,
such as favourable terrain, a vulnerable enemy, a local population that can
prevent the leakage of information, and the enemy's fatigue and unpreparedness.
This requires that the enemy should advance, and we should not grudge a temporary
loss of part of our territory. For the temporary loss of part of our territory
is the price we pay for the permanent preservation of all our territory,
including the recovery of lost territory. On the negative side, whenever
we are forced into a disadvantageous position which fundamentally endangers
the preservation of our forces, we should have the courage to retreat, so
as to preserve our forces and hit the enemy when new opportunities arise.
In their ignorance of this principle, the advocates of desperate action will
contest a city or a piece of ground even when the position is obviously and
definitely unfavourable; as a result, they not only lose the city or ground
but fail to preserve their forces. We have always advocated the policy of
"luring the enemy in deep", precisely because it is the most effective military
policy for a weak army strategically on the defensive to employ against a
strong army.

95. Among the forms of warfare in the anti-Japanese war mobile warfare comes
first and guerrilla warfare second. When we say that in the entire war mobile
warfare is primary and guerrilla warfare supplementary, we mean that the
outcome of the war depends mainly on regular warfare, especially in its mobile
form, and that guerrilla warfare cannot shoulder the main responsibility
in deciding the outcome. It does not follow, however, that the role of guerrilla
warfare is unimportant in the strategy of the war. Its role in the strategy
of the war as a whole is second only to that of mobile warfare, for without
its support we cannot defeat the enemy. In saying this we also have in mind
the strategic task of developing guerrilla warfare into mobile warfare. Guerrilla
warfare will not remain the same throughout this long and cruel war, but
will rise to a higher level and develop into mobile warfare. Thus the strategic
role of guerrilla warfare is twofold, to support regular warfare and to transform
itself into regular warfare. Considering the unprecedented extent and duration
of guerrilla warfare in China's War of Resistance, it is all the more important
not to underestimate its strategic role. Guerrilla warfare in China, therefore,
has not only its tactical but also its peculiar strategic problems. I have
already discussed this in "Problems of Strategy in Guerrilla War Against
Japan". As indicated above, the forms of warfare in the three strategic stages
of the War of Resistance are as follows. In the first stage mobile warfare
is primary, while guerrilla and positional warfare are supplementary. In
the second stage guerrilla warfare will advance to the first place and will
be supplemented by mobile and positional warfare. In the third stage mobile
warfare will again become the primary form and will be supplemented by positional
and guerrilla warfare. But the mobile warfare of the third stage will no
longer be undertaken solely by the original regular forces; part, possibly
quite an important part, will be undertaken by forces which were originally
guerrillas but which will have progressed from guerrilla to mobile warfare.
From the viewpoint of all three stages in China's War of Resistance Against
Japan, guerrilla warfare is definitely indispensable. Our guerrilla war will
present a great drama unparalleled in the annals of war. For this reason,
out of the millions of China's regular troops, it is absolutely necessary
to assign at least several hundred thousand to disperse through all
enemy-occupied areas, arouse the masses to arm themselves, and wage guerrilla
warfare in co-ordination with the masses. The regular forces so assigned
should shoulder this sacred task conscientiously, and they should not think
their status lowered because they fight fewer big battles and for the time
being do not appear as national heroes. Any such thinking is wrong. Guerrilla
warfare does not bring as quick results or as great renown as regular warfare,
but "a long road tests a horse's strength and a long task proves a man's
heart", and in the course of this long and cruel war guerrilla warfare will
demonstrate its immense power; it is indeed no ordinary undertaking. Moreover,
such regular forces can conduct guerrilla warfare when dispersed and mobile
warfare when concentrated, as the Eighth Route Army has been doing. The principle
of the Eighth Route Army is, "Guerrilla warfare is basic, but lose no chance
for mobile warfare under favourable conditions." This principle is perfectly
correct; the views of its opponents are wrong.

96. At China's present technical level, positional warfare, defensive or
offensive, is generally impracticable, and this is where our weakness manifests
itself. Moreover, the enemy is also exploiting the vastness of our territory
to bypass our fortified positions. Hence positiona1 warfare cannot be an
important, still less the principal, means for us. But in the first and second
stages of the war, it is possible and essential, within the scope of mobile
warfare, to employ localized positional warfare in a supplementary role in
campaigns. Semi-positional "mobile defence" is a still more essential part
of mobile warfare undertaken for the purpose of resisting the enemy at every
step, thereby depleting his forces and gaining extra time. China must strive
to increase her supplies of modern weapons so that she can fully carry out
the tasks of positional attack in the stage of the strategic counter-offensive.
In this third stage positional warfare will undoubtedly play a greater role,
for then the enemy will be holding fast to his positions, and we shall not
be able to recover our lost territory unless we launch powerful positional
attacks in support of mobile warfare. Nevertheless, in the third stage too,
we must exert our every effort to make mobile warfare the primary form of
warfare. For the art of directing war and the active role of man are largely
nullified in positional warfare such as that fought in Western Europe in
the second half of World War I. It is only natural that the war should be
taken "out of the trenches", since the war is being fought in the vast expanses
of China and since our side will remain poorly equipped technically for quite
a long time. Even during the third stage, when China's technical position
will be better, she will hardly surpass her enemy in that respect, and so
will have to concentrate on highly mobile warfare, without which she cannot
achieve final victory. Hence, throughout the War of Resistance China will
not adopt positional warfare as primary; the primary or important forms are
mobile warfare and guerrilla warfare. These two forms of warfare will afford
full play to the art of directing war and to the active role of man-- what
a piece of good fortune out of our misfortune!

WAR OF ATTRITION AND WAR OF ANNIHILATION


97. As we have said before, the essence, or the object, of war is to preserve
oneself and destroy the enemy. Since there are three forms of warfare, mobile,
positional and guerrilla, for achieving this object, and since they differ
in degrees of effectiveness, there arises the broad distinction between war
of attrition and war of annihilation.

98. To begin with, we may say that the anti-Japanese war is at once a war
of attrition and a war of annihilation. Why? Because the enemy is still
exploiting his strength and retains strategic superiority and strategic
initiative, and therefore, unless we fight campaigns and battles of annihilation,
we cannot effectively and speedily reduce his strength and break his superiority
and initiative. We still have our weakness and have not yet rid ourselves
of strategic inferiority and passivity; therefore, unless we fight campaigns
and battles of annihilation, we cannot win time to improve our internal and
international situation and alter our unfavourable position. Hence campaigns
of annihilation are the means of attaining the objective of strategic attrition.
In this sense war of annihilation is war of attrition. It is chiefly by using
the method of attrition through annihilation that China can wage protracted
war.

99. But the objective of strategic attrition may also be achieved by campaigns
of attrition. Generally speaking, mobile warfare performs the task of
annihilation, positional warfare performs the task of attrition, and guerrilla
warfare performs both simultaneously; the three forms of warfare are thus
distinguished from one another. In this sense war of annihilation is different
from war of attrition. Campaigns of attrition are supplementary but necessary
in protracted war.

100. Speaking theoretically and in terms of China's needs, in order to achieve
the strategic objective of greatly depleting the enemy's forces, China in
her defensive stage should not only exploit the function of annihilation,
which is fulfilled primarily by mobile warfare and partially by guerrilla
warfare, but also exploit the function of attrition, which is fulfilled primarily
by positional warfare (which itself is supplementary) and partially by guerrilla
warfare. In the stage of stalemate we should continue to exploit the functions
of annihilation and attrition fulfilled by guerrilla and mobile warfare for
further large-scale depletion of the enemy's forces. All this is aimed at
protracting the war, gradually changing the general balance of forces and
preparing the conditions for our counter-offensive. During the strategic
counter-offensive, we should continue to employ the method of attrition through
annihilation so as finally to expel the enemy.

101. But as a matter of fact, it was our experience in the last ten months
that many or even most of the mobile warfare campaigns became campaigns of
attrition, and guerrilla warfare did not adequately fulfil its proper function
of annihilation in certain areas. The positive aspect is that at least we
depleted the enemy's forces, which is important both for the protracted warfare
and for our final victory, and did not shed our blood in vain. But the drawbacks
are first, that we did not sufficiently deplete the enemy, and second, that
we were unable to avoid rather heavy losses and captured little war booty.
Although we should recognize the objective cause of this situation, namely,
the disparity between us and the enemy in technical equipment and in the
training of troops, in any case it is necessary, both theoretically and
practically, to urge that our main forces should fight vigorous battles of
annihilation whenever circumstances are favourable. And although our guerrilla
units have to wage battles of pure attrition in performing specific tasks
such as sabotage and harassment, it is necessary to advocate and vigorously
carry out campaigns and battles of annihilation whenever circumstances are
favourable, so as greatly to deplete the enemy's forces and greatly replenish
our own.

102. The "exterior lines", the "quick-decision" and the "offensive" in
quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines and the "mobility" in
mobile warfare find their main operational expression in the use of encircling
and outflanking tactics; hence the necessity for concentrating superior forces.
Therefore concentration of forces and the use of encircling and outflanking
tactics are the prerequisites for mobile warfare, that is, for quick-decision
offensive warfare on exterior lines. All this is aimed at annihilating the
enemy forces.

103. The strength of the Japanese army lies not only in its weapons but also
in the training of its officers and men--its degree of organization, its
self-confidence arising from never having been defeated, its superstitious
belief in the Mikado and in supernatural beings, its arrogance, its contempt
for the Chinese people and other such characteristics, all of which stem
from long years of indoctrination by the Japanese warlords and from the Japanese
national tradition. This is the chief reason why we have taken very few
prisoners, although we have killed and wounded a great many enemy troops.
It is a point that has been underestimated by many people in the past. To
destroy these enemy characteristics will be a long process. The first thing
to do is to give the matter serious attention, and then patiently and
systematically to work at it in the political field and in the fields of
international propaganda and the Japanese people's movement; in the military
sphere war of annihilation is of course one of the means. In these enemy
characteristics pessimists may find a basis for the theory of national
subjugation, and passively minded military men a basis for opposition to
war of annihilation. We, on the contrary, maintain that these strong points
of the Japanese army can be destroyed and that their destruction has already
begun. The chief method of destroying them is to win over the Japanese soldiers
politically. We should understand, rather than hurt, their pride and channel
it in the proper direction and, by treating prisoners of war leniently, lead
the Japanese soldiers to see the anti-popular character of the aggression
committed by the Japanese rulers. On the other hand, we should demonstrate
to the Japanese soldiers the indomitable spirit and the heroic, stubborn
fighting capacity of the Chinese army and the Chinese people, that is, we
should deal them blows in battles of annihilation. Our experience in the
last ten months of military operations shows that it is possible to annihilate
enemy forces--witness the Pinghsingkuan and Taierhchuang campaigns. The Japanese
army's morale is beginning to sag, its soldiers do not understand the aim
of the war, they are engulfed by the Chinese armies and by the Chinese people,
in assault they show far less courage than the Chinese soldiers, and so on;
all these are objective factors favourable to waging battles of annihilation,
and they will, moreover, steadily develop as the war becomes protracted.
From the viewpoint of destroying the enemy's overweening arrogance through
battles of annihilation, such battles are one of the prerequisites for shortening
the war and accelerating the emancipation of the Japanese soldiers and the
Japanese people. Cats make friends with cats, and nowhere in the world do
cats make friends with mice.

104. On the other hand, it must be admitted that for the present we are inferior
to the enemy in technical equipment and in troop training. Therefore, it
is often difficult to achieve the maximum in annihilation, such as capturing
the whole or the greater part of an enemy force, especially when fighting
on the plains. In this connection the excessive demands of the theorists
of quick victory are wrong. What should be demanded of our forces in the
anti-Japanese war is that they should fight battles of annihilation as far
as possible. In favourable circumstances, we should concentrate superior
forces in every battle and employ encircling and outflanking tactics--encircle
part if not all of the enemy forces, capture part if not all of the encircled
forces, and inflict heavy casualties on part of the encircled forces if we
cannot capture them. In circumstances which are unfavourable for battles
of annihilation, we should fight battles of attrition. In favourable
circumstances, we should employ the principle of concentration of forces,
and in unfavourable circumstances that of their dispersion. As for the
relationship of command in campaigns, we should apply the principle of
centralized command in the former and that of decentralized command in the
latter. These are the basic principles of field operations for the War of
Resistance Against Japan.

THE POSSIBILITIES OF EXPLOITING THE ENEMY'S MISTAKES


105. The enemy command itself provides a basis for the possibility of defeating
Japan. History has never known an infallible general and the enemy makes
mistakes just as we ourselves can hardly avoid making them; hence, the
possibility exists of exploiting the enemy's errors. In the ten months of
his war of aggression the enemy has already made many mistakes in strategy
and tactics. There are five major ones.

  First, piecemeal reinforcement. This is due to the enemy's underestimation
  of China and also to his shortage of troops. The enemy has always looked
  down on us. After grabbing the four northeastern provinces at small cost,
  he occupied eastern Hopei and northern Chahar, all by way of strategic
  reconnaissance. The conclusion the enemy came to was that the Chinese nation
  is a heap of loose sand. Thus, thinking that China would crumble at a single
  blow, he mapped out a plan of "quick decision", attempting with very small
  forces to send us scampering in panic. He did not expect to find such great
  unity and such immense powers of resistance as China has shown during the
  past ten months, forgetting as he did that China is already in an era of
  progress and already has an advanced political party, an advanced army and
  an advanced people. Meeting with setbacks, the enemy then increased his forces
  piecemeal from about a dozen to thirty divisions. If he wants to advance,
  he will have to augment his forces still further. But because of Japan's
  antagonism with the Soviet Union and her inherent shortage of manpower and
  finances, there are inevitable limits to the maximum number of men she can
  throw in and to the furthest extent of her advance.
  
  Second, absence of a main direction of attack. Before the Taierhchuang campaign,
  the enemy had divided his forces more or less evenly between northern and
  central China and had again divided them inside each of these areas. In northern
  China, for instance, he divided his forces among the Tientsin-pukow, the
  Peiping-Hankow and the Tatung-Puchow Railways, and along each of these lines
  he suffered some casualties and left some garrisons in the places occupied,
  after which he lacked the forces for further advances. After the Taierhchuang
  defeat, from which he learned a lesson, the enemy concentrated his main forces
  in the direction of Hsuchow, and so temporarily corrected this mistake.
  
  Third, lack of strategic co-ordination. On the whole coordination exists
  within the groups of enemy forces in northern China and in central China,
  but there is glaring lack of coordination between the two. When his forces
  on the southern section of the Tientsin-Pukow Railway attacked Hsiaopengpu,
  those on the northern section made no move, and when his forces on the northern
  section attacked Taierhchuang, those on the southern section made no move.
  After the enemy came to grief at both places, the Japanese minister of war
  arrived on an inspection tour and the chief of general staff turned up to
  take charge, and for the moment, it seemed, there was co-ordination. The
  landlord class, the bourgeoisie and the warlords of Japan have very serious
  internal contradictions, which are growing, and the lack of military
  co-ordination is one of the concrete manifestations of this fact.
  
  Fourth, failure to grasp strategic opportunities. This failure was conspicuously
  shown in the enemy's halt after the occupation of Nanking and Taiyuan, chiefly
  because of his shortage of troops and his lack of a strategic pursuit force.
  
  Fifth, encirclement of large, but annihilation of small, numbers. Before
  the Taierhchuang campaign, in the campaigns of Shanghai, Nanking, Tsangchow,
  Paoting, Nankow, Hsinkou and Linfen, many Chinese troops were routed but
  few were taken prisoner, which shows the stupidity of the enemy command.


These five errors--piecemeal reinforcement, absence of a main direction of
attack, lack of strategic co-ordination, failure to grasp opportunities,
and encirclement of large, but annihilation of small, numbers--were all points
of incompetence in the Japanese command before the Taierhchuang campaign.
Although the enemy has since made some improvements, he cannot possibly avoid
repeating his errors because of his shortage of troops, his internal
contradictions and other factors. In addition, what he gains at one point
he loses at another. For instance, when he concentrated his forces in northern
China on Hsuchow, he left a great vacuum in the occupied areas in northern
China, which gave us full scope for developing guerrilla warfare. These mistakes
were of the enemy's own making and not induced by us. On our part, we can
deliberately make the enemy commit errors, that is, we can mislead him and
manoeuvre him into the desired position by ingenious and effective moves
with the help of a well-organized local population, for example, by "making
a feint to the east but attacking in the west". This possibility has already
been discussed. All the above shows that in the enemy's command, too, we
can find some basis for victory. Of course, we should not take it as an important
basis for our strategic planning; on the contrary, the only reliable course
is to base our planning on the assumption that the enemy will make few mistakes.
Besides, the enemy can exploit our mistakes just as we can exploit his. It
is the duty of our command to allow him the minimum of opportunities for
doing so. Actually, the enemy command has committed errors, will again commit
errors in the future, and can be made to do so through our endeavours. All
these errors we can exploit, and it is the business of our generals in the
War of Resistance to do their utmost to seize upon them. However, although
much of the enemy's strategic and campaign command is incompetent,
there are quite a few excellent points in his battle command, that is, in
his unit and small formation tactics, and here we should learn from him.

THE QUESTION OF DECISIVE ENGAGEMENTS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE
  WAR


106. The question of decisive engagements in the anti-Japanese war should
be approached from three aspects: we should resolutely fight a decisive
engagement in every campaign or battle in which we are sure of victory; we
should avoid a decisive engagement in every campaign or battle in which we
are not sure of victory; and we should absolutely avoid a strategically decisive
engagement on which the fate of the whole nation is staked. The characteristics
differentiating our War of Resistance Against Japan from many other wars
are also revealed in this question of decisive engagements. In the first
and second stages of the war, which are marked by the enemy's strength and
our weakness, the enemy's objective is to have us concentrate our main forces
for a decisive engagement. Our objective is exactly the opposite. We want
to choose conditions favourable to us, concentrate superior forces and fight
decisive campaigns or battles only when we are sure of victory, as in the
battles at Pinghsingkuan, Taierhchuang and other places; we want to avoid
decisive engagements under unfavourable conditions when we are not sure of
victory, this being the policy we adopted in the Changteh and other campaigns.
As for fighting a strategically decisive engagement on which the fate of
the whole nation is staked, we simply must not do so, as witness the recent
withdrawal from Hsuchow. The enemy's plan for a "quick decision" was thus
foiled, and now he cannot help fighting a protracted war with us. These
principles are impracticable in a country with a small territory, and hardly
practicable in a country that is very backward politically. They are practicable
in China because she is a big country and is in an era of progress. If
strategically decisive engagements are avoided, then "as long as the green
mountains are there, one need not worry about firewood", for even though
some of our territory may be lost, we shall still have plenty of room for
manoeuvre and thus be able to promote and await domestic progress, international
support and the internal disintegration of the enemy; that is the best policy
for us in the anti-Japanese war. Unable to endure the arduous trials of a
protracted war and eager for an early triumph, the impetuous theorists of
quick victory clamour for a strategically decisive engagement the moment
the situation takes a slightly favourable turn. To do what they want would
be to inflict incalculable damage on the entire war, spell finis to the
protracted war, and land us in the enemy's deadly trap; actually, it would
be the worst policy. Undoubtedly, if we are to avoid decisive engagements,
we shall have to abandon territory, and we must have the courage to do so
when (and only when) it becomes completely unavoidable. At such times we
should not feel the slightest regret, for this policy of trading space for
time is correct. History tells us how Russia made a courageous retreat to
avoid a decisive engagement and then defeated Napoleon, the terror of his
age. Today China should do likewise.

107. Are we not afraid of being denounced as "non-resisters"? No, we are
not. Not to fight at all but to compromise with the enemy -- that is
non-resistance, which should not only be denounced but must never be tolerated.
We must resolutely fight the War of Resistance, but in order to avoid the
enemy's deadly trap, it is absolutely necessary that we should not allow
our main forces to be finished off at one blow, which would make it difficult
to continue the War of Resistance--in brief, it is absolutely necessary to
avoid national subjugation. To have doubts on this point is to be shortsighted
on the question of the war and is sure to lead one into the ranks of the
subjugationists. We have criticized the desperate recklessness of "only advance,
never retreat" precisely because, if it became the fashion, this doctrine
would make it impossible to continue the War of Resistance and would lead
to the danger of ultimate national subjugation.

108. We are for decisive engagements whenever circumstances are favourable,
whether in battles or in major or minor campaigns, and in this respect we
should never tolerate passivity. Only through such decisive engagements can
we achieve the objective of annihilating or depleting the enemy forces, and
every soldier in the anti-Japanese war should resolutely play his part. For
this purpose considerable partial sacrifices are necessary; to avoid any
sacrifice whatsoever is the attitude of cowards and of those afflicted by
the fear of Japan and must be firmly opposed. The execution of Li Fu-ying,
Han Fu-chu and other Rightists was justified. Within the scope of correct
war planning, encouraging the spirit and practice of heroic self-sacrifice
and dauntless advance in battle is absolutely necessary and inseparable from
the waging of protracted war and the achievement of final victory. We have
strongly condemned the flightism of "only retreat, never advance" and have
supported the strict enforcement of discipline, because it is only through
heroic decisive engagements, fought under a correct plan, that we can vanquish
the powerful enemy; flightism, on the contrary, gives direct support to the
theory of national subjugation.

109. Is it not self-contradictory to fight heroically first and then abandon
territory? Will not our heroic fighters have shed their blood in vain? That
is not at all the way questions should be posed. To eat and then to empty
your bowels--is this not to eat in vain? To sleep and then to get up--is
this not to sleep in vain? Can questions be posed in such a way? I would
suppose not. To keep on eating, to keep on sleeping, to keep on fighting
heroically all the way to the Yalu River without a stop--these are subjectivist
and formalist illusions, not realities of life. As everybody knows, although
in fighting and shedding our blood in order to gain time and prepare the
counter-offensive we have had to abandon some territory, in fact we have
gained time, we have achieved the objective of annihilating and depleting
enemy forces we have acquired experience in fighting, we have aroused hitherto
inactive people and improved our international standing. Has our blood been
shed in vain? Certainly not. Territory has been given up in order to preserve
our military forces and indeed to preserve territory, because if we do not
abandon part of our territory when conditions are unfavourable but blindly
fight decisive engagements without the least assurance of winning, we shall
lose our military forces and then be unable to avoid the loss of all our
territory; to say nothing of recovering territory already lost. A capitalist
must have capital to run his business, and if he loses it all he is no longer
a capitalist. Even a gambler must have money to stake, and if he risks it
all on a single throw and his luck fails, he cannot gamble any more. Events
have their twists and turns and do not follow a straight line, and war is
no exception; only formalists are unable to comprehend this truth.

100. I think the same will also hold true for the decisive engagements in
the stage of strategic counter-offensive. Although by then the enemy will
be in the inferior and we in the superior position, the principle of "fighting
profitable decisive engagements and avoiding unprofitable ones" will still
apply and will continue to apply until we have fought our way to the Yalu
River. This is how we will be able to maintain our initiative from beginning
to end, and as for the enemy's "challenges" and other people's "taunts",
we should imperturbably brush them aside and ignore them. In the War of
Resistance only those generals who show this kind of firmness can be deemed
courageous and wise. This is beyond the ken of those who "jump whenever touched".
Even though we are in a more or less passive position strategically in this
first stage of the war, we should have the initiative in every campaign;
and of course we should have the initiative throughout the later stages.
We are for protracted war and final victory, we are not gamblers who risk
everything on a single throw.

THE ARMY AND THE PEOPLE ARE THE FOUNDATION OF
  VICTORY


111. Japanese imperialism will never relax in its aggression against and
repression of revolutionary China; this is determined by its imperialist
nature. If China did not resist, Japan would easily seize all China without
firing a single shot, as she did the four northeastern provinces. Since China
is resisting, it is an inexorable law that Japan will try to repress this
resistance until the force of her repression is exceeded by the force of
China's resistance. The Japanese landlord class and bourgeoisie are very
ambitious, and in order to drive south to Southeast Asia and north to Siberia,
they have adopted the policy of breaking through in the centre by first attacking
China. Those who think that Japan will know where to stop and be content
with the occupation of northern China and of Kiangsu and Chekiang Provinces
completely fail to perceive that imperialist Japan, which has developed to
a new stage and is approaching extinction, differs from the Japan of the
past. When we say that there is a definite limit both to the number of men
Japan can throw in and to the extent of her advance, we mean that with her
available strength, Japan can only commit part of her forces against China
and only penetrate China as far as their capacity allows, for she also wants
to attack in other directions and has to defend herself against other enemies;
at the same time China has given proof of progress and capacity for stubborn
resistance, and it is inconceivable that there should be fierce attacks by
Japan without inevitable resistance by China. Japan cannot occupy the whole
of China, but she will spare no effort to suppress China's resistance in
all the areas she can reach, and will not stop until internal and external
developments push Japanese imperialism to the brink of the grave. There are
only two possible outcomes to the political situation in Japan. Either the
downfall of her entire ruling class occurs rapidly, political power passes
to the people and war thus comes to an end, which is impossible at the moment;
or her landlord class and bourgeoisie become more and more fascist and maintain
the war until the day of their downfall, which is the very road Japan is
now travelling. There can be no other outcome. Those who hope that the moderates
among the Japanese bourgeoisie will come forward and stop the war are only
harbouring illusions. The reality of Japanese politics for many years has
been that the bourgeois moderates of Japan have fallen captive to the landlords
and the financial magnates. Now that Japan has launched war against China,
so long as she does not suffer a fatal blow from Chinese resistance and still
retains sufficient strength, she is bound to attack Southeast Asia or Siberia,
or even both. She will do so once war breaks out in Europe; in their wishful
calculations' the rulers of Japan have it worked out on a grandiose scale.
Of course, it is possible that Japan will have to drop her original plan
of invading Siberia and adopt a mainly defensive attitude towards the Soviet
Union on account of Soviet strength and of the serious extent to which Japan
herself has been weakened by her war against China. But in that case, so
far from relaxing her aggression against China she will intensify it, because
then the only way left to her will be to gobble up the weak. China's task
of persevering in the War of Resistance, the united front and the protracted
war will then become all the more weighty, and it will be all the more necessary
not to slacken our efforts in the slightest.

112. Under the circumstances the main prerequisites for China's victory over
Japan are nation-wide unity and all-round progress on a scale ten or even
a hundred times greater than in the past. China is already in an era of progress
and has achieved a splendid unity, but her progress and unity are still far
from adequate. That Japan has occupied such an extensive area is due not
only to her strength but also to China's weakness; this weakness is entirely
the cumulative effect of the various historical errors of the last hundred
years, and especially of the last ten years, which have confined progress
to its present bounds. It is impossible to vanquish so strong an enemy without
making an extensive and long-term effort. There are many things we have to
exert ourselves to do; here I will deal only with two fundamental aspects,
the progress of the army and the progress of the people.

113. The reform of our military system requires its modernization and improved
technical equipment, without which we cannot drive the enemy back across
the Yalu River. In our employment of troops we need progressive, flexible
strategy and tactics, without which we likewise cannot win victory. Nevertheless,
soldiers are the foundation of an army; unless they are imbued with a progressive
political spirit, and unless such a spirit is fostered through progressive
political work, it will be impossible to achieve genuine unity between officers
and men, impossible to arouse their enthusiasm for the War of Resistance
to the full, and impossible to provide a sound basis for the most effective
use of all our technical equipment and tactics. When we say that Japan will
finally be defeated despite her technical superiority, we mean that the blows
we deliver through annihilation and attrition, apart from inflicting losses,
will eventually shake the morale of the enemy army whose weapons are not
in the hands of politically conscious soldiers. With us, on the contrary,
officers and men are at one on the political aim of the War of Resistance.
This gives us the foundation for political work among all the anti-Japanese
forces. A proper measure of democracy should be put into effect in the army,
chiefly by abolishing the feudal practice of bullying and beating and by
having officers and men share weal and woe. Once this is done, unity will
be achieved between officers and men, the combat effectiveness of the army
will be greatly increased, and there will be no doubt of our ability to sustain
the long, cruel war.

114. The richest source of power to wage war lies in the masses of the people.
It is mainly because of the unorganized state of the Chinese masses that
Japan dares to bully us. When this defect is remedied, then the Japanese
aggressor, like a mad bull crashing into a ring of flames, will be surrounded
by hundreds of millions of our people standing upright, the mere sound of
their voices will strike terror into him, and he will be burned to death.
China's armies must have an uninterrupted flow of reinforcements, and the
abuses of press-ganging and of buying
substitutes,[33] which now exist at the lower
levels, must immediately be banned and replaced by widespread and enthusiastic
political mobilization, which will make it easy to enlist millions of men.
We now have great difficulties in raising money for the war, but once the
people are mobilized, finances too will cease to be a problem. Why should
a country as large and populous as China suffer from lack of funds? The army
must become one with the people so that they see it as their own army. Such
an army will be invincible, and an imperialist power like Japan will be no
match for it.

115. Many people think that it is wrong methods that make for strained relations
between officers and men and between the army and the people, but I always
tell them that it is a question of basic attitude (or basic principle), of
having respect for the soldiers and the people. It is from this attitude
that the various policies, methods and forms ensue. If we depart from this
attitude, then the policies, methods and forms will certainly be wrong, and
the relations between officers and men and between the army and the people
are bound to be unsatisfactory. Our three major principles for the army's
political work are, first, unity between officers and men; second, unity
between the army and the people; and third, the disintegration of the enemy
forces. To apply these principles effectively, we must start with this basic
attitude of respect for the soldiers and the people, and of respect for the
human dignity of prisoners of war once they have laid down their arms. Those
who take all this as a technical matter and not one of basic attitude are
indeed wrong, and they should correct their view.

116. At this moment when the defence of Wuhan and other places has become
urgent, it is a task of the utmost importance to arouse the initiative and
enthusiasm of the whole army and the whole people to the full in support
of the war. There is no doubt that the task of defending Wuhan and other
places must be seriously posed and seriously performed. But whether we can
be certain of holding them depends not on our subjective desires but on concrete
conditions. Among the most important of these conditions is the political
mobilization of the whole army and people for the struggle. If a strenuous
effort is not made to secure all the necessary conditions, indeed even if
one of these conditions is missing, disasters like the loss of Nanking and
other places are bound to be repeated. China will have her Madrids in places
where the conditions are present. So far China has not had a Madrid, and
from now on we should work hard to create several, but it all depends on
the conditions. The most fundamental of these is extensive political mobilization
of the whole army and people.

117. In all our work we must persevere in the Anti-Japanese National United
Front as the general policy. For only with this policy can we persevere in
the War of Resistance and in protracted warfare, bring about a widespread
and profound improvement in the relations between officers and men and between
the army and the people, arouse to the full the initiative and enthusiasm
of the entire army and the entire people in the fight for the defence of
all the territory still in our hands and for the recovery of what we have
lost, and so win final victory.

118. This question of the political mobilization of the army and the people
is indeed of the greatest importance. We have dwelt on it at the risk of
repetition precisely because victory is impossible without it. There are,
of course, many other conditions indispensable to victory, but political
mobilization is the most fundamental. The Anti-Japanese National United Front
is a united front of the whole army and the whole people, it is certainly
not a united front merely of the headquarters and members of a few political
parties; our basic objective in initiating the Anti-Japanese National United
Front is to mobilize the whole army and the whole people to participate
in it.

CONCLUSIONS


119. What are our conclusions? They are:

  "Under what conditions do you think China can defeat and destroy the forces
  of Japan?" "Three conditions are required first, the establishment of an
  anti-Japanese united front in China second, the formation of an international
  anti-Japanese united front; third, the rise of the revolutionary movement
  of the people in Japan and the Japanese colonies. From the standpoint of
  the Chinese people, the unity of the people of China is the most important
  of the three conditions."
  
  "How long do you think such a war would last?" "That depends on the strength
  of China's anti-Japanese united front and many other conditioning factors
  involving China and Japan."
  
  "If these conditions are not realized quickly, the war will be prolonged.
  But in the end, just the same, Japan will certainly be defeated and China
  will certainly be victorious. Only the sacrifices will be great and there
  will be a very painful period."
  
  "Our strategy should be to employ our main forces to operate over an extended
  and fluid front. To achieve success, the Chinese troops must conduct their
  warfare with a high degree of mobility on extensive battlefields."
  
  "Besides employing trained armies to carry on mobile warfare, we must organize
  great numbers of guerrilla units among the peasants."
  
  "In the course of the war, China will be able to . . . reinforce the equipment
  of her troops gradually. Therefore China will be able to conduct positional
  warfare in the latter period of the war and make positional attacks on the
  Japanese-occupied areas. Thus Japan's economy will crack under the strain
  of China's long resistance and the morale of the Japanese forces will break
  under the trial of innumerable battles. On the Chinese side, however, the
  growing latent power of resistance will be constantly brought into play and
  large numbers of revolutionary people will be pouring into the front lines
  to fight for their freedom. The combination of all these and other factors
  will enable us to make the final and decisive attacks on the fortifications
  and bases in the Japanese occupied areas and drive the Japanese forces of
  aggression out of China." (From an interview with Edgar Snow in July 1936.)
  
  "Thus a new stage has opened in China's political situation.... In the present
  stage the central task is to mobilize all the nation's forces for victory
  in the War of Resistance."
  
  "The key to victory in the war now lies in developing the resistance that
  has already begun into a war of total resistance by the whole nation. Only
  through such a war of total resistance can final victory be won."
  
  "The existence of serious weaknesses in the War of Resistance may lead to
  setbacks, retreats, internal splits, betrayals, temporary and partial compromises
  and other such reverses. Therefore it should be realized that the war will
  be arduous and protracted. But we are confident that, through the efforts
  of our Party and the whole people, the resistance already started will sweep
  aside all obstacles and continue to advance and develop." ("Resolution on
  the Present Situation and the Tasks of the Party", adopted by the Central
  Committee of the Communist Party of China, August 1937.)


These are our conclusions. In the eyes of the subjugationists the enemy are
supermen and we Chinese are worthless, while in the eyes of the theorists
of quick victory we Chinese are supermen and the enemy are worthless. Both
are wrong. We take a different view; the War of Resistance Against Japan
is a protracted war, and the final victory will be China's. These are our
conclusions.

120. My lectures end here. The great War of Resistance Against Japan is
unfolding, and many people are hoping for a summary of experience to facilitate
the winning of complete victory. What I have discussed is simply the general
experience of the past ten months, and it may perhaps serve as a kind of
summary. The problem of protracted war deserves wide attention and discussion;
what I have given is only an outline, which I hope you will examine and discuss,
amend and amplify.

NOTES


1. This theory of national subjugation was the view held
by the Kuomintang. The Kuomintang was unwilling to resist Japan and fought
Japan only under compulsion. After the Lukouchiao Incident (July 7, 1937),
the Chiang Kai-shek clique reluctantly took part in the War of Resistance,
while the Wang Ching-wei clique became the representatives of the theory
of national subjugation, was ready to capitulate to Japan and in fact
subsequently did so. However, the idea of national subjugation not only existed
in the Kuomintang, but also affected certain sections of the middle strata
of society and even certain backward elements among the labouring people.
As the corrupt and impotent Kuomintang government lost one battle after another
and the Japanese troops advanced unchecked to the vicinity of Wuhan in the
first year of the War of Resistance, some backward people became profoundly
pessimistic.

2. These views were to be found within the Communist Party.
During the first six months of the War of Resistance, there was a tendency
to take the enemy lightly among some members of the Party, who held the view
that Japan could be defeated at a single blow. It was not that they felt
our own forces to be so strong, since they well knew that the troops and
the organized people's forces led by the Communist Party were still small,
but that the Kuomintang had begun to resist Japan. In their opinion, the
Kuomintang was quite powerful, and, in co-ordination with the Communist Party,
could deal Japan telling blows. They made this erroneous appraisal because
they saw only one aspect of the Kuomintang, that it was resisting Japan,
but overlooked the other aspect, that it was reactionary and corrupt.

3. Such was the view of Chiang Kai-shek and company. Though
they were compelled to resist Japan, Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang pinned
their hopes solely on prompt foreign aid and had no confidence in their own
strength, much less in the strength of the people.

4. Taierhchuang is a town in southern Shantung where the
Chinese army fought a battle in March 1938 against the Japanese invaders.
By pitting 400,000 men against Japan's 70,000 to 80,000, the Chinese army
defeated the Japanese.

5. This view was put forward in an editorial in the Ta
King Pao, then the organ of the Political Science Group in the Kuomintang.
Indulging in wishful thinking, this clique hoped that a few more victories
of the Taierhchuang type would stop Japan's advance and that there would
be no need to mobilize the people for a protracted war which would threaten
the security of its own class. This wishful thinking then pervaded the Kuomintang
as a whole.

6. For many decades, beginning with the end of the 18th
century, Britain exported an increasing quantity of opium to China. This
traffic not only subjected the Chinese people to drugging but also plundered
China of her silver. It aroused fierce opposition in China. In 1840, under
the pretext of safeguarding its trade with China, Britain launched armed
aggression against her. The Chinese troops led by Lin Tse-hsu put up resistance,
and the people in Canton spontaneously organized the "Quell-the-British Corps",
which dealt serious blows to the British forces of aggression. In 1842, however,
the corrupt Ching regime signed the Treaty of Nanking with Britain. This
treaty provided for the payment of indemnities and the cession of Hongkong
to Britain, and stipulated that Shanghai, Foochow, Amoy, Ningpo and Canton
were to be opened to British trade and that tariff rates for British goods
imported into China were to be jointly fixed by China and Britain.

7. The Taiping Revolution, or the Movement of the Taiping
Heavenly Kingdom, was the mid-19th century revolutionary peasant movement
against the feudal rule and national oppression of the Ching Dynasty. In
January 1851 Hung Hsiu-chuan, Yang Hsiu-ching and other leaders launched
an uprising in Chintien Village in Kueiping County, Kwangsi Province, and
proclaimed the founding of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom. Proceeding northward
from Kwangsi, their peasant army attacked and occupied Hunan and Hupoh in
1852. In 1853 it marched through Kiangsi and Anhwei and captured Nanking.
A section of the forces then continued the drive north and pushed on to the
vicinity of Tientsin. However, the Taiping army failed to build stable base
areas in the places it occupied; moreover, after establishing its capital
in Nanking, its leading group committed many political and military errors.
Therefore it was unable to withstand the combined onslaughts of the
counter-revolutionary forces of the Ching government and the British, U.S.
and French aggressors, and was finally defeated in 1864.

8. The Reform Movement of 1898, whose leading spirits were
Kang Yu-wei, Liang Chi-chao and Tan Szu-tung, represented the interests of
the liberal bourgeoisie and the enlightened landlords. The movement was favoured
and supported by Emperor Kuang Hsu, but had no mass basis. Yuan Shih-kai,
who had an army behind him, betrayed the reformers to Empress Dowager Tzu
Hsi, the leader of the die-hards, who seized power again and had Emperor
Kuang Hsu imprisoned and Tan Szu-tung and five others beheaded. Thus the
movement ended in tragic defeat.

9. The Revolution of 1911 was the bourgeois revolution
which overthrew the autocratic regime of the Ching Dynasty. On October 10
of that year, a section of the Ching Dynasty's New Army who were under
revolutionary influence staged an uprising in Wuchang, Hupeh Province. The
existing bourgeois and petty-bourgeois revolutionary societies and the broad
masses of the workers, peasants and soldiers responded enthusiastically,
and very soon the rule of the Ching Dynasty crumbled. In January 1912, the
Provisional Government of the Republic of China was set up in Nanking, with
Sun Yat-sen as the Provisional President. Thus China's feudal monarchic system
which had lasted for more than two thousand years was brought to an end.
The idea of a democratic republic had entered deep in the hearts of the people.
But the bourgeoisie which led the revolution was strongly conciliationist
in nature. It did not mobilize the peasant masses on an extensive scale to
crush the feudal rule of the landlord class in the countryside, but instead
handed state power over to the Northern warlord Yuan Shih-kai under imperialist
and feudal pressure. As a result, the revolution ended in defeat.

10. The Northern Expedition was the punitive war against
the Northern warlords launched by the revolutionary army which marched north
from Kwangtung Province in May-July 1926. The Northern Expeditionary Army,
with the Communist Party of China taking part in its leadership and under
the Party's influence (the political work in the army was at that time mostly
under the charge of Communist Party members), gained the warm support of
the broad masses of workers and peasants. In the second half of 1926 and
the first half of 1927 it occupied most of the provinces along the Yangtse
and Yellow Rivers and defeated the Northern warlords. In April 1927 this
revolutionary war failed as a result of betrayal by the reactionary clique
under Chiang Kai-shek within the revolutionary army.

11. On January 16, 1938, the Japanese cabinet declared
in a policy statement that Japan would subjugate China by force. At the same
time it tried by threats and blandishments to make the Kuomintang government
capitulate, declaring that if the Kuomintang government "continued to plan
resistance", the Japanese government would foster a new puppet regime in
China and no longer accept the Kuomintang as "the other party" in negotiations.

12. The capitalists referred to here are chiefly those
of the United States.

13. By "their governments" Comrade Mao Tse-tung is here
referring to the governments of the imperialist countries--Britain, the United
States and France.

14. Comrade Mao Tse-tung's prediction that there would
be an upswing in China during the stage of stalemate in the War of Resistance
Against Japan was completely confirmed in the case of the Liberated Areas
under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party. But there was actually
a decline instead of an upswing in the Kuomintang areas, because the ruling
clique headed by ChiangKai-shek was passive in resisting Japan and active
in opposing the Communist Party and the people. This roused opposition among
the broad masses of the people and raised their political consciousness

15. According to the theory that "weapons decide
everything", China which was inferior to Japan in regard to arms was bound
to be defeated in the war. This view was current among all the leaders of
the Kuomintang reaction, Chiang Kai-shek included.

16. See "Problems of Strategy in Guerrilla War Against
Japan", Note 9, p. 112 of this volume.

17. Sun Wu-kung is the monkey king in the Chinese novel
Hsi Yu Chi (Pilgrimage to the West), written in the 16th
century. He could cover 108,000 li by turning a somersault. Yet
once in the palm of the Buddha, he could not escape from it, however many
somersaults he turned. With a flick of his palm Buddha transformed his fingers
into the five-peak Mountain of Five Elements, and buried Sun Wu-kung.

18. "Fascism is unbridled chauvinism and predatory
war," said Comrade Georgi Dimitrov in his report to the Seventh World
Congress of the Communist International in August 1935, entitled "The Fascist
Offensive and the Tasks of the Communist International" (see Selected
Articles and Speeches, Eng. ed., Lawrence & Wishart London, 1951,
p. 44). In July 1937, Comrade Dimitrov published an article entitled
Fascism Is War.

19. V. I. Lenin, Socialism and War, Eng. ed.,
FLPH, Moscow, 1950, p. 19.

20. Sun Tzu, Chapter 3, "The Strategy of Attack".

21. Chengpu, situated in the southwest of the present
Chuancheng County in Shantung Province, was the scene of a great battle between
the states of Tsin and Chu in 632 BC. At the beginning of the battle the
Chu troops got the upper hand. The Tsin troops, after making a retreat of
90 li, chose the right and left flanks of the Chu troops, their
weak spots, and inflicted heavy defeats on them.

22. The ancient town of Chengkeo, in the northwest of
the present Chengkao County, Honan Province, was of great military importance.
It was the scene of battles fought in 203 B.C. between Liu Pang, King of
Han, and Hsiang Yu, King of Chu. At first Hsiang Yu captured Hsingyang and
Chengkao and Liu Pang's troops were almost routed. Liu Pang waited until
the opportune moment when Hsiang Yu's troops were in midstream crossing the
Szeshui River, and then crushed them and recaptured Chengkao.

23. In 204 B.C., Han Hsin, a general of the state of Han,
led his men in a big battle with Chao Hsieh at Chinghsing. Chao Hsieh's army,
said to be 200,000 strong, was several times that of Han. Deploying his troops
with their backs to a river, Han Hsin led them in valiant combat, and at
the same time dispatched some units to attack and occupy the enemy's weakly
garrisoned rear. Caught in a pincer, Chao Hsieh's troops were utterly defeated.

24. The ancient town of Kunyang, in the north of the present
Yehhsien County, Honan Province, was the place where Liu Hsiu, founder of
the Eastern Han Dynasty, defeated the troops of Wang Mang, Emperor of the
Hsin Dynasty, in A.D. 23. There was a huge numerical disparity between the
two sides, Liu Hsiu's forces totalling 8,000 to 9,000 men as against Wang
Mang's 400,000. But taking advantage of the negligence of Wang Mang's generals,
Wang Hsun and Wang Yi, who underestimated the enemy, Liu Hsiu with only three
thousand picked troops put Wang Mang's main forces to rout. He followed up
this victory by crushing the rest of the enemy troops.

25. Kuantu was in the northeast of the present Chungmou
County, Honan Province, and the scene of the battle between the armies of
Tsao Tsao and Yuan Shao in A D 200. Yuan Shao had an army of 100,000, while
Tsao Tsao had only a meagre force and was short of supplies. Taking advantage
of the lack of vigilance on the part of Yuan Shao's troops, who belittled
the enemy, Tsao Tsao dispatched his light-footed soldiers to spring a surprise
attack on them and set their supplies on fire. Yuan Shao's army was thrown
into confusion and its main force wiped out.

26. The state of Wu was ruled by Sun Chuan, and the state
of Wei by Tsao Tsao. Chihpi is situated on the south bank of the Yangtse
River, to the northeast of Chisyu, Hupeh Province. In A.D. 208 Tsao Tsao
led an army of over 500,000 men, which he proclaimed to be 800,000 strong,
to launch an attack on Sun Chuan. The latter, in alliance with Tsao Tsao's
antagonist Liu Pei, mustered a force of 30,000. Knowing that Tsao Tsao's
army was plagued by epidemics and was unaccustomed to action afloat, the
allied forces of Sun Chuan and Liu Pei set fire to Tsao Tsao's fleet and
crushed his army.

27. Yiling, to the east of the present Ichang, Hupeh Province,
was the place where Lu Sun, a general of the state of Wu, defeated the army
of Liu Pei, ruler of Shu, in A D. 222. Liu Pei's troops scored successive
victories at the beginning of the war and penetrated five or six hundred
li into the territory of Wu as far as Yiling. Lu Sun, who was defending
Yiling, avoided battle for over seven months until Liu Pei "was at his wits'
end and his troops were exhausted and demoralized". Then he crushed Liu Pei's
troops by taking advantage of a favourable wind to set fire to their tents.

28. Hsieh Hsuan, a general of Eastern Tsin Dynasty, defeated
Fu Chien, ruler of the state of Chin, in AD 383 at the Feishui River in Anhwei
Province. Fu Chien had an infantry force of more than 600,000, a cavalry
force of 270,000 and a guards corps of more than 30,000, while the land and
river forces of Eastern Tsin numbered only 80,000. When the armies lined
up on opposite banks of the Feishui River, Hsieh Hsuan, taking advantage
of the overconfidence and conceit of the enemy troops, requested Fu Chien
to move his troops back so as to leave room for the Eastern Tsin troops to
cross the river and fight it out. Fu Chien complied, but when he ordered
withdrawal, his troops got into a panic and could not be stopped. Seizing
the opportunity, the Eastern Tsin troops crossed the river, launched an offensive
and crushed the enemy.

29. In A.D. 383, Fu Chien, the ruler of the state of Chin,
belittled the forces of Tsin and attacked them. The Tsin troops defeated
the enemy's advance units at Lochien, Shouyang County, Anhwei Province, and
pushed forward by land and water. Ascending the city wall of Shonyang, Fu
Chien observed the excellent alignment of the Tsin troops and, mistaking
the woods and bushes on Mount Pakung for enemy soldiers, was frightened by
the enemy's apparent strength.

30. Comrade Mao Tse-tung is here referring to the fact
that Chiang Kai-shek and Wang Ching-wei, having betrayed the first national
democratic united front of the Kuomintang and the Communist Party in 1927,
launched a ten-year war against the people, and thus made it impossible for
the Chinese people to be organized on a large scale. For this the Kuomintang
reactionaries headed by Chiang Kai-shek must be held responsible.

31. Duke Hsiang of Sung ruled in the Spring and Autumn
Era. In 638 BC, the state of Sung fought with the powerful state of Chu.
The Sung forces were already deployed in battle positions when the Chu troops
were crossing the river. One of the Sung officers suggested that, as the
Chu troops were numerically stronger, this was the moment for attack. But
the Duke said, "No, a gentleman should never attack one who is unprepared."
When the Chu troops had crossed the river but had not yet completed their
battle alignment, the officer again proposed an immediate aback, and once
again the Duke said, "No, a gentleman should never attack an army which has
not yet completed its battle alignment." The Duke gave the order for attack
on after the Chu troops were fully prepared. As a result, the Sung troops
met with disastrous defeat and the Duke himself was wounded.

32. Han Pu-chu, a Kuomintang warlord, was for several
years governor of Shantun. When the Japanese invaders thrust southward to
Shantung along the Tientsin-Pukow Railway after occupying Peiping and Tientsin
in 1937, Han Fu-chu fled all the was from Shantung to Honan without fighting
a single battle.

33. The Kuomintang expanded its army by press-ganging.
Its military and police seized people everywhere, roping them up and treating
them like convicts. Those who had money would bribe the Kuomintang officials
or pay for substitutes.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Role of the Chinese Communist Party in the National War







THE ROLE OF THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY IN THE NATIONAL WAR



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE ROLE OF THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY IN THE NATIONAL WAR


October 1938

[This report was made by Comrade Mao Tse-tung to the Sixth Plenary Session
of the Sixth Central Committee of the Party. The session endorsed the line
of the Political Bureau headed by Comrade Mao Tse-tung and was a very important
one. In discussing the question of the role of the Chinese Communist Party
in the national war he helped all comrades clearly to understand and
conscientiously to shoulder the Party's great and historic responsibility
of leading the War of Resistance Against Japan. The plenary session decided
on the line of persisting in the anti-Japanese united front, but at the same
time pointed out that there had to be struggle as well as unity within the
united front and that the proposition, "Everything through the united front",
did not suit Chinese conditions. Thus the error of accommodationism in regard
to the united front was criticized; this problem was dealt with by Comrade
Mao Tse-tung in "The Question of Independence and Initiative Within the United
Front", which was part of his concluding speech at the same session. Affirming
that it was extremely important for the whole Party to devote itself to
organizing the people's armed struggle against Japan, the session decided
that the war zones and the enemy's rear should be the Party's main fields
of work and repudiated the erroneous ideas of those who pinned their hopes
of victory on the Kuomintang armies and who would have entrusted the fate
of the people to legal struggles under the reactionary Kuomintang rule. This
problem was dealt with by Comrade Mao Tse-tung in "Problems of War and Strategy",
which was also part of his concluding speech at the session.]
  

Comrades, the prospects ahead of us are bright. Not only is it necessary
for us to defeat Japanese imperialism and build a new China, but we are certainly
capable of achieving these aims. However, there is a difficult road ahead
between the present and the bright future. In the struggle for a new China,
the Chinese Communist Party and the whole people must fight the Japanese
aggressors in a planned way and can defeat them only through a long war.
We have already said a good deal about the various problems relating to the
war. We have summed up the experience gained since its outbreak and appraised
the present situation, defined the urgent tasks confronting the whole nation
and explained the reasons for sustaining a long war by means of a long-term
national united front against Japan and the methods for doing so, and we
have analysed the international situation. What problems then remain? Comrades,
there is one more problem, namely, what role the Chinese Communist Party
should play in the national war, or how Communists should understand their
own role, strengthen themselves and close their ranks in order to be able
to lead this war to victory and not to defeat.

PATRIOTISM AND INTERNATIONALISM 


Can a Communist, who is an internationalist, at the same time be a patriot?
We hold that he not only can be but must be. The specific content of patriotism
is determined by historical conditions. There is the "patriotism" of the
Japanese aggressors and of Hitler, and there is our patriotism. Communists
must resolutely oppose the "patriotism" of the Japanese aggressors and of
Hitler. The Communists of Japan and Germany are defeatists with regard to
the wars being waged by their countries. To bring about the defeat of the
Japanese aggressors and of Hitler by every possible means is in the interests
of the Japanese and the German people, and the more complete the defeat the
better. This is what the Japanese and German Communists should be doing and
what they are doing. For the wars launched by the Japanese aggressors and
Hitler are harming their own people as well as the people of the world. China's
case is different, because she is the victim of aggression. Chinese Communists
must therefore combine patriotism with internationalism. We are at once
internationalists and patriots, and our slogan is, "Fight to defend the
motherland against the aggressors." For us defeatism is a crime and to strive
for victory in the War of Resistance is an inescapable duty. For only by
fighting in defence of the motherland can we defeat the aggressors and achieve
national liberation. And only by achieving national liberation will it be
possible for the proletariat and other working people to achieve their own
emancipation. The victory of China and the defeat of the invading imperialists
will help the people of other countries. Thus in wars of national liberation
patriotism is applied internationalism. For this reason Communists must use
their initiative to the full, march bravely and resolutely to the battle
front of the war of national liberation and train their guns on the Japanese
aggressors. For this reason, immediately after the Incident of September
18, 1931, our Party issued its call to resist the Japanese aggressors by
a war of national defence, and later proposed a national united front against
Japan, ordered the Red Army to reorganize as part of the anti-Japanese National
Revolutionary Army and to march to the front, and instructed Party members
to take their place in the forefront of the war and defend the motherland
to the last drop of their blood. These are good patriotic actions and, far
from running counter to internationalism, are its application in China. Only
those who are politically muddle-headed or have ulterior motives talk nonsense
about our having made a mistake and abandoned internationalism.

COMMUNISTS SHOULD SET AN EXAMPLE IN THE NATIONAL WAR


For the above reasons Communists should show a high degree of initiative
in the national war, and show it concretely, that is, they should play an
exemplary vanguard role in every sphere. Our war is being waged under adverse
circumstances. National consciousness, national self-respect and national
self-confidence are not sufficiently developed among the broad masses, the
majority of the people are unorganized, China's military power is weak, the
economy is backward, the political system is undemocratic, corruption and
pessimism exist, and a lack of unity and solidarity is to be found within
the united front; these are among the adverse circumstances. Therefore,
Communists must consciously shoulder the great responsibility of uniting
the entire nation so as to put an end to all such undesirable phenomena.
Here the exemplary vanguard role of the Communists is of vital importance.
Communists in the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies should set an example
in fighting bravely, carrying out orders, observing discipline, doing political
work and fostering internal unity and solidarity. In their relations with
friendly parties and armies, Communists should take a firm stand of unity
for resistance to Japan, uphold the programme of the united front and set
an example in carrying out the tasks of resistance; they should be true in
word and resolute in deed, free from arrogance and sincere in consulting
and co-operating with the friendly parties and armies, and they should be
models in inter-party relations within the united front. Every Communist
engaged in government work should set an example of absolute integrity, of
freedom from favouritism in making appointments and of hard work for little
remuneration. Every Communist working among the masses should be their friend
and not a boss over them, an indefatigable teacher and not a bureaucratic
politician. At no time and in no circumstances should a Communist place his
personal interests first; he should subordinate them to the interests of
the nation and of the masses. Hence, selfishness, slacking, corruption, seeking
the limelight, and so on, are most contemptible, while selflessness, working
with all one's energy, whole-hearted devotion to public duty, and quiet hard
work will command respect. Communists should work in harmony with all
progressives outside the Party and endeavour to unite the entire people to
do away with whatever is undesirable. It must be realized that Communists
form only a small section of the nation, and that there are large numbers
of progressives and activists outside the Party with whom we must work. It
is entirely wrong to think that we alone are good and no one else is any
good. As for people who are politically backward, Communists should not slight
or despise them, but should befriend them, unite with them, convince them
and encourage them to go forward. The attitude of Communists towards any
person who has made mistakes in his work should be one of persuasion in order
to help him change and start afresh and not one of exclusion, unless he is
incorrigible. Communists should set an example in being practical as well
as far-sighted. For only by being practical can they fulfil the appointed
tasks, and only far-sightedness can prevent them from losing their bearings
in the march forward. Communists should therefore set an example in study;
at all times they should learn from the masses as well as teach them. Only
by learning from the people, from actual circumstances and from the friendly
parties and armies, and by knowing them well, can we be practical in our
work and far-sighted as to the future. In a long war and in adverse
circumstances, the dynamic energy of the whole nation can be mobilized in
the struggle to overcome difficulties, defeat the enemy and build a new China
only if the Communists play an exemplary vanguard role to the best of their
ability together with all the advanced elements among the friendly parties
and armies and among the masses.

UNITE THE WHOLE NATION AND COMBAT ENEMY AGENTS IN ITS
  MIDST


The one and only policy for overcoming difficulties, defeating the enemy
and building a new China is to consolidate and expand the Anti-Japanese National
United Front and mobilize the dynamic energy of the whole nation. However,
there are already enemy agents playing a disruptive role within our national
united front, namely, the traitors, Trotskyites and pro-Japanese elements.
Communists must always be on the look-out for them, expose their criminal
activities with factual evidence and warn the people not to be duped by them.
Communists must sharpen their political vigilance towards these enemy agents.
They must understand that the expansion and consolidation of the national
united front is inseparable from the exposure and weeding out of enemy agents.
It is entirely wrong to pay attention only to the one side and forget the
other.

EXPAND THE COMMUNIST PARTY AND PREVENT INFILTRATION BY ENEMY
  AGENTS


To overcome the difficulties, defeat the enemy and build a new China, the
Communist Party must expand its organization and become a great mass party
by opening its doors to the masses of workers, peasants and young activists
who are truly devoted to the revolution, who believe in the Party's principles,
support its policies and are willing to observe its discipline and work hard.
Here no tendency towards closed-doorism should be tolerated. But at the same
time, there must be no slackening of vigilance against infiltration by enemy
agents. The Japanese imperialist secret services are ceaselessly trying to
disrupt our Party and to smuggle undercover traitors, Trotskyites, pro-Japanese
elements, degenerates and careerists into its ranks in the guise of activists.
Not for a moment must we relax our vigilance and our strict precautions against
such persons. We must not close our doors for fear of enemy agents, our set
policy being boldly to expand our Party. But while boldly enlarging our
membership, we must not relax our vigilance against enemy agents and careerists
who will avail themselves of this opportunity to sneak in. We shall make
mistakes if we only pay attention to the one side and forget the other. The
only correct policy is: "Expand the Party boldly but do not let a single
undesirable in."

MAINTAIN BOTH THE UNITED FRONT AND THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE
  PARTY


It is only by firmly maintaining the national united front that the difficulties
can be overcome, the enemy defeated and a new China built. This is beyond
all doubt. At the same time, every party and group in the united front must
preserve its ideological, political and organizational independence; this
holds good for the Kuomintang, the Communist Party or any other party
or group. In inter-party relations, the Principle of Democracy in the Three
People's Principles permits both the union of all parties and groups and
the independent existence of each. To speak of unity alone while-denying
independence is to abandon the Principle of Democracy, and to this neither
the Communist Party nor any other party would agree. There is no doubt that
independence within the united front is relative and not absolute, and that
to regard it as absolute would undermine the general policy of unity against
the enemy. But this relative independence must not be denied; ideologically,
politically and organizationally, each party must have its relative independence,
that is, relative freedom. Also, the general policy of unity against the
enemy would be undermined if this relative freedom were denied or voluntarily
abandoned. This should be clearly understood by all members of the Communist
Party as well as of the friendly parties.

The same is true of the relationship between the class struggle and the national
struggle. It is an established principle that in the War of Resistance everything
must be subordinated to the interests of resistance. Therefore, the interests
of the class struggle must be subordinated to, and must not conflict with,
the interests of the War of Resistance. But classes and the class struggle
are facts, and those people who deny the fact of class struggle are wrong.
The theory which attempts to deny this fact is utterly wrong. We do not deny
the class struggle, we adjust it. The policy of mutual help and mutual
concessions which we advocate is applicable not only to party relations but
also to class relations. Unity against Japan requires an appropriate policy
of adjustment in class relations, a policy which does not leave the labouring
people without political and material safeguards but also gives consideration
to the interests of the rich, thereby meeting the demands of solidarity against
the enemy. It is bad for the War of Resistance to pay attention only to the
one side and neglect the other. 

CONSIDER THE SITUATION AS A WHOLE, THINK IN TERMS OF THE
  MAJORITY, AND WORK TOGETHER WITH OUR ALLIES


In leading the masses in struggle against the enemy, Communists must consider
the situation as a whole, think in terms of the majority of the people and
work together with their allies. They must grasp the principle of subordinating
the needs of the part to the needs of the whole. If a proposal appears feasible
for a partial situation but not for the situation as a whole, then the part
must give way to the whole. Conversely, if the proposal is not feasible for
the part but is feasible in the light of the situation as a whole, again
the part must give way to the whole. This is what is meant by considering
the situation as a whole. Communists must never separate themselves from
the majority of the people or neglect them by leading only a few progressive
contingents in an isolated and rash advance, but must forge close links between
the progressive elements and the broad masses. This is what is meant by thinking
in terms of the majority. Wherever there are democratic parties or individuals
willing to co-operate with us, the proper attitude for Communists is to talk
things over with them and work together with them. It is wrong to indulge
in arbitrary decisions and peremptory actions and to ignore our allies. A
good Communist must be good at considering the situation as a whole, good
at thinking in terms of the majority and good at working with his allies.
We have had serious shortcomings in this respect, and we must still give
the matter attention.

CADRES POLICY


The Chinese Communist Party is a party leading a great revolutionary struggle
in a nation several hundred million strong, and it cannot fulfil its historic
task without a large number of leading cadres who combine ability with political
integrity. In the last seventeen years our Party has trained a good many
competent leaders, so that we have a framework of cadres in military, political,
cultural, Party and mass work; all honour is due to the Party and to the
nation for this achievement. But the present framework is not yet strong
enough to support the vast edifice of our struggle, and it is still necessary
to train capable people on a large scale. Many activists have come forward,
and are continuing to come forward, in the great struggle of the Chinese
people. We have the responsibility for organizing and training them and for
taking good care and making proper use of them. Cadres are a decisive factor,
once the political line is determined.[1] Therefore,
it is our fighting task to train large numbers of new cadres in a planned
way.

Our concern should extend to non-Party cadres as well as to Party cadres.
There are many capable people outside the Party whom we must not ignore.
The duty of every Communist is to rid himself of aloofness and arrogance
and to work well with non-Party cadres, give them sincere help, have a warm,
comradely attitude towards them and enlist their initiative in the great
cause of resisting Japan and reconstructing the nation.

We must know how to judge cadres. We must not confine our judgement to a
short period or a single incident in a cadre's life, but should consider
his life and work as a whole. This is the principal method of judging cadres.

We must know how to use cadres well. In the final analysis, leadership involves
two main responsibilities: to work out ideas, and to use cadres well. Such
things as drawing up plans, making decisions, and giving orders and directives,
are all in the category of "working out ideas". To put the ideas into practice,
we must weld the cadres together and encourage them to go into action; this
comes into the category of "using the cadres well". Throughout our national
history there have been two sharply contrasting lines on the subject of the
use of cadres, one being to "appoint people on their merit", and the other
to "appoint people by favouritism". The former is the honest and the latter
the dishonest way. The criterion the Communist Party should apply in its
cadres policy is whether or not a cadre is resolute in carrying out the Party
line, keeps to Party discipline, has close ties with the masses, has the
ability to find his bearings independently, and is active, hard-working and
unselfish. This is what "appointing people on their merit" means. The cadres
policy of Chang Kuo-tao was the exact opposite. Following the line of "appointing
people by favouritism," he gathered personal favourites round himself to
form a small clique, and in the end he turned traitor to the Party and decamped.
This is an important lesson for us. Taking warning from it and from similar
historical lessons, the Central Committee and the leaders at all levels must
make it their major responsibility to adhere to the honest and fair way in
cadres policy and reject the dishonest and unfair way, and so consolidate
the unity of the Party.

We must know how to take good care of cadres. There are several ways of doing
so.

  First, give them guidance. This means allowing them a free hand in their
  work so that they have the courage to assume responsibility and, at the same
  time, giving them timely instructions so that, guided by the Party's political
  line, they are able to make full use of their initiative.
  
  Second, raise their level. This means educating them by giving them the
  opportunity to study so that they can enhance their theoretical understanding
  and their working ability.
  
  Third, check up on their work, and help them sum up their experience, carry
  forward their achievements and correct their mistakes. To assign work without
  checking up and to take notice only when serious mistakes are made--that
  is not the way to take care of cadres.
  
  Fourth, in general, use the method of persuasion with cadres who have made
  mistakes, and help them correct their mistakes. The method of struggle should
  be confined to those who make serious mistakes and nevertheless refuse to
  accept guidance. Here patience is essential. It is wrong lightly to label
  people "opportunists" or lightly to begin "waging struggles" against them.
  
  Fifth, help them with their difficulties. When cadres are in difficulty as
  a result of illness, straitened means or domestic or other troubles, we must
  be sure to give them as much care as possible.


This is how to take good care of cadres.

PARTY DISCIPLINE


In view of Chang Kuo-tao's serious violations of discipline, we must affirm
anew the discipline of the Party, namely:

  (1) the individual is subordinate to the organization;
  
  (2) the minority is subordinate to the majority;
  
  (3) the lower level is subordinate to the higher level; and
  
  (4) the entire membership is subordinate to the central Committee.


Whoever violates these articles of discipline disrupts Party unity. Experience
proves that some people violate Party discipline through not knowing what
it is, while others, like Chang Kuo-tao, violate it knowingly and take advantage
of many Party members' ignorance to achieve their treacherous purposes. Hence
it is necessary to educate members in Party discipline so that the rank and
file will not only observe discipline themselves, but will exercise supervision
over the leaders so that they, too, observe it, thus preventing the recurrence
of cases like Chang Kuo-tao's. If we are to ensure the development of inner-Party
relations along the right lines, besides the four most important articles
of discipline mentioned above we must work out a set of fairly detailed Party
rules which will serve to unify the actions of the leading bodies at all
levels.

PARTY DEMOCRACY


In the present great struggle, the Chinese Communist Party demands that all
its leading bodies and all its members and cadres should give the fullest
expression to their initiative, which alone can ensure victory. This initiative
must be demonstrated concretely in the ability of the leading bodies, the
cadres and the Party rank and file to work creatively, in their readiness
to assume responsibility, in the exuberant vigour they show in their work,
in their courage and ability to raise questions, voice opinions and criticize
defects, and in the comradely supervision that is maintained over the leading
bodies and the leading cadres. Otherwise, "initiative" will be an empty thing.
But the exercise of such initiative depends on the spread of democracy in
Party life. It cannot be brought into play if there is not enough democracy
in Party life. Only in an atmosphere of democracy can large numbers of able
people be brought forward. Ours is a country in which small-scale production
and the patriarchal system prevail, and taking the country as a whole there
is as yet no democratic life; consequently this state of affairs is reflected
in our Party by insufficient democracy in Party life. This phenomenon hinders
the entire party from exercising its initiative to the full. Similarly, it
has led to insufficient democracy in the united front and in the mass movements.
For these reasons, education in democracy must be carried on within the Party
so that members can understand the meaning of democratic life, the meaning
of the relationship between democracy and centralism, and the way in which
democratic centralism should be put into practice. Only in this way can we
really extend democracy within the Party and at the same time avoid
ultra-democracy and the laissez-faire which destroys discipline.

It is also essential to extend democracy in our Party organizations in the
army to the degree necessary to stimulate the initiative of the Party members
and increase the combat effectiveness of the troops. However, there cannot
be as much democracy in the Party organizations in the army as in the local
Party organizations. Both in the army and in the local organizations, inner-Party
democracy is meant to strengthen discipline and increase combat effectiveness,
not to weaken them.

The extension of democracy in the Party should be seen as an essential step
in its consolidation and development, and as an important weapon enabling
it to be most active in the great struggle, to prove equal to its tasks,
create fresh strength and surmount the difficulties of the war.

OUR PARTY HAS CONSOLIDATED ITSELF AND GROWN STRONG THROUGH
  THE STRUGGLE ON TWO FRONTS


Broadly speaking, in the last seventeen years our Party has learned to use
the Marxist-Leninist weapon of ideological struggle against incorrect ideas
within the Party on two fronts--against Right opportunism and against "Left"
opportunism.

Before the Fifth Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee,
[2] our Party fought Chen Tu-hsiu's Right opportunism
and Comrade Li Li-san's "Left" opportunism. It made great progress thanks
to the victories achieved in these two inner-Party struggles. After the Fifth
Plenary Session there were two further historic inner-Party struggles, namely,
the struggles at the Tsunyi Meeting and in connection with the expulsion
of Chang Kuo-tao.

The Tsunyi Meeting corrected serious errors of a "Left" opportunist
character--errors of principle committed in the fight against the enemy's
fifth "encirclement and suppression" campaign--and united the Party and the
Red Army; it enabled the Central Committee of the Party and the main forces
of the Red Army to bring the Long March to a triumphant conclusion, to advance
to a forward position in the resistance to Japan and to carry out the new
policy of the Anti-Japanese National United Front. By combating Chang Kuo-tao
Right opportunism, the Pasi and Yenan Meetings (the fight against the Chang
Kuo-tao line began at the Pasi Meeting [3] and
ended at the Yenan Meeting [4]) succeeded in bringing
all the Red forces together and in strengthening the unity of the whole Party
for the heroic struggle against Japan. Both kinds of opportunist mistakes
arose during the revolutionary civil war, and their characteristic was that
they were errors related to the war.

What are the lessons which have been derived from these two inner-Party
struggles? They are:

  (1) The tendency to "Left" impetuosity, which disregards both the subjective
  and the objective factors, is extremely harmful to a revolutionary war and,
  for that matter, to any revolutionary movement--it was among the serious
  errors of principle which were manifested in the struggle against the enemy's
  fifth "encirclement and suppression" campaign, and which arose from ignorance
  of the characteristics of China's revolutionary war.
  
  (2) The opportunism of Chang Kuo-tao, however, was Right opportunism in the
  revolutionary war and was a combination of a retreatist line, warlordism
  and anti-Party activity. It was only with the overcoming of this brand of
  opportunism that large numbers of cadres and Party members in the Fourth
  Front Army of the Red Army, men of intrinsically fine quality and with a
  long record of heroic struggle, were able to free themselves from its toils
  and return to the correct line of the Central Committee.
 
  (3) Striking results were achieved in the great organizational work of the
  ten years of the Agrarian Revolutionary War--in army building, government
  work, mass work and Party building. Had it not been for the support rendered
  by such organizational work to the heroic fighting at the front, we could
  not have kept up the bitter struggle against Chiang Kai-shek. However, in
  the latter part of that period serious errors of principle were made in the
  Party's policy concerning cadres and organization, errors which showed themselves
  in the tendency towards sectarianism, in punitiveness and in the policy of
  ideological struggle carried to excess. They were due both to our failure
  to eliminate the vestiges of the former Li Li-san line and to the political
  mistakes in matters of principle committed at the time. These errors, too,
  were corrected at the Tsunyi Meeting, and the Party was thus able to make
  the turn to a correct cadres policy and to correct organizational principles.
  As for Chang Kuo-tao's organizational line, it violated all Party principles,
  disrupted Party discipline and carried factional activity to the point of
  opposition to the Party, the Central Committee and the Communist International.
  The Central Committee did everything possible to overcome Chang Kuo-tao's
  iniquitous and erroneous line and to frustrate his anti-Party activity, and
  also tried to save Chang Kuo-tao himself. But as he stubbornly refused to
  correct his mistakes and resorted to double-dealing, and subsequently even
  betrayed the Party and threw himself into the arms of the Kuomintang, the
  Party had to take firm measures and expel him. This disciplinary action won
  the support not only of all Party members but of all people loyal to the
  cause of national liberation. The Communist International also endorsed the
  decision and denounced Chang Kuo-tao as a deserter and renegade.


These lessons, these achievements, have furnished us with the prerequisites
for uniting the whole Party, for strengthening its ideological, political
and organizational unity, and for successfully waging the War of Resistance.
Our Party has consolidated itself and grown strong through the struggle on
the two fronts.

THE PRESENT STRUGGLE ON TWO FRONTS


From now on, it is of paramount importance to wage a political struggle against
Rightist pessimism in the War of Resistance, although it is still necessary
to keep an eye on "Left" impetuosity. On questions of the united front and
of Party and mass organization, we must continue the fight against the "Left"
tendency towards closed-doorism if we are to achieve co-operation with the
various other anti-Japanese parties and groups, expand the Communist Party
and broaden the mass movement. At the same time, we must take care to combat
the Right opportunist tendency towards co-operation and expansion which are
unconditional in character, or otherwise they will both be hindered and be
turned into capitulationist co-operation and unprincipled expansion.

Ideological struggle on the two fronts must suit the concrete circumstances
of each case, and we must never approach a problem subjectively or permit
the bad old habit of "sticking labels" on people to continue.

In the struggle against deviations, we must give serious attention to opposing
double-faced behaviour. As Chang Kuo-tao's career shows, the greatest danger
of such behaviour is that it may develop into factional activity. To comply
in public but oppose in private, to say yes and mean no, to say nice things
to a person's face but play tricks behind his back--these are all forms of
double-dealing. Only by sharpening the vigilance of cadres and Party members
against such behaviour can we strengthen Party discipline.

STUDY


Generally speaking, all Communist Party members who can do so should study
the theory of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, study our national history
and study current movements and trends; moreover, they should help to educate
members with less schooling. The cadres in particular should study these
subjects carefully, while members of the Central Committee and senior cadres
should give them even more attention. No political party can possibly lead
a great revolutionary movement to victory unless it possesses revolutionary
theory and a knowledge of history and has a profound grasp of the practical
movement.

The theory of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin is universally applicable. We
should regard it not as a dogma, but as a guide to action. Studying it is
not merely a matter of learning terms and phrases but of learning
Marxism-Leninism as the science of revolution. It is not just a matter of
understanding the general laws derived by Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin
from their extensive study of real life and revolutionary experience, but
of studying their standpoint and method in examining and solving problems.
Our Party's mastery of Marxism-Leninism is now rather better than it used
to be, but is still far from being extensive or deep. Ours is the task of
leading a great nation of several hundred million in a great and unprecedented
struggle. For us, therefore, the spreading and deepening of the study of
Marxism-Leninism present a big problem demanding an early solution which
is possible only through concentrated effort. Following on this plenary session
of the Central Committee, I hope to see an all-Party emulation in study which
will show who has really learned something, and who has learned more and
learned better. So far as shouldering the main responsibility of leadership
is concerned, our Party's fighting capacity will be much greater and our
task of defeating Japanese imperialism will be more quickly accomplished
if there are one or two hundred comrades with a grasp of Marxism-Leninism
which is systematic and not fragmentary, genuine and not hollow.

Another of our tasks is to study our historical heritage and use the Marxist
method to sum it up critically. Our national history goes back several thousand
years and has its own characteristics and innumerable treasures. But in these
matters we are mere schoolboys. Contemporary China has grown out of the China
of the past; we are Marxist in our historical approach and must not lop off
our history. We should sum up our history from Confucius to Sun Yat-sen and
take over this valuable legacy. This is important for guiding the great movement
of today. Being Marxists, Communists are internationalists, but we can put
Marxism into practice only when it is integrated with the specific
characteristics of our country and acquires a definite national form. The
great strength of Marxism-Leninism lies precisely in its integration with
the concrete revolutionary practice of all countries. For the Chinese Communist
Party, it is a matter of learning to apply the theory of Marxism-Leninism
to the specific circumstances of China. For the Chinese Communists who are
part of the great Chinese nation, flesh of its flesh and blood of its blood,
any talk about Marxism in isolation from China's characteristics is merely
Marxism in the abstract, Marxism in a vacuum. Hence to apply Marxism concretely
in China so that its every manifestation has an indubitably Chinese character,
i.e., to apply Marxism in the light of China's specific characteristics,
becomes a problem which it is urgent for the whole Party to understand and
solve. Foreign stereotypes must be abolished, there must be less singing
of empty, abstract tunes, and dogmatism must be laid to rest, they must be
replaced by the fresh, lively Chinese style and spirit which the common people
of China love. To separate internationalist content from national form is
the practice of those who do not understand the first thing about
internationalism. We, on the contrary, must link the two closely. In this
matter there are serious errors in our ranks which should be conscientiously
overcome.

What are the characteristics of the present movement? What are its laws?
How is it to be directed? These are all practical questions. To this day
we do not yet understand everything about Japanese imperialism, or about
China. The movement is developing, new things have yet to emerge, and they
are emerging in an endless stream. To study this movement in its entirety
and in its development is a great task claiming our constant attention. Whoever
refuses to study these problems seriously and carefully is no Marxist.

Complacency is the enemy of study. We cannot really learn anything until
we rid ourselves of complacency. Our attitude towards ourselves should be
"to be insatiable in learning" and towards others "to be tireless in teaching".

UNITY AND VICTORY


Unity within the Chinese Communist Party is the fundamental prerequisite
for uniting the whole nation to win the War of Resistance and build a new
China. Seventeen years of tempering have taught the Chinese Communist Party
many ways of attaining internal unity, and ours is now a much more seasoned
Party. Thus we are able to form a powerful nucleus for the whole people in
the struggle to win victory in the War of Resistance and to build a new China.
Comrades, so long as we are united, we can certainly reach this goal.

NOTES


1. In his report to the 17th Congress of the C.P.S.U.(B.)
in January 1934, Stalin said: ". . . after the correct political line has
been laid down, organizational work decides everything, including the fate
of the political line itself, its success or failure." (See Problems
of Leninism, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1954, p. 644.) He also dealt with
the question of "proper selection of personnel". In his address in May 1935
delivered in the Kremlin Palace to the graduates from the Red Army Academies,
Stalin put forward and explained the Hogan: "Cadres decide everything."
(Ibid., 661-62.) In his report to the 18th Congress of the C.P.S.U,(B)
in March 1939, Stalin said: "After a correct political line has been worked
out and tested in practice, the Party cadres become the decisive force in
the leadership exercised by the Party and the state." (Ibid., p.
784.)

2. The period referred to was that from the emergency meeting
of the Political Bureau of the Fifth Central Committee of the Chinese Communist
Party in August 1927 to the Fifth Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee
in January 1934.

3. The Pasi Meeting was called by the Political Bureau
of the Central Committee in August 1935 at Pasi, northwest of the county
town of Sungpan, on the borders of northwestern Szechuan and southeastern
Kansu. Chang Kuo-tao, leading a section of the Red Army, had broken away
from the Central Committee, and was challenging its orders and attempting
to undermine it. At this meeting the Central Committee decided to leave the
danger zone for northern Shensi with those forces of the Red Army which obeyed
its orders. However, Chang Kuo-tao led the Red Army units he had deceived
southward to the area of Tienchuan, Lushan, the Big and Small Chinchuan and
Ahpa, where he established a bogus central committee and came out publicly
against the Party.

4. The Yenan Meeting was the enlarged meeting of the Political
Bureau of the Central Committee of the Party held in Yenan in April 1937.
Prior to this meeting large numbers of cadres and soldiers in the Red Army
units under Chang Kuo-tao who had already become aware of his deception marched
northward towards the Shensi-Kansu border area. On their way, however, some
units acted on mistaken orders and switched westward to the area of Kanchow,
Liangchow and Suchow, all in Kansu Province. Most of these were wiped out
by the enemy and the rest made their way to Sinkiang and only later returned
to the Shensi-Kansu border area. The other units had long since reached the
Shensi-Kansu border area and joined forces with the Central Red Army. Chang
Kuo-tao himself also turned up in northern Shensi and attended the Yenan
Meeting. The meeting systematically and conclusively condemned his opportunism
and rebellion against the Party. He feigned acquiescence but actually made
preparations for his final betrayal of the Party.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Question of Independence and Initiative Within





THE QUESTION OF INDEPENDENCE AND INITIATIVE WITHIN THE UNITED FRONT





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE QUESTION OF INDEPENDENCE AND INITIATIVE WITHIN THE UNITED FRONT


November 5, 1938

[This is part of Comrade Mao Tse-tung's concluding speech at the Sixth
Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee of the Party. At the time,
the issue of independence and initiative within the united front was one
of the outstanding questions concerning the anti-Japanese united front, a
question on which there were differences of opinion between Comrade Mao Tse-tung
and Chen Shao-yu. In essence what was involved was proletarian leadership
in the united front. In his report of December 1947 ("The Present Situation
and Our Tasks") Comrade Mao Tse-tung briefly summed up these differences:

During the War of Resistance, our Party combated ideas similar to those
  of the capitulationists [referring to Chen Tu-hsiu's capitulationism in the
  period of the First Revolutionary Civil War], that is, such ideas as making
  concessions to the Kuomintang's anti-popular policies, having more confidence
  in the Kuomintang than in the masses, not daring to arouse and give full
  rein to mass struggles, not daring to expand the Liberated Areas and the
  people's armies in the Japanese-occupied areas, and handing over the leadership
  in the War of Resistance to the Kuomintang. Our Party waged a resolute struggle
  against such impotent and degenerate ideas, which run counter to the principles
  of Marxism-Leninism, resolutely carried out its political line of "developing
  the progressive forces, winning over the middle forces and isolating the
  die-hard forces", and resolutely expanded the Liberated Areas and the People's
  Liberation Army. Not only did this ensure our Party's ability to defeat Japanese
  imperialism in the period of its aggression, but also in the period after
  the Japanese surrender when Chiang Kai-shek launched his counter-revolutionary
  war, it ensured our Party's ability to switch smoothly and without loss to
  the course of Opposing Chiang Kai-shek's counter-revolutionary war with a
  people's revolutionary war and to win great victories in a short time. All
  Party comrades must keep these lessons of history firmly in mind.]


HELP AND CONCESSIONS SHOULD BE POSITIVE, NOT NEGATIVE


All political parties and groups in the united front must help each other
and make mutual concessions for the sake of long-term cooperation, but such
help and concessions should be positive, not negative. We must consolidate
and expand our own Party and army, and at the same time should assist friendly
parties and armies to consolidate and expand; the people want the government
to satisfy their political and economic demands, and at the same time give
the government every possible help to prosecute the War of Resistance; the
factory workers demand better conditions from the owners, and at the same
time work hard in the interests of resistance; for the sake of unity against
foreign aggression, the landlords should reduce rent and interest, and at
the same time the peasants should pay rent and interest. All these principles
and policies of mutual assistance are positive, not negative or one-sided.
The same should be true of mutual concessions. Each side should refrain from
undermining the other and from organizing secret party branches within the
other's party, government and army. For our part we organize no secret party
branches inside the Kuomintang and its government or army, and so set the
Kuomintang's mind at rest, to the advantage of the War of Resistance. The
saying, "Refrain from doing some things in order to be able to do other
things",[1] exactly meets the case. A national
war of resistance would have been impossible without the reorganization of
the Red Army, the change in the administrative system in the Red areas, and
the abandonment of the policy of armed insurrection. By giving way on the
latter we have achieved the former; negative measures have yielded positive
results. "To fall back the better to leap forward"
[2]--that is Leninism. To regard concessions as
something purely negative is contrary to Marxism-Leninism. There are indeed
instances of purely negative concessions--the Second International's doctrine
of collaboration between labour and capital [3]
resulted in the betrayal of a whole class and a whole revolution. In China,
Chen Tu-hsiu and then Chang Kuo-tao were both capitulators; capitulationism
must be strenuously opposed. When we make concessions, fall back, turn to
the defensive or halt our advance in our relations with either allies or
enemies, we should always see these actions as part of our whole revolutionary
policy, as an indispensable link in the general revolutionary line, as one
turn in a zigzag course. In a word, they are positive.

THE IDENTITY BETWEEN THE NATIONAL AND THE CLASS
STRUGGLE

To sustain a long war by long-term co-operation or, in other words, to
subordinate the class struggle to the present national struggle against
Japan--such is the fundamental principle of the united front. Subject to
this principle, the independent character of the parties and classes and
their independence and initiative within the united front should be preserved,
and their essential rights should not be sacrificed to co-operation and unity,
but on the contrary must be firmly upheld within certain limits. Only thus
can co-operation be promoted, indeed only thus can there be any co-operation
at all. Otherwise co-operation will turn into amalgamation and the united
front will inevitably be sacrificed. In a struggle that is national in character,
the class struggle takes the form of national struggle, which demonstrates
the identity between the two. On the one hand, for a given historical period
the political and economic demands of the various classes must not be such
as to disrupt co-operation; on the other hand, the demands of the national
struggle (the need to resist Japan) should be the point of departure for
all class struggle. Thus there is identity in the united front between unity
and independence and between the national struggle and the class struggle.

"EVERYTHING THROUGH THE UNITED FRONT" IS WRONG

The Kuomintang is the party in power, and so far has not allowed the united
front to assume an organizational form. Behind the enemy lines, the idea
of "everything through" is impossible, for there we have to act independently
and with the initiative in our own hands while keeping to the agreements
which the Kuomintang has approved (for instance, the Programme of Armed
Resistance and National Reconstruction). Or we may act first and report
afterwards, anticipating what the Kuomintang might agree to. For instance,
the appointment of administrative commissioners and the dispatch of troops
to Shantung Province would never have occurred if we had tried to get these
things done "through the united front". It is said that the French Communist
Party once put forward a similar slogan, but that was probably because in
France, where a joint committee of the parties already existed and the Socialist
Party was unwilling to act in accordance with the jointly agreed programme
and wanted to have its own way, the Communist Party had to put forward such
a slogan in order to restrain the Socialist Party, and certainly it did not
do so to shackle itself. In the case of China, the Kuomintang has deprived
all other political parties of equal rights and is trying to compel them
to take its orders. If this slogan is meant to be a demand that everything
done by the Kuomintang must go through us, it is both ridiculous and impossible.
If we have to secure the Kuomintang's consent beforehand for everything we
do, what if the Kuomintang does not consent? Since the policy of the Kuomintang
is to restrict our growth, there is no reason whatever for us to propose
such a slogan, which simply binds us hand and foot. At present there are
things for which we should secure prior consent from the Kuomintang, such
as the expansion of our three divisions into three army corps--this is to
report first and act afterwards. There are other things which the Kuomintang
can be told after they have become accomplished facts, such as the expansion
of our forces to over 200,000 men--this is to act first and report afterwards.
There are also things, such as the convening of the Border Region assembly,
which we shall do without reporting for the time being, knowing that the
Kuomintang will not agree. There are still other things which, for the time
being, we shall neither do nor report, for they are likely to jeopardize
the whole situation. In short, we must not split the united front, but neither
should we allow ourselves to be bound hand and foot, and hence the slogan
of "everything through the united front" should not be put forward. If
"everything must be submitted to the united front" is interpreted as "everything
must be submitted to" Chiang Kai-shek and Yen Hsi-shan, then that slogan,
too, is wrong. Our policy is one of independence and initiative within the
united front, a policy both of unity and of independence. 

NOTES

1. A quotation from Mencius.

2. V. I. Lenin, "Conspectus of Hegel's Book
Lectures on the History of Philosophy", Collected Works, Russ. ed.,
Moscow, 1958, Vol. XXXVIII, p. 275.

3. "The doctrine of collaboration between labour and capital"
is the reactionary doctrine of the Second International, which advocates
such collaboration in the capitalist countries and opposes the revolutionary
overthrow of bourgeois rule and the establishment of the dictatorship of
the proletariat.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Problems of War and Strategy







PROBLEMS OF WAR AND STRATEGY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

PROBLEMS OF WAR AND STRATEGY


November 6, 1938

[This article is part of Comrade Mao Tse-tung's concluding speech at the
Sixth Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee of the Party. In his
"Problems of Strategy in Guerrilla War Against Japan" and "On Protracted
War", Comrade Mao Tse-tung had already settled the question of the Party's
leading role in the War of Resistance Against Japan. But some comrades,
committing Right opportunist errors, denied that the Party must maintain
its independence and initiative in the united front, and so doubted and even
opposed the Party's line on the war and on strategy.

In order to overcome this Right opportunism, bring the whole Party to
a clearer understanding of the prime importance of the problems of war and
strategy in the Chinese revolution and mobilize it for serious work in this
connection, Comrade Mao Tse-tung again stressed the importance of the subject
at this plenary session, approaching it from the viewpoint of the history
of China's political struggles, and analysed the development of the Party's
military work and the specific changes in its strategy The result was unanimity
of thought in the Party leadership and unanimity of action throughout the
Party.] 
  

I. CHINA'S CHARACTERISTICS AND REVOLUTIONARY WAR

The seizure of power by armed force, the settlement of the issue by war,
is the central task and the highest form of revolution. This Marxist-Leninist
principle of revolution holds good universally, for China and for all other
countries.

But while the principle remains the same, its application by the party of
the proletariat finds expression in varying ways according to the varying
conditions. Internally, capitalist countries practice bourgeois democracy
(not feudalism) when they are not fascist or not at war; in their external
relations, they are not oppressed by, but themselves oppress, other nations.
Because of these characteristics, it is the task of the party of the proletariat
in the capitalist countries to educate the workers and build up strength
through a long period of legal struggle, and thus prepare for the final overthrow
of capitalism. In these countries, the question is one of a long legal struggle,
of utilizing parliament as a platform, of economic and political strikes,
of organizing trade unions and educating the workers. There the form of
organization is legal and the form of struggle bloodless (non-military).
On the issue of war, the Communist Parties in the capitalist countries oppose
the imperialist wars waged by their own countries; if such wars occur, the
policy of these Parties is to bring about the defeat of the reactionary
governments of their own countries. The one war they want to fight is the
civil war for which they are preparing.[1] But
this insurrection and war should not be launched until the bourgeoisie becomes
really helpless, until the majority of the proletariat are determined to
rise in arms and fight, and until the rural masses are giving willing help
to the proletariat. And when the time comes to launch such an insurrection
and war, the first step will be to seize the cities, and then advance into
the countryside' and not the other way about. All this has been done by Communist
Parties in capitalist countries, and it has been proved correct by the October
Revolution in Russia.

China is different however. The characteristics of China are that she is
not independent and democratic but semi-colonial and semi-feudal, that internally
she has no democracy but is under feudal oppression and that in her external
relations she has no national independence but is oppressed by imperialism.
It follows that we have no parliament to make use of and no legal right to
organize the workers to strike. Basically, the task of the Communist Party
here is not to go through a long period of legal struggle before launching
insurrection and war, and not to seize the big cities first and then occupy
the countryside, but the reverse.

When imperialism is not making armed attacks on our country, the Chinese
Communist Party either wages civil war jointly with the bourgeoisie against
the warlords (lackeys of imperialism), as in 1924-27 in the wars in Kwangtung
Province [2] and the Northern Expedition, or unites
with the peasants and the urban petty bourgeoisie to wage civil war against
the landlord class and the comprador bourgeoisie (also lackeys of imperialism),
as in the War of Agrarian Revolution of 1927-36. When imperialism launches
armed attacks on China, the Party unites all classes and strata in the country
opposing the foreign aggressors to wage a national war against the foreign
enemy, as it is doing in the present War of Resistance Against Japan.

All this shows the difference between China and the capitalist countries.
In China war is the main form of struggle and the army is the main form of
organization. Other forms such as mass organization and mass struggle are
also extremely important and indeed indispensable and in no circumstances
to be overlooked, but their purpose is to serve the war. Before the outbreak
of a war all organization and struggle are in preparation for the war, as
in the period from the May 4th Movement of 1919 to the May 30th Movement
of 1925. After war breaks out, all organization and struggle are coordinated
with the war either directly or indirectly, as, for instance, in the period
of the Northern Expedition when all organization and struggle in the rear
areas of the revolutionary army were co-ordinated with the war directly,
and those in the Northern warlord areas were co-ordinated with the war
indirectly. Again in the period of the War of Agrarian Revolution all
organization and struggle inside the Red areas were co-ordinated with the
war directly, and outside the Red areas indirectly. Yet again in the present
period, the War of Resistance, all organization and struggle in the rear
areas of the anti-Japanese forces and in the areas occupied by the enemy
are directly or indirectly co-ordinated with the war.

"In China the armed revolution is fighting the armed counterrevolution. That
is one of the specific features and one of the advantages of the Chinese
revolution."[3] This thesis of Comrade Stalin's
is perfectly correct and is equally valid for the Northern Expedition, the
War of Agrarian Revolution, and the present War of Resistance Against Japan.
They are all revolutionary wars; all directed against counter-revolutionaries
and all waged mainly by the revolutionary people, differing only in the sense
that a civil war differs from a national war, and that a war conducted by
the Communist Party differs from a war it conducts jointly with the Kuomintang.
Of course, these differences are important. They indicate the breadth of
the main forces in the war (an alliance of the workers and peasants, or of
the workers, peasants and bourgeoisie) and whether our antagonist in the
war is internal or external (whether the war is against domestic or foreign
foes, and, if domestic, whether against the Northern warlords or against
the Kuomintang); they also indicate that the content of China's revolutionary
war differs at different stages of its history. But all these wars are instances
of armed revolution fighting armed counterrevolution, they are all revolutionary
wars, and all exhibit the specific features and advantages of the Chinese
revolution. The thesis that revolutionary war "is one of the specific features
and one of the advantages of the Chinese revolution" fits China's conditions
perfectly. The main task of the party of the Chinese proletariat, a task
confronting it almost from its very inception, has been to unite with as
many allies as possible and, according to the circumstances, to organize
armed struggles for national and social liberation against armed
counterrevolution, whether internal or external. Without armed struggle the
proletariat and the Communist Party would have no standing at all in China,
and it would be impossible to accomplish any revolutionary task.

Our Party did not grasp this point fully during the first five or six years
after it was founded, that is, from 1921 to its participation in the Northern
Expedition in 1926. It did not then understand the supreme importance of
armed struggle in China, or seriously prepare for war and organize armed
forces, or apply itself to the study of military strategy and tactics. During
the Northern Expedition it neglected to win over the army but laid one-sided
stress on the mass movement, with the result that the whole mass movement
collapsed the moment the Kuomintang turned reactionary. For a long time after
1927 many comrades continued to make it the Party's central task to prepare
for insurrections in the cities and to work in the White areas. It was only
after our victory in repelling the enemy's third "encirclement and suppression"
campaign in 1931 that some comrades fundamentally changed their attitude
on this question. But this was not true of the whole Party, and there were
other comrades who did not think along the lines presented here.

Experience tells us that China's problems cannot be settled without armed
force. An understanding of this point will help us in successfully waging
the War of Resistance Against Japan from now on. The fact that the whole
nation is rising in armed resistance in the war against Japan should inculcate
a better understanding of the importance of this question in the whole Party,
and every Party member should be prepared to take up arms and go to the front
at any moment. Moreover, our present session has clearly defined the direction
for our efforts by deciding that the Party's main fields of work are in the
battle zones and in the enemy's rear. This is also an excellent antidote
against the tendency of some Party members to be willing only to work in
Party organizations and in the mass movement but to be unwilling to study
or participate in warfare, and against the failure of some schools to encourage
students to go to the front, and other such phenomena. In most of China,
Party organizational work and mass work are directly linked with armed struggle;
there is not and cannot be, any Party work or mass work that is isolated
and stands by itself. Even in rear areas remote from the battle zones (like
Yunnan, Kweichow and Szechuan) and in enemy-occupied areas (like Peiping,
Tientsin, Nanking and Shanghai), Party organizational work and mass work
are co-ordinated with the war, and should and must exclusively serve the
needs of the front. In a word, the whole Party must pay great attention to
war, study military matters and prepare itself for fighting. 


II. THE WAR HISTORY OF THE KUOMINTANG 

It will be useful for us to look at the history of the Kuomintang and see
what attention it pays to war.

From the start, when he organized a small revolutionary group, Sun Yat-sen
staged armed insurrections against the Ching
Dynasty.[4] The period of Tung Meng Hui (the
Chinese Revolutionary League) was replete with armed
insurrections,[5] right up to the armed overthrow
of the Ching Dynasty by the Revolution of 1911. Then, during the period of
the Chinese Revolutionary Party, he carried out a military campaign against
Yuan Shih-kai.[6] Subsequent events such as the
southern movement of the naval units,[7] the northern
expedition from Kweilin [8] and the founding of
the Whampoa Military Academy [9] were also among
Sun Yat-sen's military undertakings.

After Sun Yat-sen came Chiang Kai-shek, who brought the Kuomintang's military
power to its zenith. He values the army as his very life and has had the
experience of three wars, namely, the Northern Expedition, the Civil War
and the War of Resistance Against Japan. For the last ten years Chiang Kai-shek
has been a counter-revolutionary. He has created a huge "Central Army" for
counter-revolutionary purposes. He has held firmly to the vital point that
whoever has an army has power and that war decides everything. In this respect
we ought to learn from him. In this respect both Sun Yat-sen and Chiang Kai-shek
are our teachers.

Since the Revolution of 1911, all the warlords have clung to their armies
for dear life, setting great store by the principle, "Whoever has an army
has power."

Tan Yen-kai,[10] a clever bureaucrat who had a
chequered career in Hunan, was never a civil governor pure and simple but
always insisted on being both the military governor and the civil governor.
Even when he became President of the National Government first in Canton
and then in Wuhan, he was concurrently the commander of the Second Army.
There are many such warlords who understand this peculiarity of China's.

There have also been parties in China, notably the Progressive
Party,[11] which did not want to have an army;
yet even this party recognized that it could not get government positions
without some warlord backing. Among its successive patrons have been Yuan
Shih-kai,[12] Tuan
Chi-jui[13] and Chiang Kai-shek (to whom the Political
Science Group,[14] formed out of a section of
the Progressive Party, has attached itself).

A few small political parties with a short history, e.g., the Youth
Party,[15] have no army, and so have not been
able to get anywhere.

In other countries there is no need for each of the bourgeois parties to
have an armed force under its direct command. But things are different in
China, where, because of the feudal division of the country, those landlord
or bourgeois groupings or parties which have guns have power, and those which
have more guns have more power. Placed in such an environment, the party
of the proletariat should see clearly to the heart of the matter.

Communists do not fight for personal military power (they must in no
circumstances do that, and let no one ever again follow the example of Chang
Kuo-tao), but they must fight for military power for the Party, for military
power for the people. As a national war of resistance is going on, we must
also fight for military power for the nation. Where there is naivety on the
question of military power, nothing whatsoever can be achieved. It is very
difficult for the labouring people, who have been deceived and intimidated
by the reactionary ruling classes for thousands of years, to awaken to the
importance of having guns in their own hands. Now that Japanese imperialist
oppression and the nation-wide resistance to it have pushed our labouring
people into the arena of war, Communists should prove themselves the most
politically conscious leaders in this war. Every Communist must grasp the
truth, "Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun." Our principle
is that the Party commands the gun, and the gun must never be allowed to
command the Party. Yet, having guns, we can create Party organizations, as
witness the powerful Party organizations which the Eighth Route Army has
created in northern China. We can also create cadres, create schools, create
culture, create mass movements. Everything in Yenan has been created by having
guns. All things grow out of the barrel of a gun. According to the Marxist
theory of the state, the army is the chief component of state power. Whoever
wants to seize and retain state power must have a strong army. Some people
ridicule us as advocates of the "omnipotence of war". Yes, we are advocates
of the omnipotence of revolutionary war; that is good, not bad, it is Marxist.
The guns of the Russian Communist Party created socialism. We shall create
a democratic republic. Experience in the class struggle in the era of imperialism
teaches us that it is only by the power of the gun that the working class
and the labouring masses can defeat the armed bourgeoisie and landlords;
in this sense we may say that only with guns can the whole world be transformed.
We are advocates of the abolition of war, we do not want war; but war can
only be abolished through war, and in order to get rid of the gun it is necessary
to take up the gun.

III. THE WAR HISTORY OF THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY 


Our Party failed to grasp the importance of engaging itself directly in
preparations for war and in the organization of armed forces for a period
of three or four years, that is; from 1921 (when the Chinese Communist Party
was founded) to 1924 (when the First National Congress of the Kuomintang
was held), and it still lacked adequate understanding of this issue in the
1924-27 period and even later; nevertheless, after 1924, when it began to
participate in the Whampoa Military Academy, it entered a new stage and began
to see the importance of military affairs. Through helping the Kuomintang
in the wars in Kwangtung Province and participating in the Northern Expedition,
the Party gained leadership over some armed
forces.[16] Then, having learned a bitter lesson
from the failure of the revolution, the Party organized the Nanchang
Uprising, [17] the Autumn Harvest Uprising
[18] and the Canton Uprising, and entered on a
new period, the founding of the Red Army. That was the crucial period in
which our Party arrived at a thorough understanding of the importance of
the army. Had there been no Red Army and no war fought by the Red Army in
this period, that is, had the Communist Party adopted Chen Tu-hsiu's
liquidationism, the present War of Resistance would have been inconceivable
or could not have been sustained for long.

At its emergency meeting held on August 7, 1927, the Central Committee of
the Party combated Right opportunism in the political sphere, thus enabling
the Party to take a big stride forward. At its fourth plenary session in
January 1931, the Sixth Central Committee nominally combated "Left" opportunism
in the political sphere, but in fact itself committed the error of "Left"
opportunism anew. The two meetings differed in their content and historical
role, but neither of them dealt seriously with the problems of war and strategy,
a fact which showed that war had not yet been made the centre of gravity
in the Party's work. After the central leadership of the Party moved into
the Red areas in 1933, this situation underwent a radical change, but mistakes
in principle were again committed on the problem of war (and all other major
problems), bringing serious losses to the revolutionary war. The Tsunyi Meeting
of 1935, on the other hand, was mainly a fight against opportunism in the
military sphere and gave top priority to the question of war, and this was
a reflection of the war conditions of the time. Today we can say with confidence
that in the struggles of the past seventeen years the Chinese Communist Party
has forged not only a firm Marxist political line but also a firm Marxist
military line. We have been able to apply Marxism in solving not only political
but also military problems; we have trained not only a large core of cadres
capable of running the Party and the state, but also a large core of cadres
capable of running the army. These achievements are the flower of the revolution,
watered by the blood of countless martyrs, a glory that belongs not only
to the Chinese Communist Party and the Chinese people, but also to the Communist
Parties and the peoples of the whole world. There are only three armies in
the whole world which belong to the proletariat and the labouring people,
the armies led by the Communist Parties of the Soviet Union, of China and
of Spain, and as yet Communist Parties in other countries have had no military
experience; hence our army and our military experience are all the more precious.

In order to carry the present War of Resistance Against Japan to victory,
it is extremely important to expand and consolidate the Eighth Route Army,
the New Fourth Army and all the guerrilla forces led by our Party. Acting
on this principle, the Party should dispatch a sufficient number of its best
members and cadres to the front. Everything must serve victory at the front,
and the organizational task must be subordinated to the political task.

IV. CHANGES IN THE PARTY'S MILITARY STRATEGY IN THE CIVIL
  WAR AND THE NATIONAL WAR


The changes in our Party's military strategy are worth studying. Let us deal
separately with the two processes, the civil war and the national war.

The civil war can be roughly divided into two strategic periods. Guerrilla
warfare was primary in the first period and regular warfare in the second.
But this regular warfare was of the Chinese type, regular only in its
concentration of forces for mobile warfare and in a certain degree of
centralization and planning in command and organization; in other respects
it retained a guerrilla character and, as regular warfare, was on a low level
and not comparable with the regular warfare of foreign armies or, in some
ways, even with that of the Kuomintang army. Thus, in a sense, this type
of regular warfare was only guerrilla warfare raised to a higher level.

The War of Resistance Against Japan can also be roughly divided into two
strategic periods, so far as our Party's military tasks are concerned. In
the first period (comprising the stages of the strategic defensive and strategic
stalemate) it is guerrilla warfare which is primary, while in the second
(the stage of the strategic counteroffensive) it is regular warfare which
will be primary. However, the guerrilla warfare of the first period of the
War of Resistance differs considerably in content from that of the first
period of the civil war, because the dispersed guerrilla tasks are being
carried out by the regular (i.e., regular to a certain degree) Eighth
Route Army. Likewise, the regular warfare of the second period of the War
of Resistance will be different from that of the second period of the civil
war because we can assume that, given up-to-date equipment, a great change
will take place both in the army and in its operations. Our army will then
attain a high degree of centralization and organization, and its operations
will lose much of their guerrilla character and attain a high degree of
regularity; what is now on a low level will then be raised to a higher level,
and the Chinese type of regular warfare will change into the general type.
That will be our task in the stage of the strategic counter-offensive.

Thus we see that the two processes, the civil war and the War of Resistance
Against Japan, and their four strategic periods, contain three changes in
strategy. The first was the change from guerrilla warfare to regular warfare
in the civil war. The second was the change from regular warfare in the civil
war to guerrilla warfare in the War of Resistance. And the third will be
the change from guerrilla warfare to regular warfare in the War of Resistance.

The first of the three changes encountered great difficulties. It involved
a twofold task. On the one hand, we had to combat the Right tendency of localism
and guerrilla-ism, which consisted in clinging to guerrilla habits and refusing
to make the turn to regularization, a tendency which arose because our cadres
underestimated the changes in the enemy's situation and our own tasks. In
the Central Red Area it was only after much painstaking education that this
tendency was gradually corrected. On the other hand, we also had to combat
the "Left" tendency of over-centralization and adventurism which put undue
stress on regularization, a tendency which arose because some of the leading
cadres overestimated the enemy, set the tasks too high and mechanically applied
foreign experience regardless of the actual conditions. For three long years
(before the Tsunyi Meeting) this tendency imposed enormous sacrifices on
the Central Red Area, and it was corrected only after we had learned lessons
for which we paid in blood. Its correction was the achievement of the Tsunyi
Meeting.

The second change in strategy took place in the autumn of 1937 (after the
Lukouchiao Incident), at the juncture of the two different wars. We faced
a new enemy, Japanese imperialism, and had as our ally our former enemy,
the Kuomintang (which was still hostile to us), and the theatre of war was
the vast expanse of northern China (which was temporarily our army's front
but would soon be the enemy's rear and would remain so for a long time).
In this special situation, our change in strategy was an extremely serious
one. In this special situation we had to transform the regular army of the
past into a guerrilla army (in respect to its dispersed operations, and not
to its sense of organization or to its discipline), and transform the mobile
warfare of the past into guerrilla warfare, so that we could adapt ourselves
to the kind of enemy facing us and to the tasks before us. But this change
was, to all appearances, a step backward and therefore necessarily very
difficult. Both underestimation and morbid fear of Japan, tendencies likely
to occur at such a time, did actually occur among the Kuomintang. When the
Kuomintang changed over from civil war to national war, it suffered many
needless losses mainly because of its underestimation of the enemy, but also
because of its morbid fear of Japan (as exemplified by Han Fu-chu and Liu
Chih [19]). On the other hand, we have effected
the change fairly smoothly and, instead of suffering losses, have won big
victories. The reason is that the great majority of our cadres accepted the
correct guidance of the Central Committee in good time and skilfully sized
up the actual situation; even though there were serious arguments between
the Central Committee and some of the army cadres. The extreme importance
of this change for persevering in, developing and winning the War of Resistance
as a whole, as well as for the future of the Communist Party of China, can
be seen immediately if we think of the historic significance of anti-Japanese
guerrilla warfare in determining the fate of the national liberation struggle
in China. In its extraordinary breadth and protractedness, China's anti-Japanese
guerrilla war is without precedent, not only in the East but perhaps in the
whole history of mankind.

The third change, from guerrilla to regular warfare against Japan, belongs
to the future development of the war, which will presumably give rise to
new circumstances and new difficulties. We need not discuss it now.

V. THE STRATEGIC ROLE OF GUERRILLA WARFARE AGAINST
  JAPAN


In the anti-Japanese war as a whole, regular warfare is primary and guerrilla
warfare supplementary, for only regular warfare can decide the final outcome
of the war. Of the three strategic stages (the defensive, the stalemate and
the counter-offensive) in the entire process of the war in the country as
a whole, the first and last are stages in which regular warfare is
primary and guerrilla warfare supplementary. In the intermediate stage guerrilla
warfare will become primary and regular warfare supplementary, because the
enemy will be holding on to the areas he has occupied and we will be preparing
for the counter-offensive but will not yet be ready to launch it. Though
this stage will possibly be the longest, it is still only one of the three
stages in the entire war. If we take the war as a whole, therefore, regular
warfare is primary and guerrilla warfare supplementary. Unless we understand
this, unless we recognize that regular warfare will decide the final outcome
of the war, and unless we pay attention to building a regular army and to
studying and directing regular warfare, we shall be unable to defeat Japan.
This is one aspect of the matter.

All the same, guerrilla warfare has its important strategic place throughout
the war. Without guerrilla warfare and without due attention to building
guerrilla units and guerrilla armies and to studying and directing guerrilla
warfare, we shall likewise be unable to defeat Japan. The reason is that,
since the greater part of China will be converted into the enemy's rear,
in the absence of the most extensive and persistent guerrilla warfare the
enemy will entrench himself securely without any fear of attacks from behind,
will inflict heavy losses on our main forces fighting at the front and will
launch increasingly fierce offensives; thus it will be difficult for us to
bring about a stalemate, and the very continuation of the War of Resistance
may be jeopardized. But even if things do not turn out that way, other
unfavourable circumstances will ensue, such as the inadequate building up
of strength for our counter-offensive, the absence of supporting actions
during the counter-offensive, and the possibility that the enemy will be
able to replace his losses. If these circumstances arise and are not overcome
by the timely development of extensive and persistent guerrilla warfare,
it will likewise be impossible to defeat Japan. Hence, though guerrilla warfare
occupies a supplementary place in the war as a whole, it does have an extremely
important place in strategy. In waging the War of Resistance Against Japan
it is undoubtedly a grave error to neglect guerrilla warfare. This is the
other aspect of the matter.

Given a big country, guerrilla warfare is possible; hence there was guerrilla
warfare in the past too. But guerrilla warfare can be persevered in only
when led by the Communist Party. That is why guerrilla warfare generally
failed in the past and why it can be victorious only in modern times and
only in big countries in which Communist Parties have emerged, as in the
Soviet Union during its civil war and in China at present. Considering the
present circumstances and the general situation with respect to the war,
the division of labour between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party in
the anti-Japanese war, in which the former carries on frontal regular warfare
and the latter carries on guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines, is both
necessary and proper, and is a matter of mutual need, mutual co-ordination
and mutual assistance.

It can thus be understood how important and necessary it was for our Party
to change its military strategy from the regular warfare of the latter period
of the civil war to the guerrilla warfare of the first period of the War
of Resistance. The favourable effects of this change can be summed up in
the following eighteen points:

  (1) reduction of the areas occupied by the enemy forces;
  
  (2) expansion of the base areas of our own forces;
  
  (3) in the stage of the defensive, co-ordination with operations at the regular
  front, so as to pin down the enemy;
  
  (4) in the stage of stalemate, maintenance of a firm hold on the base areas
  behind the enemy lines, so as to facilitate the training and reorganization
  of troops at the regular front;
  
  (5) in the stage of the counter-offensive, co-ordination with the regular
  front in recovering lost territory;
  
  (6) the quickest and most effective expansion of our forces;
  
  (7) the widest expansion of the Communist Party, so that a Party branch may
  be organized in every village;
  
  (8) the broadest development of the mass movements, so that all the people
  behind the enemy lines, except for those in his strongholds, may be organized;
  
  (9) the most extensive establishment of organs of anti-Japanese democratic
  political power;
  
  (10) the widest development of anti-Japanese cultural and educational work;
  
  (11) the most extensive improvement of the people's livelihood;
  
  (12) the most effective disintegration of the enemy troops;
  
  (13) the most extensive and enduring impact on popular feeling and stimulation
  of morale throughout the country;
  
  (14) the most extensive impetus to progress in the friendly armies and parties;
  
  (15) adaptation to the situation in which the enemy is strong and we are
  weak, so that we suffer fewer losses and win more victories;
  
  (16) adaptation to the fact that China is large and Japan small, so as to
  make the enemy suffer more losses and win fewer victories;
  
  (17) the quickest and most effective training of large numbers of cadres
  for leadership; and
  
  (18) the most effective solution of the problem of provisions.


It is also beyond doubt that in the long course of struggle the guerrilla
units and guerrilla warfare will not remain as they are but will develop
to a higher stage and evolve gradually into regular units and regular warfare.
Through guerrilla warfare, we shall build up our strength and turn ourselves
into a decisive element in the crushing of Japanese imperialism.

VI. PAY GREAT ATTENTION TO THE STUDY OF MILITARY
  MATTERS


All the issues between two hostile armies depend on war for their solution,
and China's survival or extinction depends on her victory or defeat in the
present war. Hence our study of military theory, of strategy and tactics
and of army political work brooks not a moment's delay. Though our study
of tactics is still inadequate, our comrades who are engaged in military
work have achieved a great deal in the last ten years and, on the
basis of Chinese conditions, have brought forth much that is new; the shortcoming
here is that there has been no general summing-up. But so far only a few
people have taken up the study of the problems of strategy and the theory
of war. First-rate results have been achieved in the study of our political
work, which, in wealth of experience and in the number and quality of its
innovations, ranks second only to that of the Soviet Union; here too the
shortcoming is insufficient synthesis and systematization. The popularization
of military knowledge is an urgent task for the Party and the whole
country. We must now pay great attention to all these things, but most of
all to the theory of war and strategy. I deem it imperative that we arouse
interest in the study of military theory and direct the attention of the
whole membership to the study of military matters.

NOTES



1. See V. I. Lenin, "The War and Russian Social-Democracy"
(Collected Works, Eng. ed., Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1964, Vol.
XXI, pp. 27-34), "The Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. Groups Abroad" (ibid.,
pp. 158-64), "The Defeat of One's own Government in the Imperialist
War" (ibid., pp. 275-80), "The Defeat of Russia and the Revolutionary
Crisis" (ibid., pp. 378-82). These articles, written in 1914-15,
deal Specifically with the imperialist war of that time. See also History
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks), Short Course,
Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1951, pp. 258-67.

2. In 1924, Dr. Sun Yat-sen, in alliance with the Communist
Party and the revolutionary workers and peasants, defeated the "Merchants'
Corps", an armed force of the compradors and landlords which engaged in
counter-revolutionary activities in Canton in collaboration with the British
imperialists. The revolutionary army, which had been founded on the basis
of co-operation between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party, set out from
Canton early in 1925, fought the Eastern Campaign and, with the support of
the peasants, defeated the troops of the warlord Chen Chiung-ming. It then
returned to Canton and overthrew the Yunnan and Kwangsi warlords who had
entrenched themselves there. That autumn it conducted the Second Eastern
Campaign and finally wiped out Chen Chiung-ming's forces. These campaigns,
in which members of the Communist Party and the Communist Youth League fought
heroically in the van, brought about the political unification of Kwangtung
Province and paved the way for the Northern Expedition.

3. J. V. Stalin, "The Prospects of the Revolution in China",
Works, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1954, Vol. VIII, p. 379.

4. In 1894, Dr. Sun Yat-sen formed a small revolutionary
organization in Honolulu called the Hsing Chung Hui (Society for
China's Regeneration). With the support of the secret societies among the
people, he staged two armed insurrections in Kwangtung Province against the
Ching government after its defeat in the Sino-Japanese war in 1895, one at
Canton in 1895 and the other at Huichow in 1900.

5. Tang Meng Hui, or the Chinese Revolutionary
League (a united front organization of the bourgeoisie, the petty bourgeoisie
and a section of the landed gentry opposed to the Ching government), was
formed in 1905 through the merging of the Hsing Chung Hui (see note
above) and two other groups, the Hua Hsing Hui (Society for China's
Regeneration) and the Kuang Fu Hui (Society for Breaking the Foreign
Yoke). It put forward a programme of bourgeois revolution advocating "the
expulsion of the Tartars (Manchus), the recovery of China, the establishment
of a republic and the equalization of landownership". In the period of the
Chinese Revolutionary League, Dr. Sun Yat-sen, allying himself with the secret
societies and a part of the New Army of the Ching government, launched a
number of armed insurrections against the Ching regime, notably those at
Pinghsiang (Kiangsi Province), Liuyang and Liling (Hunan Province) in 1906,
at Huangkang, Chaochow and Chinchow (Kwangtung Province), and at Chennankuan
(Kwangsi Province) in 1907, at Hokou (Yunnan Province) in 1908 and at Canton
in 1911. The last was followed in the same year by the Wuchang Uprising which
resulted in the overthrow of the Ching Dynasty.

6. In 1912, the Chinese Revolutionary League was reorganized
into the Kuomintang and made a compromise with the Northern warlord regime
headed by Yuan Shih-kai. In 1913 Yuan's troops marched southward to suppress
the forces which had emerged in the provinces of Kiangsi, Anhwei and Kwangtung
in the course of the 1911 revolution. Armed resistance was organized by Dr.
Sun Yat-sen but it was soon crushed. In 1914, realizing the error of the
Kuomintang's policy of compromise, Dr. Sun formed the Chung Hua Ke Ming
Tang (Chinese Revolutionary Party) in Tokyo, Japan, in order to distinguish
his organization from the Kuomintang of the time. The new Party was actually
an alliance of the political representatives of a section of the petty
bourgeoisie and a section of the bourgeoisie against Yuan Shih-kai. Through
this alliance, Dr. Sun Yat-sen staged a minor insurrection in Shanghai in
1914. In 1915 when Yuan Shih-kai proclaimed himself emperor, Tsai Ngo and
others set out from Yunnan to take action against him, and Dr. Sun was also
very active in advocating and promoting armed opposition to Yuan Shih-kai.

7. In 1917 Dr. Sun Yat-sen went from Shanghai to Canton
at the head of a naval force which was under his influence. Using Kwangtung
as a base and co-operating with the Southwestern warlords who were opposed
to the Northern warlord Tuan Chi-jui, he set up a military government opposed
to Tuan Chi-jui.

8. In 1921 Dr. Sun Yat-sen planned a northern expedition
from Kweilin, Kwangsi Province. But his plan was frustrated by the mutiny
of his subordinate, Chen Chiung ming, who was in league with the Northern
warlords.

9. The Whampoa Military Academy, located at Whampoa near
Canton, was established by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in 1924 after the reorganization
of the Kuomintang with the help of the Chinese Communist Party and the Soviet
Union. Before Chiang Kai-shek's betrayal of the revolution in 1927, the academy
was run jointly by the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. Comrades Chou
En-lai, Yeh Chien-ying, Yun Tai-ying, Hsiao Chu-nu and others held responsible
posts in the academy at one time or another. Many of the cadets were members
of the Communist Party or the Communist Youth League, and they formed the
revolutionary core of the academy.

10. Tan Yen-kai was a native of Hunan who had been a
Henlin, a member of the highest official scholastic body under the
Ching Dynasty. He was a careerist who first advocated a constitutional monarchy
and then took part in the Revolution of 1911. His later adherence to the
Kuomintang reflected the contradiction between the Hunan landlords and the
Northern warlords.

11. The Progressive Party was organized by Liang Chi-chao
and others under the aegis of Yuan Shih-kai during the first years of the
Republic.

12. Yuan Shih-kai was the head of the Northern warlords
in the last years of the Ching Dynasty. After the Ching Dynasty was overthrown
by the Revolution of 1911, he usurped the presidency of the Republic and
organized the first government of the Northern warlords, which represented
the big landlord and big comprador classes. He did this by relying on
counter-revolutionary armed force and on the support of the imperialists
and by taking advantage of the conciliationist character of the bourgeoisie,
which was then leading the revolution. In 1915 he wanted to make himself
emperor and, to gain the support of the Japanese imperialists, accepted the
Twenty-one Demands with which Japan aimed at obtaining exclusive control
of all China. In December of the same year an uprising against his assumption
of the throne took place in Yunnan Province and promptly won nation-wide
response and support. Yuan Shih-kai died in Peking in June 1916.

13. Tuan Chi-jui was an old subordinate of Yuan Shih-kai
and head of the Anhwei clique of Northern warlords. After Yuan's death he
more than once controlled the Peking government.

14. The extremely right-wing Political Science Group was
formed in 1916 by a section of the Progressive Party and a section of the
Kuomintang. It gambled now on the Southern, now on the Northern, warlords
in order to grab government posts. During the Northern Expedition of 1926-27,
its pro-Japanese members, such as Huang Fu, Chang Chun and Yang Yung-tai,
began to collaborate with Chiang Kai-shek and, using their reactionary political
experience, helped him build up a counter revolutionary regime.

15. The Youth Party, also called the Chinese Youth Party
or the Etatiste Party, was formed by a handful of unscrupulous fascist
politicians. They made counter-revolutionary careers for themselves by opposing
the Communist Party and the Soviet Union and received subsidies from the
various groups of reactionaries in power and from the imperialists.

16. Comrade Mao Tse-tung is here referring mainly to the
independent regiment commanded by General Yeh Ting, a Communist, during the
Northern Expedition. See "The Struggle in the Chingkang Mountains", Note
14 Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Eng. ed., PLP, Peking, 1965,
Vol. I, p. 104.

17. Nanchang, capital of Kiangsi Province, was the scene
of the famous uprising on August 1, 1927 led by the Communist Party of China
in order to combat the counterrevolution of Chiang Kai-shek and Wang Ching-wei
and to continue the revolution of 1924-27. More than thirty thousand troops
took part in the uprising which was led by Comrades Chou En-lai, Chu Teh,
Ho Lung and Yeh Ting. The insurrectionary army withdrew from Nanchang on
August I as planned, but suffered a defeat when approaching Chaochow and
Swatow in Kwangtung Province. Led by Comrades Chu Teh and Chen Yi, part of
the troops later fought their way to the Chingkang Mountains and joined forces
with the First Division of the First Workers' and Peasants' Revolutionary
Army under Comrade Mao Tse-tung.

18. The famous Autumn Harvest Uprising under the leadership
of Comrade Mao Tse-tung was launched in September 1927 by the people's armed
forces of Hsiushui Pinghsiang, Pingkiang and Liuyang Counties on the
Hunan-Kiangsi border, who formed the First Division of the First Workers'
and Peasants' Revolutionary Army. Comrade Mao Tse-tung led this force to
the Chingkang Mountains where a revolutionary base was established.

19. Han Fu-chu was a Kuomintang warlord in Shantung Province.
Liu Chih another warlord, who commanded Chiang Kai-shek's personal troops
in Honan Province, was responsible for the defence of the Paoting area in
Hopei after the outbreak of the War of Resistance Against Japan. Both of
them fled before the Japanese without firing a shot.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The May 4th Movement







THE MAY 4TH MOVEMENT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE MAY 4TH MOVEMENT

May 1939

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrote this article for newspapers in Yenan to
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the May 4th Movement.]
  

The May 4th Movement twenty years ago marked a new stage in China's
bourgeois-democratic revolution against imperialism and feudalism. The cultural
reform movement which grew out of the May 4th Movement was only one of the
manifestations of this revolution. With the growth and development of new
social forces in that period, a powerful camp made its appearance in the
bourgeois-democratic revolution, a camp consisting of the working class,
the student masses and the new national bourgeoisie. Around the time of the
May 4th Movement, hundreds of thousands of students courageously took their
place in the van. In these respects the May 4th Movement went a step beyond
the Revolution of 1911.

If we trace China's bourgeois-democratic revolution back to its formative
period, we see that it has passed through a number of stages in its development:
the Opium War, the War of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom, the Sino-Japanese
War of 1894,[1] the Reform Movement of
1898,[2] the Yi Ho Tuan
Movement,[3] the Revolution of 1911, the May 4th
Movement, the Northern Expedition, and the War of the Agrarian Revolution.
The present War of Resistance Against Japan is yet another stage, and is
the greatest, most vigorous and most dynamic stage of all. The
bourgeois-democratic revolution can be considered accomplished only when
the forces of foreign imperialism and domestic feudalism have basically been
overthrown and an independent democratic state has been established. From
the Opium War onwards each stage in the development of the revolution has
had its own distinguishing characteristics. But the most important feature
differentiating them is whether they came before or after the emergence of
the Communist Party. However, taken as a whole, all the stages bear the character
of a bourgeois-democratic revolution The aim of this democratic revolution
is to establish a social system hitherto unknown in Chinese history, namely,
a democratic social system having a feudal society (during the last hundred
years a semi-colonial and semi-feudal society) as its precursor and a socialist
society as its successor. If anyone asks why a Communist should strive to
bring into being first a bourgeois-democratic society and then a socialist
society, our answer is: we are following the inevitable course of history.

China's democratic revolution depends on definite social forces for its
accomplishment. These social forces are the working class, the peasantry,
the intelligentsia and the progressive section of the bourgeoisie, that is,
the revolutionary workers, peasants, soldiers, students and intellectuals,
and businessmen, with the workers and peasants as the basic revolutionary
forces and the workers as the class which leads the revolution. It is impossible
to accomplish the anti-imperialist and anti-feudal democratic revolution
without these basic revolutionary forces and without the leadership of the
working class. Today, the principal enemies of the revolution are the Japanese
imperialists and the Chinese traitors, and the fundamental policy in the
revolution is the policy of the Anti-Japanese National United Front, consisting
of all workers, peasants, soldiers, students and intellectuals, and businessmen
who are against Japanese aggression. Final victory in the War of Resistance
will be won when this united front is greatly consolidated and developed.

In the Chinese democratic revolutionary movement, it was the intellectuals
who were the first to awaken. This was clearly demonstrated both in the
Revolution of 1911 and in the May 4th Movement, and in the days of the May
4th Movement the intellectuals were more numerous and more politically conscious
than in the days of the Revolution of 1911. But the intellectuals will accomplish
nothing if they fail to integrate themselves with the workers and peasants.
In the final analysis, the dividing line between revolutionary intellectuals
and non-revolutionary or counter-revolutionary intellectuals is whether or
not they are willing to integrate themselves with the workers and peasants
and actually do so. Ultimately it is this alone, and not professions of faith
in the Three People's Principles or in Marxism, that distinguishes one from
the other. A true revolutionary must be one who is willing to integrate himself
with the workers and peasants and actually does so.

It is now twenty years since the May 4th Movement and almost two years since
the outbreak of the anti-Japanese war. The young people and the cultural
circles of the whole country bear a heavy responsibility in the democratic
revolution and the War of Resistance. I hope they will understand the character
and the motive forces of the Chinese revolution, make their work serve the
workers and peasants, go into their midst and become propagandists and organizers
among them. Victory will be ours when the entire people arises against Japan.
Young people of the whole country, bestir yourselves!

NOTES


1. The Sino-Japanese War of 1894 was started by Japanese
imperialism for the purpose of invading Korea and China. Many Chinese soldiers
and some patriotic generals put up a heroic fight. But China suffered defeat
because of the corruption of the Ching government and its failure to prepare
resistance. In 1895 the Ching government concluded the shameful Treaty of
Shimonoseki with Japan.

2. For the Reform Movement of 1898 see "On Protracted War",
Note 8, p. 191 of this volume.

3. The Yi Ho Tuan Movement was the anti-imperialist armed
struggle which took place in northern China in 1900. The broad masses of
peasants, handicraftsmen and other people took part in this movement. Getting
in touch with one another through religious and other channels, they organized
themselves on the basis of secret societies and waged a heroic struggle against
the joint forces of aggression of the eight imperialist powers--the United
States, Britain, Japan, Germany, Russia, France, Italy and Austria. The movement
was put down with indescribable savagery after the joint forces of aggression
occupied Tientsin and Peking.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Orientation of the Youth Movement







THE ORIENTATION OF THE YOUTH MOVEMENT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE ORIENTATION OF THE YOUTH MOVEMENT


May 4, 1939

[This speech was delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung at a mass meeting of
youth in Yenan to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the May 4th Movement.
It represented a development in his ideas on the question of the Chinese
revolution.]
  

Today is the twentieth anniversary of the May 4th Movement, and
the youth of Yenan are all gathered here for this commemoration meeting.
I shall therefore take the occasion to speak on some questions concerning
the orientation of the youth movement in China.

First, May 4 has now been designated as China's Youth Day,
[1] and rightly so. Twenty years have elapsed since
the May 4th Movement, yet it is only this year that the day has been designated
as the national Youth Day, and this is a most significant fact. For it indicates
that the Chinese people's democratic revolution against imperialism and feudalism
will soon reach a turning point. This revolution encountered repeated failures
over several decades, but now there must be a change, a change towards victory
and not another failure. The Chinese revolution is now going forward, forward
to victory. The repeated failures of the past cannot and must not be allowed
to recur, and they must be turned into victory. But has the change already
taken place? No. It has not, nor have we yet won victory. But victory can
be won. It is precisely in the present War of Resistance Against Japan that
we are striving to reach the turning point from failure to victory. The May
4th Movement was directed against a government of national betrayal, a government
which conspired with imperialism and sold out the interests of the nation,
a government which oppressed the people. Was it not necessary to oppose such
a government? If it was not, then the May 4th Movement was simply a mistake.
It is obvious that such a government must be opposed, that a government of
national betrayal must be overthrown. Just consider, long before the May
4th Movement Dr. Sun Yat-sen was already a rebel against the government of
his day; he opposed and overthrew the Ching government. Was he right in doing
so? In my opinion he was quite right. For the government he opposed did not
resist imperialism but conspired with it, and was not a revolutionary government
but one that suppressed the revolution. The May 4th Movement was a revolutionary
movement precisely because it opposed a government of national betrayal.
The youth of China should see the May 4th Movement in this light. Today,
when the whole nation has militantly risen to resist Japan, we are determined
to defeat Japanese imperialism, and we shall not tolerate any traitors or
allow the revolution to fail again for we have taken warning from its failures
in the past. With few exceptions, the whole youth of China is awakened and
determined to win, and this is reflected in the designation of May 4th as
Youth Day. We are advancing along the road to victory and, provided the whole
people make a concerted effort, the Chinese revolution will definitely triumph
through the War of Resistance.

Secondly, what is the Chinese revolution directed against? What are the targets
of the revolution? As everybody knows, imperialism is one target and feudalism
the other. What are the targets of the revolution at this moment? One is
Japanese imperialism, and the other the Chinese collaborators. To make our
revolution we must overthrow Japanese imperialism and the Chinese traitors.
Who are the makers of the revolution? What is its main force? The common
people of China. The motive forces of the revolution are the proletariat,
the peasantry and all members of other classes who are willing to oppose
imperialism and feudalism; these are the revolutionary forces opposing
imperialism and feudalism. But who, among so many, are the basic force, the
backbone of the revolution? The workers and the peasants, forming 90 per
cent of the country's population. What is the nature of the Chinese revolution?
What kind of revolution are we making today? Today we are making a
bourgeois-democratic revolution, and nothing we do goes beyond its scope.
By and large, we should not destroy the bourgeois system of private property
for the present; what we want to destroy is imperialism and feudalism. This
is what we mean by the bourgeois-democratic revolution. But its accomplishment
is already beyond the capacity of the bourgeoisie and must depend on the
efforts of the proletariat and the broad masses of the people. What is the
goal of this revolution? To overthrow imperialism and feudalism and to establish
a people's democratic republic. A people's democratic republic means a republic
based on the revolutionary Three people's Principles. It will be different
both from the semi-colonial and semi-feudal state of the present and from
the socialist system of the future. Capitalists have no place in a socialist
society, but they should still be allowed in a people's democracy. Will there
always be a place for capitalists in China? No, definitely not in the future.
This is true not only of China but of the whole world. In the future no country,
whether it be Britain, the United States, France, Japan, Germany or Italy,
will have any place for capitalists, and China will be no exception. The
Soviet Union is a country which has already established socialism, and beyond
all doubt the whole world will follow its example. China will certainly go
over to socialism in the future; that is an irresistible law. But at the
present stage our task is not to put socialism into practice, but to destroy
imperialism and feudalism, change China's present semi-colonial and semi-feudal
status, and establish people's democracy. This is what the youth of the whole
country must strive for.

Thirdly, what are the lessons of the Chinese revolution? This question is
also an important one for our youth to understand. Strictly speaking, China's
bourgeois-democratic revolution against imperialism and feudalism was begun
by Dr. Sun Yat-sen and has been going on for more than fifty years; as for
foreign capitalist aggression against China, it has been going on for almost
a hundred years. During that century, there was first the Opium War against
British aggression, then came the War of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom, then
the Sino-Japanese War of 1894, the Reform Movement of 1898, the Yi Ho Tuan
Movement, the Revolution of 1911, the May 4th Movement, the Northern Expedition,
and the war waged by the Red Army--although these struggles differed from
each other, their common purpose was to repel foreign enemies or change existing
conditions. However, it was only with Dr. Sun Yat-sen that a more or less
clearly defined bourgeois-democratic revolution began. In the last fifty
years the revolution started by Dr. Sun Yat-sen has had both its successes
and its failures. Was not the Revolution of 1911 a success? Didn't it send
the emperor packing? Yet it was a failure in the sense that while it sent
the emperor packing, it left China under imperialist and feudal oppression,
so that the anti-imperialist and anti-feudal revolutionary task remained
unaccomplished. What was the aim of the May 4th Movement? Its aim likewise
was to overthrow imperialism and feudalism, but it, too, failed, and China
still remained under the rule of imperialism and feudalism. The same is true
of the revolution known as the Northern Expedition; it scored successes,
but it too failed. From the time the Kuomintang turned against the Communist
Party,[2] China again fell under the domination
of imperialism and feudalism. The inevitable result was the ten years' war
waged by the Red Army. But these ten years of struggle fulfilled the
revolutionary task only in parts of China and not in the country as a whole.
If we are to sum up the revolution during the past decades we may say that
it has won only temporary and partial victories and not permanent and nation-wide
victory. As Dr. Sun Yat-sen said "The revolution is not yet completed, all
my comrades must struggle on." The question now is: Why, after decades of
struggle, has the Chinese revolution not yet attained its goal? What are
the reasons? I think there are two: first, the enemy forces have been too
strong; second, our own forces have been too weak. Because one side was strong
and the other side weak, the revolution did not succeed. In saying that the
enemy forces have been too strong, we mean that the forces of imperialism
(the primary factor) and of feudalism have been too strong. In saying that
our own forces have been too weak, we mean weak in the military, political,
economic and cultural fields; but our weaknesses and our consequent failure
to fulfil the anti-imperialist and anti-feudal task are chiefly due to the
fact that the labouring people, the workers and peasants, constituting 90
per cent of the population, have not yet been mobilized. If we are to sum
up the experience of the revolution of the past decades, we may say that
the people throughout the country have not been fully mobilized and that
the reactionaries have invariably opposed and sabotaged such mobilization.
Only by mobilizing and organizing the workers and peasants, who comprise
90 per cent of the population, is it possible to overthrow imperialism and
feudalism. Dr. Sun Yat-sen said in his Testament:

  For forty years I have devoted myself to the cause of the national revolution
  with the aim of winning freedom and equality for China. My experiences during
  these forty years have firmly convinced me that to achieve this aim we must
  arouse the masses of the people and unite in a common struggle with those
  nations of the world which treat us as equals.


It is now more than ten years since Dr. Sun died, and if we add these on,
the total is over fifty years. What is the lesson of the revolution during
these years? Fundamentally, it is, "arouse the masses of the people". You
should carefully study this lesson, and so should all China's youth. They
must know that only by mobilizing the masses of workers and peasants, who
form 90 per cent of the population, can we defeat imperialism and feudalism.
Unless we mobilize the workers and peasants of the whole country, it will
be impossible for us to defeat Japan and build a new China.

Fourthly, to return to the youth movement. On this very day twenty years
ago there occurred in China the great historical event known as the May 4th
Movement, in which the students participated; it was a movement of tremendous
significance. What role have China's young people played since the May 4th
Movement? In a way they have played a vanguard role--a fact recognized by
everybody except the die-hards. What is a vanguard role? It means taking
the lead and marching in the forefront of the revolutionary ranks. In the
anti-imperialist and anti-feudal ranks of the Chinese people, there is a
contingent composed of the country's young intellectuals and students. It
is a contingent of considerable size and, even if the many who have given
their lives are not included, it now numbers several million. It is an army
on one of the fronts against imperialism and feudalism, and an important
army too. But this army is not enough; we cannot defeat the enemy by relying
on it alone, for when all is said and done it is not the main force. What
then is the main force? The workers and peasants. Our young intellectuals
and students must go among the workers and peasants, who make up 90 per cent
of the population, and mobilize and organize them. Without this main force
of workers and peasants, we cannot win the fight against imperialism and
feudalism, we cannot win it by relying only on the contingent of young
intellectuals and students. Therefore, the young intellectuals and students
throughout the country must unite with the broad masses of workers and peasants
and become one with them, and only then can a mighty force be created. A
force of hundreds of millions of people! Only with this huge force can the
enemy's strongholds be taken and his last fortresses smashed. In assessing
the youth movement of the past from this viewpoint, we should call attention
to a wrong tendency. In the youth movement of the last few decades, a section
of the young people have been unwilling to unite with the workers and peasants
and have opposed their movements; this is a counter-current in the youth
movement. In fact, these people are not at all bright in their refusal to
unite with the masses who make up 90 per cent of the population and in going
so far as to oppose them outright. Is this a good tendency? I think not,
because in opposing the workers and peasants they are in fact opposing the
revolution; that is why we say it is a counter-current in the youth movement.
A youth movement of that kind would come to no good. A few days ago I wrote
a short article in which I noted:

  In the final analysis, the dividing line between revolutionary intellectuals
  and non-revolutionary or counter-revolutionary intellectuals is whether or
  not they are willing to integrate themselves with the workers and peasants
  and actually do so.


Here I advanced a criterion which I regard as the only valid one. How should
we judge whether a youth is a revolutionary? How can we tell? There can only
be one criterion, namely, whether or not he is willing to integrate himself
with the broad masses of workers and peasants and does so in practice. If
he is willing to do so and actually does so, he is a revolutionary; otherwise
he is a non-revolutionary or a counter-revolutionary. If today he integrates
himself with the masses of workers and peasants, then today he is a
revolutionary; if tomorrow he ceases to do so or turns round to oppress the
common people, then he becomes a non-revolutionary or a counter-revolutionary.
Some young people talk glibly about their belief in the Three People's Principles
or in Marxism, but this does not prove anything. Doesn't Hitler profess belief
in "socialism"? Twenty years ago even Mussolini was a "socialist"! And what
does their "socialism" amount to? Fascism! Didn't Chen Tu-hsiu once "believe"
in Marxism? What did he do later? He went over to the counter-revolution.
Didn't Chang Kuo-tao "believe" in Marxism? Where is he now? He has run away
and landed in the mire. Some people style themselves "followers of the Three
People's Principles" or even old stalwarts of these Principles; but what
have they done? It turns out that their Principle of Nationalism means conspiring
with imperialism, that their Principle of Democracy means oppressing the
common people, and that their Principle of People's Livelihood means sucking
the people's blood. They affirm the Three People's Principles with their
lips but deny them in their hearts. So when we assess a person and judge
whether he is a true or false adherent of the Three People's Principles,
whether he is a true or false Marxist, we need only find out how he stands
in relation to the broad masses of workers and peasants, and then we shall
know him for what he is. This is the only criterion, there is no other. I
hope that the youth of our country will never allow themselves to be carried
away by this sinister counter-current but will clearly recognize the workers
and peasants as their friends and march forward to a bright future.

Fifthly, the present War of Resistance Against Japan marks a new stage--the
greatest, most dynamic and most vigorous stage-- in the Chinese revolution.
In this stage the youth shoulder tremendous responsibilities. Our revolutionary
movement has gone through many stages of struggle in the last decades, but
at no stage has it been so broad as in the present War of Resistance. When
we maintain that the Chinese revolution now has features distinguishing it
from the revolution in the past and that it will make the turn from failure
to victory, we mean that the masses of the Chinese people have made progress,
of which the progress of the youth is a clear proof. Hence the anti-Japanese
war must and certainly will triumph. As everybody knows, the basic policy
in this war is the Anti-Japanese National United Front, whose aim it is to
overthrow Japanese imperialism and the Chinese collaborators, transform the
old China into a new China, and liberate the whole nation from its semi-colonial
and semi-feudal status. The present lack of unity in the Chinese youth movement
is a serious weakness. You should continue to strive for unity, because unity
is strength. You must help the youth of the whole country to understand the
present situation, to achieve unity and to resist Japan to the end.

Sixthly and lastly, I want to speak about the youth movement in Yenan. It
is the model for the youth movement throughout the country. The direction
it is taking is in fact the orientation for the youth movement of the entire
country. Why? Because it is the correct orientation. You see, in the matter
of unity the youth of Yenan have acquitted themselves well, indeed very well.
The youth of Yenan have achieved solidarity and unity. The young intellectuals
and students, the young workers and peasants in Yenan are all united. Large
numbers of revolutionary youth from all over the country, and even from Chinese
communities abroad, have come to study in Yenan. Most of you attending this
meeting today have come to Yenan from thousands of miles away; whether your
surname is Chang or Li, whether you are a man or a woman, a worker or a peasant,
you are all of one mind. Should this not be regarded as a model for the whole
country? The youth in Yenan, besides being united among themselves, have
integrated themselves with the masses of workers and peasants, and more than
anything else this makes you a model for the whole country. What have
you been doing? You have been learning the theory of revolution and studying
the principles and methods for resisting Japan and saving the nation. You
have been carrying out the campaign for production and have reclaimed thousands
of mou of waste land. Confucius never reclaimed land or tilled the
soil. When he ran his school, he had quite a number of students, "seventy
worthies and three thousand disciples"--quite a flourishing school! But he
had far fewer students than there are in Yenan, and what is more, they would
have disliked production campaigns. When a student asked him how to plough
the fields, Confucius answered, "I don't know, I am not as good at that as
a farmer." Confucius was next asked how to grow vegetables, and he answered,
"I don't know, I am not as good at that as a vegetable gardener." In ancient
times the youth of China who studied under a sage neither learned revolutionary
theory nor took part in labour. Today, there is little revolutionary theory
taught and there are no such things as production movements in the schools
over vast regions of our country. It is only here in Yenan and in the
anti-Japanese base areas behind the enemy lines that the young people are
fundamentally different; they are really the vanguard in resisting Japan
and saving the nation because their political orientation and their methods
of work are correct. That is why I say the youth movement in Yenan is the
model for the youth movement throughout the country. Our meeting today is
highly significant. I have said all I wanted. I hope you will all study the
lessons of the Chinese revolution in the last fifty years, develop its good
points and discard its mistakes, so that the youth will be at one with the
people of the whole country and the revolution will make the turn from failure
to victory. When the youth and the whole nation are mobilized, organized
and united, Japanese imperialism will be overthrown. Each young person must
shoulder his responsibility. You must each be different from before and resolve
to unite the youth and organize the people of the whole country for the overthrow
of Japanese imperialism and the transformation of the old China into a new
China. This is what I expect of all of you.

NOTES


1. May 4 was first adopted as China's Youth Day by the
youth organization of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region. Under
the pressure of the patriotic upsurge of the broad masses of young people,
the Kuomintang government expressed its agreement. But it subsequently proclaimed
March 29 as its own Youth Day (in Commemoration of the revolutionary martyrs
who died during an uprising at Canton in 1911) because, fearing that the
youth would turn revolutionary, it regarded the decision to observe May 4
as dangerous. However, May 4 continued to be observed as Youth Day in the
revolutionary base areas under the leadership of the Communist Party, and
was officially proclaimed China's Youth Day by the Administrative Council
of the Central People's Government in December 1949 after the founding of
the People's Republic of China.

2. "The Kuomintang turned against the Communist Party"
here refers to the counter-revolutionary coups staged in 1927 by Chiang Kai-shek
in Shanghai and Nanking and by Wang Ching-wei in Wuhan.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Oppose Capitulationist Activity







OPPOSE CAPITULATIONIST ACTIVITY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

OPPOSE CAPITULATIONIST ACTIVITY


June 30, 1939


Ever since the Chinese nation was confronted with the Japanese aggression,
the first and foremost question has been to fight or not to fight. This question
aroused serious controversy in the period from the Incident of September
18, 1931 to the Lukouchiao Incident of July 7, 1937. The conclusion reached
by all patriotic political parties and groups and by all our patriotic
fellow-countrymen was: "To fight is to survive, not to fight is to
perish." The conclusion reached by all the capitulationists was: "To fight
is to perish, not to fight is to survive." For a time, the roaring guns of
the resistance at Lukouchiao decided the issue. They proclaimed the first
conclusion right and the second wrong. But why was the question settled only
temporarily and not once and for all? Because the Japanese imperialists adopted
the policy of inducing China to capitulate, the international capitulationists
[1] tried to bring about a compromise, and certain
people within our anti-Japanese front wavered. Now the issue has been raised
again, worded in a slightly different way as a question of "peace or war".
Thus a controversy has arisen inside China between those who favour continuing
the war and those who favour making peace. Their respective positions remain
the same: the conclusion of the war group is "to fight is to survive, to
make peace is to perish"; the conclusion of the peace group is "to make peace
is to survive, to fight is to perish". The former comprises all patriotic
parties and all patriots and they make up the great majority of the nation,
while the latter, i.e., the capitulationists, constitutes only a
small wavering minority within the anti-Japanese front. Consequently, the
peace group has to resort to lying propaganda, and, above all, to anti-Communist
propaganda. For example, it has fabricated and released a spate of false
news, false reports, false documents and false resolutions, such as: "the
Communist Party engages in disruptive activities", "the Eighth Route Army
and the New Fourth Army are merely moving about without fighting and refuse
to obey orders", "a separatist regime has been formed in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region and is expanding beyond its confines", "the Communist Party
is plotting to overthrow the government", and even, "the Soviet Union is
plotting aggression against China". Its purpose is to make peace, or in other
words to capitulate, by covering up the real facts and confusing public opinion.
The peace group, the group of capitulationists, is doing all this because
it cannot wreck Kuomintang-Communist co-operation, split the Anti-Japanese
National United Front and surrender to Japan unless it combats the Communist
Party, which is the initiator and champion of the united front. Second, it
hopes that Japanese imperialism will make concessions. It believes that Japan
is well-nigh exhausted and will change her basic policy, voluntarily withdrawing
from central, southern and even northern China, and that China can thus win
without doing any more fighting. Third, it pins its hopes on international
pressure. Many people in the peace group bank on the exertion of pressure
by the big powers not only on Japan, so that she will make some concessions
and thereby facilitate a peace settlement, but also on the Chinese government,
so that they can say to the war group: "Look! In the present international
climate, we have to make peace!" and "A Pacific international conference
[2] would be to China's advantage. It would not be
another Munich, [3] but a step towards China's
rejuvenation!" This forms the sum total of the views, tactics and schemes
of the peace group, the Chinese capitulationists. The drama is being acted
out not only by Wang Ching-wei himself, but, what is more serious, by many
others like him who are concealed within the anti-Japanese front and are
collaborating with him in a kind of duet [4] or
joint performance, with some wearing the white make-up of the stage villain
and others the red make-up of the hero.

We Communists openly proclaim that, at all times, we stand with those who
favour continuing the war and resolutely oppose those who favour making peace.
We have but one desire, that is, together with all other patriotic parties
and all other patriots, to strengthen unity and strengthen the national united
front and Kuomintang-Communist co-operation, put the Three People's Principles
into effect, carry the War of Resistance through to the end, fight all the
way to the Yalu River and recover all our lost
territories.[5] We firmly denounce the Wang Ching-weis,
both overt and covert, who are creating an anti-Communist climate, engineering
"friction" [6] between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party, and even trying to provoke another civil war between the two parties.
We say to them: In essence, your divisive schemes are nothing but preparations
for capitulation, and your divisive and capitulationist policy simply reveals
your general plan of selling out the interests of the nation for the selfish
interests of a few individuals. People have eyes and will see through your
scheming. We categorically repudiate the absurd view that a Pacific conference
would not be an Eastern Munich. Of course, the so-called Pacific conference
would be an Eastern Munich, a preparation for turning China into another
Czechoslovakia. We firmly denounce the groundless assertion that Japanese
imperialism may come to its senses and make concessions. Japanese imperialism
will never change its basic policy of subjugating China. Japan's honeyed
words after the fall of Wuhan--for instance, the suggestion that she would
abandon the policy of "not accepting the National Government as the opposite
party in negotiations" [7] and would instead recognize
it as such, or that she would withdraw her troops from central and southern
China on certain conditions--are nothing but cunning bait to hook the fish,
so that whoever swallows the bait must expect to be well and truly cooked.
The international capitulationists are likewise pursuing a cunning policy
to induce China to surrender. They have countenanced Japanese aggression
against China, while they themselves "sit on top of the mountain to watch
the tigers fight", waiting for the opportune moment to engineer a so-called
Pacific conference for mediation in order to profit at others' expense. Anyone
who pins his hopes on such schemers will likewise find that he has been badly
duped.

What was once a question of whether or not to fight has now become a question
of whether to continue the war or to make peace, but essentially it is the
same question, the most important and fundamental of all questions. In the
last six months, with Japan pressing on with her policy of inducing China
to capitulate, with the international capitulationists intensifying their
activities and, above all, with some people in our anti-Japanese front wavering
more than every a great clamour has arisen around the question of peace or
war, so that capitulation has become the main danger in the present political
situation. And the first and most important move the capitulationists are
making to prepare for it is to fight communism, that is, to break up
Kuomintang-Communist co-operation and the unity of the anti-Japanese front.
In these circumstances, all patriotic parties and all patriots must keep
a close watch over the capitulationists' activities and must understand the
main characteristics of the present situation namely, that capitulation is
the chief danger and that anti-communism is the preparatory step to capitulation,
and they must do their utmost to oppose capitulation and a split. No group
of people must ever be allowed to undermine or betray the war against Japanese
imperialism, a war which has cost the whole nation two full years of bloodshed.
No group of people must ever be allowed to disrupt or split the Anti-Japanese
National United Front which has been forged by the common effort of the whole
nation.

Fight on and persist in unity, and China will survive.

Make peace and persist in splitting, and China will perish.

Which to reject and which to accept? Our countrymen must quickly make their
choice.

We Communists will definitely fight on and persist in unity.

All patriotic parties and all patriots will fight on and persist in unity.

Even if the capitulationists who are plotting surrender and a split should
get the upper hand for a while, they will eventually be unmasked and punished
by the people. The historical task of the Chinese nation is to achieve liberation
through united resistance. What the capitulationists desire is the exact
opposite, but however much they may have the upper hand, however jubilant
they may be, fancying that nobody dare harm them, they cannot escape punishment
by the whole people.

Oppose capitulation and a split--this is the urgent task now confronting
all the patriotic political parties and groups and all our patriotic
fellow-countrymen.

People of the whole country, unite! Persist in resistance and unity, and
suppress all plots for capitulation and a split!

NOTES


1. "The international capitulationists" were the British
and U.S. imperialists who were plotting to compromise with Japan by sacrificing
China.

2. The projected Pacific international conference was dubbed
a Far Eastern Munich because the British, U.S. and French imperialists, in
collaboration with the Chinese group which favoured making peace, were plotting
to reach a compromise with Japan by selling out China. It was Chiang Kai-shek
who used the absurd argument, which Comrade Mao Tse-tung refutes in this
article, that such a conference would not constitute an Eastern Munich.

3. In September 1938, the heads of the British, French,
German and Italian governments met in Munich, Germany, and concluded the
Munich Agreement under which Britain and France betrayed Czechoslovakia to
Germany in exchange for a German attack on the Soviet Union. In 1938 and
1939, British and U.S. imperialism made several moves to reach a compromise
with Japanese imperialism by sacrificing China. At the time when Comrade
Mao Tse-tung wrote this article in June 1939, talks were being held between
Britain and Japan in another attempt to carry out this scheme. It was called
an "Eastern Munich" because of its similarity to the Munich conspiracy
of Britain, France, Germany and Italy.

4. The duet was being acted by Chiang Kai-shek and Wang
Ching-wei. While Wang Ching-wei was the ringleader of the open capitulationists,
Chiang was the ringleader of those hiding in the anti-Japanese front.

5. At the Fifth Plenary Session of the Kuomintang's Fifth
Central Executive Committee in January 1939, Chiang Kai-shek openly declared
that what he meant by "to the very end" in the slogan "Carry the War of
Resistance through to the very end" was merely "to restore the status
quo before the Lukouchiao Incident", an interpretation that would have
meant abandoning vast areas of northern and northeastern China to Japanese
occupation. Therefore, to counter Chiang Kai-shek's capitulationist policy,
Comrade Mao Tse-tung specially stressed that "to the very end" meant "to
fight all the way to the Yalu River and recover all our lost territories".

6. The term "friction" was widely used at the time to refer
to the various kinds of reactionary political and military actions of the
Kuomintang reactionaries undertaken to wreck the Anti-Japanese National United
Front and to oppose the Communist Party and the progressive forces, such
as massacres and large-scale attacks on the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies.

7. Subsequent to the Japanese occupation of Nanking on
December 13, 1937, the Japanese government issued a statement on January
16, 1938, saying that Japan would "not accept the National Government as
the opposite party in negotiations, and expects a new government to be
established". After Japanese troops occupied Canton and Wuhan in October
1938, the Japanese government, taking advantage of Chiang Kai-shek's vacillation,
changed its policy in order to induce him to capitulate. It issued another
statement on November 3, which read in part: "As for the National Government,
provided it abandons its hitherto erroneous policy and gets new men to carry
out rehabilitation and to maintain peace and order, the Empire will not decline
to negotiate with it."


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Reactionaries Must Be Punished







THE REACTIONARIES MUST BE PUNISHED



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE REACTIONARIES MUST BE PUNISHED


August 1, 1939

[This speech was delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung at a memorial meeting
held by the people of Yenan for the martyrs of Pingkiang.]
  

Today, the First of August, we are gathered here for a memorial meeting.
Why are we holding this memorial meeting? Because the reactionaries have
killed our revolutionary comrades, killed fighters against Japan. Who should
be killed in these times? The Chinese traitors and the Japanese imperialists.
China has been fighting Japanese imperialism for two years, but the outcome
is not yet decided. The traitors are still very active, and very few of them
have been killed. Yet our revolutionary comrades, all warriors against Japan,
have been killed. Killed by whom? Killed by the troops. Why did the troops
kill fighters against Japan? They were carrying out orders; certain people
gave them the order to kill. Who gave them the order to kill? The
reactionaries.[1] Comrades! Logically, who would
want to kill fighters against Japan? First, the Japanese imperialists, and
next, the Chinese collaborators and traitors such as Wang Ching-wei. But
the scene of the killing was not Shanghai, Peiping, Tientsin or Nanking,
or any other place occupied by the Japanese aggressors and Chinese collaborators;
it took place in Pingkiang, in the rear of the War of Resistance, and among
the victims were Comrades Tu Cheng-kun and Lo Tzu-ming, responsible comrades
of the Pingkiang Liaison Office of the New Fourth Army. Obviously, the killing
was perpetrated by a gang of Chinese reactionaries acting on the orders of
the Japanese imperialists and Wang Ching-wei. Preparing to capitulate, these
reactionaries obsequiously carried out the orders of the Japanese and Wang
Ching-wei, and the first people they killed were the most resolute fighters
against Japan. This is no trivial matter; we must raise our voices against
it, we must denounce it!

The whole nation is now resisting Japan and has forged a great union of the
people for the purpose of resistance. But within this great union there are
reactionaries and capitulators. What are they doing? They are killing fighters
against Japan, holding back progress and working in collusion with the Japanese
aggressors and Chinese collate orators to pave the way for capitulation.

Has anyone taken action on this serious case of the murder of anti-Japanese
comrades? The murder was committed at 3 p.m. on June 12, today is August
1, but in all this time have we seen anyone step forward and take action?
No. Who should have done so? Action should have been taken under the law
of the land by the administrators of the law. If such a thing had happened
in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, our high court would have acted
long ago. But although nearly two months have elapsed since the Pingkiang
massacre, the law and its administrators have done nothing. What is the reason?
The reason is, China is not unified.[2]

China must be unified; there can be no victory without unification. But what
does unification mean? It means that everybody should resist Japan, that
all should unite and strive for progress and that there should be due rewards
and punishments. Who ought to be rewarded? Those who resist Japan, those
who uphold unity, those who are progressive. And who ought to be punished?
The collaborators and reactionaries who undermine resistance, unity and progress.
Is our country now unified? It is not. The Pingkiang massacre proves it.
It shows that there is no unification where there should be. We have long
demanded the unification of the whole country. First, unification on the
basis of the War of Resistance. But now, instead of being rewarded, Tu Cheng-kun,
Lo Tzu-ming and the other comrades who were resisting the Japanese have been
brutally murdered, whereas scoundrels who oppose resistance, prepare to
capitulate and commit murder go unpunished. That is not unification. We must
oppose these scoundrels and capitulators, and arrest the murderers. Second,
unification on the basis of unity. Those who stand for unity ought to be
rewarded and those who undermine it ought to be punished. But now, Comrades
Tu Cheng-kun, Lo Tzu-ming and the others who upheld unity have been punished,
have been brutally murdered, whereas the scoundrels who undermine unity are
allowed to go scot-free. That is not unification. Third, unification on the
basis of progress. The whole country must go forward; the backward must try
to keep pace with the progressive, and the progressive must not be held back
to the pace of the backward. The butchers at Pingkiang killed progressive
people. Hundreds of Communists and patriots have been assassinated since
the outbreak of the War of Resistance, the Pingkiang massacre being only
the most recent example. It will be disastrous for China if this continues;
all who resist Japan may be murdered. What do these murders mean? They mean
that the Chinese reactionaries, acting under orders from the Japanese
imperialists and Wang Chingwei, are preparing to capitulate, and that is
why they begin by killing fighters against Japan, by killing Communists and
patriots. If this is not stopped, China will perish at the hands of these
reactionaries. These murders, therefore, concern the whole country, they
are of the gravest importance, and we must demand that the National Government
punish these reactionaries with the utmost severity.

Comrades must also realize that Japanese imperialism has recently intensified
its disruptive activities, that international imperialism has become more
active in helping Japan,[3] and that the traitors
in China, both the overt and the covert Wang Ching-weis, are more active
than ever in sabotaging the War of Resistance, wrecking unity and turning
the clock back. They want to surrender the greater part of our country, cause
an internal split and engineer a civil war. At the present time certain secret
measures known as "Measures for Restricting the Activities of Alien
Parties"[4] are being extensively enforced. They
are reactionary to the core, helpful to Japanese imperialism and detrimental
to resistance, unity and progress. Which are the "alien parties"? The Japanese
imperialists, Wang Ching-wei and the traitors. How can the Communist Party
and all the other anti-Japanese political parties, which are united in resistance
to Japan, be called "alien parties"? Yet the capitulators, reactionaries
and die-hards are deliberately creating friction and disunity within the
anti-Japanese ranks. Is this kind of activity right or wrong? It is absolutely
wrong! (unanimous applause.) When it comes to restriction, what
sort of people should be restricted? The Japanese imperialists, Wang Ching-wei,
the reactionaries and capitulators. (Unanimous applause.) Why restrict
the Communist Party, which is the most resolute in resisting Japan, the most
revolutionary and the most progressive? It is absolutely wrong. We the people
of Yenan voice our firm opposition and strong protest. (Unanimous applause.)
We must oppose the "Measures for Restricting the Activities of Alien
Parties", for such measures are at the very root of all kinds of criminal
actions that wreck unity. We are holding this mass meeting today for the
sake of continued resistance, unity and progress. To this end, the "Measures
for Restricting the Activities of Alien Parties" must be abolished, the
capitulators and reactionaries must be punished, and all revolutionary comrades,
all the comrades and people resisting Japan must be protected. (Warm
applause and slogan shouting.)

NOTES


1. These reactionaries were Chiang Kai-shek and his henchmen.
On June 12, 1939, acting on a secret order from Chiang Kai-shek, the Kuomintang's
27th Group Army dispatched troops to surround the New Fourth Army Liaison
Office at Pingkiang, Hunan Province, and in cold blood murdered Comrade Tu
Cheng-kun, staff officer of the New Fourth Army, Comrade Lo Tzu-ming, major
and adjutant of the Eighth Route Army, and four other comrades. This massacre
aroused indignation not only among the people in the anti-Japanese democratic
base areas but also among honest people in the Kuomintang areas.

2. Comrade Mao Tse-tung defined unification in order to
counter the Kuomintang reactionaries' use of "unification" as a pretext for
their schemes to liquidate the Communist-led anti-Japanese armed forces and
base areas. After the renewed Kuomintang-Communist co-operation for joint
resistance to Japan, the slogan of "unification" became the Kuomintang's
chief weapon in attacking the Communist Party, which it accused of always
seeking to be different and of obstructing unification and damaging the cause
of resistance. This reactionary clamour increased after January 1939, when
the Fifth Plenary Session of the Kuomintang's Fifth Central Executive Committee
adopted the "Measures for Restricting the Activities of Alien Parties" on
the proposal of Chiang Kai-shek. Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrested the slogan
of "unification" from the Kuomintang reactionaries and turned it into a
revolutionary slogan for opposing the Kuomintang's divisive activities against
the people and the nation.

3. After the fall of Wuhan in October 1938, Japan's main
policy became one of employing political means to lure the Kuomintang into
capitulation. International imperialism, including the British and U.S.
imperialists, also repeatedly suggested to Chiang Kai-shek that he should
negotiate peace, and Chamberlain, the British Prime Minister, indicated that
Britain would take part in the so-called "reconstruction of the Far East".
The Japanese aggressors and the international imperialists stepped up their
conspiracies in 1939. In April of that year, Clark-Kerr, the British ambassador
to China, acted as an intermediary between Chiang Kai-shek and the Japanese
aggressors in arranging a peace parley. In July an agreement was reached
between Britain and Japan under which the British government was prepared
to recognize the "actual situation" Japan had brought about in China.

4. The "Measures for Restricting the Activities of Alien
Parties" were secretly issued by the central authorities of the Kuomintang
in 1939. They imposed severe restrictions on communist and all other progressive
ideas, speech and action, with the aim of disrupting all the anti-Japanese
organizations of the people. They also stipulated that in places where, in
the opinion of the Kuomintang, "the Communists were most active", the "law
of collective responsibility and collective punishment" was to be enforced
and an "information network", or counter-revolutionary secret service, was
to be generally established within the pao-chia organizations. Pao
and chia were then the basic administrative units of the
Kuomintang's fascist regime. Ten households formed a chia and
ten chia a pao.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Interview With a New China Daily Correspondent on the New International Situation







INTERVIEW WITH A NEW CHINA DAILY CORRESPONDENT ON THE NEW INTERNATIONAL
  SITUATION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

INTERVIEW WITH A NEW CHINA DAILY CORRESPONDENT ON THE NEW
  INTERNATIONAL SITUATION


September 1, 1939

Correspondent: What is the significance of the Treaty of Non-Aggression
Between the Soviet Union and Germany? [1]

Mao Tse-tung: The Soviet-German non-aggression treaty is the result
of the growing socialist strength of the Soviet Union and the policy of peace
persistently followed by the Soviet government. The treaty has shattered
the intrigues by which the reactionary international bourgeoisie represented
by Chamberlain and Daladier sought to instigate a Soviet-German war, has
broken the encirclement of the Soviet Union by the German-Italian-Japanese
anti-Communist bloc, strengthened peace between the Soviet Union and Germany,
and safeguarded the progress of socialist construction in the Soviet Union.
In the East it deals a blow to Japan and helps China; it strengthens the
position of China's forces of resistance to Japan and deals a blow to the
capitulators. All this provides a basis for helping the people throughout
the world to win freedom and liberation. Such is the full political significance
of the Soviet-German non-aggression treaty.

Question: Some people do not realize yet that the Soviet-German
non-aggression treaty is the result of the breakdown of the Anglo-French-Soviet
talks, but think that the Soviet-German treaty caused the breakdown. Will
you please explain why the Anglo-French-Soviet talks failed?

Answer: The talks failed purely because the British and French
governments were insincere. In recent years the reactionary international
bourgeoisie, and primarily that of Britain and France, have consistently
pursued the reactionary policy of "non-intervention" towards aggression by
fascist Germany, Italy and Japan. Their purpose is to connive at wars of
aggression and to profit by them. Thus Britain and France flatly rejected
the Soviet Union's repeated proposals for a genuine front against aggression;
standing on the side-lines, they took a "non-interventionist" position and
connived at German, Italian and Japanese aggression. Their aim was to step
forward and intervene when the belligerents had worn each other out. In pursuit
of this reactionary policy they sacrificed half of China to Japan, and the
whole of Abyssinia, Spain, Austria and Czechoslovakia to Italy and
Germany.[2] Then they wanted to sacrifice the Soviet
Union. This plot was clearly revealed in the recent Anglo-French-Soviet talks.
They lasted for more than four months, from April 15 to August 23, during
which the Soviet Union exercised the utmost patience. But, from start to
finish, Britain and France rejected the principle of equality and reciprocity;
they demanded that the Soviet Union provide safeguards for their security,
but refused to do likewise for the Soviet Union and the small Baltic states,
so as to leave a gap through which Germany could attack, and they also refused
to allow the passage of Soviet troops through Poland to fight the aggressor.
That is why the talks broke down. In the meantime, Germany indicated her
willingness to stop her activities against the Soviet Union and abandon the
so-called Agreement Against the Communist International
[3] and recognized the inviolability of the Soviet
frontiers; hence the conclusion of the Soviet-German non-aggression treaty.
The policy of "non-intervention" pursued by international and primarily
Anglo-French reaction is a policy of "sitting on top of the mountain to watch
the tigers fight", a downright imperialist policy of profiting at others'
expense. This policy was initiated when Chamberlain took office, reached
its climax in the Munich agreement of September last year and finally collapsed
in the recent Anglo-French-Soviet talks. From now on the situation will
inevitably develop into one of direct conflict between the two big imperialist
blocs, the Anglo-French bloc and the German-Italian bloc. As I said in October
1938 at the Sixth Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee of our Party,
"The inevitable result of Chamberlain's policy will be like 'lifting a rock
only to drop it on one's own toes'." Chamberlain started with the aim of
injuring others only to end up by ruining himself. This is the law of development
which governs all reactionary policies.

Question: In your opinion, how will the present situation develop?

Answer: The international situation has already entered a new phase.
The one-sided situation in the second imperialist war which has existed for
some time, in other words, the situation in which, as a result of the policy
of "non-intervention", one group of imperialist states attacks while another
sits tight and looks on, will inevitably be replaced by a situation of
all-embracing war as far as Europe is concerned. The second imperialist war
has entered a new stage.

In Europe, a large-scale imperialist war is imminent between the German-Italian
and the Anglo-French imperialist blocs which are contending for domination
over the colonial peoples. In this war, each of the belligerents will brazenly
declare its own cause to be just and that of its opponents unjust in order
to delude people and win the support of public opinion. Actually this is
a swindle. The aims of both sides are imperialist, both are fighting for
the domination of colonies and semi-colonies and for spheres of influence,
and both are waging a predatory war. At present, they are fighting over Poland,
the Balkans and the Mediterranean littoral. This war is not at all a just
war. The only just wars are non-predatory wars, wars of liberation. Communists
will in no circumstances support any predatory war. They will, however, bravely
step forward to support every just and non-predatory war for liberation,
and they will stand in the forefront of the struggle. With Chamberlain and
Daladier practicing intimidation and bribery, the social-democratic parties
affiliated to the Second International are splitting up. One section, the
reactionary upper stratum, is following the same old disastrous road as in
the First World War and is ready to support the new imperialist war. But
another section will join with the Communists in forming a popular front
against war and fascism. Chamberlain and Daladier are following in the footsteps
of Germany and Italy and are becoming more and more reactionary, taking advantage
of the war mobilization to put the state structure in their countries on
a fascist footing and to militarize the economy. In short, the two big
imperialist blocs are feverishly preparing for war and millions of people
are facing the danger of mass slaughter. Surely all this will arouse movements
of resistance among the masses. Whether in Germany or in Italy, Britain or
France, or anywhere else in Europe or the world at large, if the people do
not want to be used as imperialist cannon-fodder, they will have to rise
up and oppose the imperialist war in every possible way.

Besides these two big blocs, there is a third bloc in the capitalist world,
headed by the United States and including a number of Central and South American
countries. In its own interests, this bloc will not enter the war for the
time being. In the name of neutrality, U.S. imperialism is temporarily refraining
from joining either of the belligerents, so as to be able to come on the
scene later and contend for the leadership of the capitalist world. The fact
that the U.S bourgeoisie is not yet prepared to discard democracy and a
peace-time economy at home is favourable to the world peace movement.

Badly hit by the Soviet-German treaty, Japanese imperialism is facing a future
beset with still greater difficulties. Two factions within Japan are fighting
over foreign policy. The militarists are contemplating an alliance with Germany
and Italy for the purpose of gaining exclusive control of China, invading
Southeast Asia and expelling Britain, the United States and France from the
East; on the other hand, one section of the bourgeoisie would prefer to make
concessions to Britain, the United States and France in order to concentrate
on plundering China. At present, there is a strong tendency towards a compromise
with Britain. The British reactionaries will offer Japan the joint partition
of China plus financial and economic help, in return for which Japan will
have to serve as the watchdog of British interests in the East, suppress
the Chinese national liberation movement and contain the Soviet Union. Therefore,
whatever happens, Japan's basic aim of conquering China will never change.
The possibility that Japan will launch large-scale frontal military offensives
in China may not be very great, but it will step up its political offensive
to "use Chinese to subdue Chinese" [4] and its
economic plundering of China to "sustain the war by means of
war",[5] while keeping up its frantic "mopping-up"
campaigns [6] in the occupied areas; moreover,
it will work through Britain to force China to surrender. At a favourable
moment it will propose an Eastern Munich and, with some relatively big
concessions as bait, will try to coax and bully China into accepting its
terms for surrender, so as to attain its aim of subjugating China. No matter
what cabinet changes the Japanese ruling class may make, this imperialist
aim will remain unchanged until the Japanese people rise in revolution.

Outside the capitalist world there is a world of light, the socialist Soviet
Union. The Soviet-German treaty enables the Soviet Union to give greater
help to the world movement for peace and to China in her resistance to Japan.

This is my appraisal of the international situation.

Question: In these circumstances, what are the prospects for China?

Answer: There are two possibilities. One is perseverance in resistance,
unity and progress, which would mean national rejuvenation. The other is
compromise, a split and retrogression, which would mean national subjugation.

In the new international situation, as Japan comes up against increased
difficulties and China firmly refuses to compromise, the stage of strategic
retreat will end for us and that of strategic stalemate will begin. The latter
stage is one of preparation for the counter-offensive.

However, stalemate along the front means the reverse of stalemate in the
enemy's rear, with the emergence of a stalemate along the front lines, the
struggle behind the enemy's lines will become intense. Thus the large-scale
"mopping-up" campaigns the enemy has been conducting in the occupied
areas--mainly in northern China--since the fall of Wuhan will not only continue
but will be intensified from now on. Furthermore, since the enemy's main
policy at present consists in his political offensive to "use Chinese to
subdue Chinese" and in his economic aggression for "sustaining the war by
means of war", and since a Far Eastern Munich is the objective of British
policy in the East, the danger of the surrender of the greater part of China
and of an internal split will increase enormously. China is still far weaker
than the enemy, and unless the whole country unites in an arduous struggle,
it will not be able to build up strength for the counter-offensive.

Therefore, the most serious task for our country is still perseverance in
the war, and there must be no slackening.

Beyond any doubt, China must on no account miss the present opportunity or
make a wrong decision but must take a firm political stand.

In other words: First, firm adherence to the stand of resistance to
Japan and opposition to any moves towards compromise. Determined blows must
be struck at all the open or undercover Wang Ching-weis. China must firmly
reject any blandishments, whether from Japan or from Britain, and must never
take part in an Eastern Munich.

Second, firm adherence to the stand of unity and opposition to any moves
towards a split. Strict vigilance must be maintained against such moves whether
they stem from the Japanese imperialists, from other foreign countries, or
from the capitulators at home. All internal friction harmful to the War of
Resistance must be sternly checked.

Third, firm adherence to the stand of progress and opposition to any
retrogression. Whether in the military, political, financial or economic
sphere, or in party affairs, or in the field of culture and education, or
in the mass movement, every theory, every institution, every measure harmful
to the war must be re-examined and effectively changed to serve the War of
Resistance.

If all this is done, China will be able effectively to build up her strength
for the counter-offensive.

From now on the whole country must make "preparation for the counter-offensive"
its over-all task in the War of Resistance.

Today, it is necessary on the one hand earnestly to sustain our defence along
the front lines and vigorously to help the fighting behind the enemy lines
and on the other to institute political, military and other reforms and build
up tremendous strength, so that when the moment comes, the whole might of
the nation can be thrown into a large-scale counter-offensive for the recovery
of our lost territories.

NOTES


1. The Treaty of Non-Aggression Between the Soviet Union
and Germany was signed on August 23, 1939.

2. Aided and abetted by the "non-intervention" policy of
the British and French governments, fascist Germany and Italy committed a
series of acts of aggression and achieved their purpose. Italy began her
armed aggression against Abyssinia in October 1935 and occupied the whole
country in May 1936. In July 1936 Germany and Italy started their joint armed
intervention in the internal affairs of Spain and supported the fascist Franco
in his rebellion against the Popular Front Government. After a prolonged
war with the German and Italian interventionists and Franco's rebel troops,
the Popular Front Government was defeated in March 1939. German troops occupied
Austria in March 1938 and invaded the Sudeten area of Czechoslovakia in October.
In March 1939 the whole of Czechoslovakia came under German occupation.

3. The Agreement Against the Communist International was
concluded between Japan and Germany in November 1936; Italy joined it in
November 1937.

4. "Using Chinese to subdue Chinese" was a sinister device
of the Japanese imperialists in their aggression against China. To create
divisions within the country, they cultivated various Chinese elements to
serve as their stooges. After the outbreak of the war, they not only employed
the openly pro-Japanese clique within the Kuomintang headed by Wang Ching-wei
but also made use of Chiang Kai-shek's clique, in order to check the Communist
Party which was the most resolute in resisting Japan. In 1939, they ceased
attacking Chiang Kai-shek's troops and gave him political encouragement in
his anti-Communist activities.

5. "Sustaining the war by means of war" refers to Japan's
policy of ruthless plunder of the Chinese areas under her occupation to meet
the expenses of her aggressive war.

6. "Mopping-up" campaigns were the Japanese aggressors'
euphemism for their barbarous policy of triple atrocity--burning all, killing
all and looting all.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Interview with Three Correspondents from the Central News Agency, the Sao Tang Pao and the Hsin Min Pao







INTERVIEW WITH THREE CORRESPONDENTS  THE CENTRAL NEWS AGENCY,
  THE SAO TANG PAO AND THE HSIN MIN PAO 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

INTERVIEW WITH THREE CORRESPONDENTS  THE CENTRAL NEWS AGENCY, THE
  SAO TANG PAO AND THE HSIN MIN PAO
  [1]


September 16, 1939


Correspondent: May we ask for your views on a few questions? We
have read your statement of September 1 in today's New China News; it
covers some of our questions, but there are others on which we would like
you to elaborate. Our written questions are divided into three groups and
we would be glad if you would give us your views on each of them.

Mao Tse-tung: I shall deal with them according to your
list.

You ask if the War of Resistance has reached the stage of stalemate. I think
it has in a sense--in the sense that there is a new international situation
and that Japan is facing greater difficulties while China has stood firm
against compromise. This does not rule out the possibility that the enemy
may still launch fairly big offensive campaigns; for instance, he may attack
Pakhoi, Changsha or even Sian. When we say that the enemy's large-scale strategic
offensive and our strategic retreat have in a sense largely come to an end,
we do not altogether exclude the possibility of further offensives and retreats.
As for the specific task in the new stage, it is to prepare for the
counter-offensive, and this concept covers everything. That is to say, during
the stage of stalemate China must build up all the strength required for
the future counter-offensive. To prepare for the counter-offensive does not
mean launching it immediately, since it cannot be done unless the conditions
are ripe. What we are talking about is the strategic, and not the tactical,
counter-offensive. Tactical counter-offensives, such as our repulse of the
enemy's "mopping-up" campaigns in southeastern Shansi are not only possible
but absolutely necessary. But the time has not yet arrived for an all-out
strategic counter-offensive, and we are now at the stage of actively preparing
for it. At this stage we shall still have to repulse a certain number of
offensive campaigns the enemy may launch at the front.

To itemize the tasks of the new stage, in the enemy's rear we must keep up
guerrilla warfare, smash his "mopping-up" campaigns and defeat his economic
aggression; at the front we must strengthen our military defences and repulse
any offensive campaign the enemy may launch; in the Great Rear Area the main
thing is to work hard for political reforms. All these form the specific
content of our preparations for the counter-offensive.

Internal political reform is very important because at present the enemy
is mainly carrying on a political offensive, and so we must strengthen our
political resistance in particular. In other words, the problem of democracy
must be solved as soon as possible, for only in this way can we increase
our capacity for political resistance and build up our military strength.
China has to rely mainly on her own efforts in the War of Resistance. We
have stood for regeneration through our own efforts, and this has become
even more important in the new international situation. The essence of such
regeneration is democracy.

Question: You have just said that democracy is essential
to winning victory in the War of Resistance through our own efforts. How
can such a system be brought into being in the present circumstances ?

Answer: Dr. Sun Yat-sen originally envisaged the three stages of
military rule, political tutelage and constitutional
government.[2] But in his "Statement on My Departure
for the North" [3] issued shortly before his death,
he no longer spoke of three stages, but said instead that a national assembly
must be convened immediately. This shows that Dr. Sun himself modified his
views many years ago in the light of changing circumstances. In the grave
situation prevailing today, with the War of Resistance going on, both the
early convening of a national assembly and the introduction of democratic
government are imperative for averting the calamity of national subjugation
and for driving out the enemy. Opinions differ on this question. Some say
that the common people are ignorant and democratic government cannot be
introduced. They are wrong. The common people have made very rapid progress
in the war and, given leadership and proper policy, democratic government
can certainly be introduced. For instance, it has been put into practice
in northern China. Most of the heads of districts, townships and the pao
and chia there are chosen by popular vote. Even some county
magistrates have been chosen in this way, and progressive elements and promising
young people have been elected. The question should be thrown open to public
discussion.

In the second group on your list, you raise the question of "restricting
alien parties", that is, the question of the friction in various localities.
Your concern over this matter is justified. There has been some improvement
recently, but fundamentally the situation remains unchanged.

Question: Has the Communist Party made its position on this question
clear to the Central Government?

Answer: We have protested.

Question: In what way?

Answer: Our Party representative, Comrade Chou En-lai, wrote a letter
to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek as early as July. Then again on August 1,
people from all walks of life in Yenan sent a telegram to the Generalissimo
and the National Government, demanding the withdrawal of the "Measures for
Restricting the Activities of Alien Parties", which had been secretly circulated
and which are at the very root of the "friction" in various places.

Question: Has there been any reply from the Central Government?

Answer: No. But it is said that there are also people in the Kuomintang
who disapprove of these measures. As everybody knows, an army that participates
in the common fight against Japan is a friendly army, not an "alien army",
and similarly, a political party that participates in the common fight against
Japan is a friendly party, not an "alien party". There are many parties and
groups taking part in the War of Resistance and, while they vary in strength,
they are fighting in the same cause; surely they must all unite and must
in no circumstances "restrict" one another. Which party is an alien party?
The party of the traitors headed by Wang Ching-wei, the running dog of Japan,
because it has nothing in common politically with the anti-Japanese parties;
that is the kind of party which should be restricted. Between the Kuomintang
and the Communist Party there is common political ground, namely, resistance
to Japanese aggression. Therefore, the problem is to concentrate all our
strength on opposing and checking Japan and Wang Ching-wei, and not on opposing
and checking the Communist Party. This is the only basis for formulating
correct slogans. Wang Ching-wei has three slogans: "Oppose Chiang Kai-shek,"
"Oppose the Communist Party", and "Be friends with Japan". Wang Ching-wei
is the common enemy of the Kuomintang, the Communist Party and the entire
people. But the Communist Party is not the enemy of the Kuomintang, nor is
the Kuomintang the enemy of the Communist Party; they should unite and help
each other rather than oppose or "restrict" each other. The slogans on our
side must be different from Wang Ching-wei's, they must be the opposite of
his and never be confused with them. If he says, "Oppose Chiang Kai-shek",
everyone should support Chiang Kai-shek; if he says, "Oppose the Communist
Party", everyone should unite with the Communist Party; and if he says, "Be
friends with Japan", everyone should resist Japan. We should support whatever
the enemy opposes and oppose whatever the enemy supports. In articles nowadays
people often quote the saying, "Do not sadden your friends and gladden your
enemies." It comes from a letter which Chu Fou, a general under Liu Hsiu
of the Eastern Han Dynasty, wrote to Peng Chung, the prefect of Yuyang. In
context it reads, "Whatever you do, you must be sure that you do not sadden
your friends and gladden your enemies." Chu Pou's words express a clear-cut
political principle which we must never forget.

In your list of questions you also ask about the Communist Party's attitude
to what has come to be known as "friction". I tell you frankly that we are
absolutely opposed to friction between the anti-Japanese parties, which cancels
out their strength. But if anyone persists in using violence against us,
tries to bully us and resorts to repression, the Communist Party will have
to take a firm stand. Our attitude is: We will not attack unless we are attacked;
if we are attacked, we will certainly counter-attack. But our stand is strictly
one of self-defence; no Communist is permitted to go beyond the principle
of self-defence

Question: How about the friction in northern China?

Answer: Chang Yin-wu and Chin Chi-jung are the two expert
friction-mongers there. Chang Yin-wu in Hopei and Chin Chi-jung in Shantung
are simply violating all laws, human or divine, and are scarcely distinguishable
from the traitors. They seldom fight the enemy but often attack the Eighth
Route Army. We have already sent Generalissimo Chiang a mass of indisputable
evidence, such as Chang Yin-wu's orders to his subordinates to attack the
Eighth Route Army

Question: Is there any friction with the New Fourth Army?

Answer: Yes, there is. The incident of the Pingkiang massacre has
shocked the whole nation.

Question: Some people say that the united front is important but
that the Border Region Government should be abolished for the sake of
unification. What do you think of this?

Answer: Nonsense of all sorts is being talked everywhere, the so-called
abolition of the Border Region being one example. The Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region is a democratic anti-Japanese base area and is politically
the most progressive region in the whole country. What grounds are there
for abolishing it? Moreover, Generalissimo Chiang long ago recognized the
Border Region and the Executive Yuan of the National Government officially
recognized it as long ago as the winter of the 26th year of the Republic
(1937). China certainly needs to be unified, but it must be unified on the
basis of resistance, unity and progress. If unification is sought on the
opposite basis, the country will perish.

Question: Since there are different interpretations of unification,
is there any possibility of a split between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party?

Answer: If we are merely talking of possibilities, we can envisage
both the possibility of unity and the possibility of a split, depending on
the attitudes of the Kuomintang and the Communist Party, and especially of
the people throughout the country. As far as we Communists are concerned,
we have long made it clear that our policy is co-operation, and that we not
only hope for long-term co-operation but are working hard for it. It is said
that at the Fifth Plenary Session of the Central Executive Committee of the
Kuomintang, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek also declared that domestic problems
should not be solved by force. Confronted with a formidable enemy and bearing
in mind the lessons of the past, the Kuomintang and the Communist Party must
each persist in long-term co-operation and avoid a split. But to avoid all
possibility of a split, political guarantees for long-term co-operation must
be found, namely, perseverance in the War of Resistance and the introduction
of democratic government. With these, unity can be maintained and a split
avoided; it depends on the common effort of the two parties and the whole
nation and the effort must be made. "Persist in resistance and oppose
capitulation", "Persist in unity and oppose a split" and "Persist in progress
and oppose retrogression" -- these are the three great political slogans
our Party put forward in its Manifesto of July 7 this year. In our opinion,
this is the only way China can avoid subjugation and drive out the enemy.
There is no other way.

NOTES


1. The Central News Agency was the official Kuomintang
news agency, the Sao Tang Pao was a paper run by military circles
in the Kuomintang government and the Hsin Min Pao was one
of the mouthpieces of the national bourgeoisie.

2. See Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Programme of National
Reconstruction. For a long time, the Kuomintang reactionary clique headed
by Chiang Kai-shek sought to justify their ruthless counter-revolutionary
dictatorship by representing it as either the stage of "military rule" or
that of "political tutelage" as envisaged by Dr. Sun.

3. This statement was made by Dr. Sun Yat-sen on November
10, 1924, two days before he left Canton for Peking at the invitation of
Feng Yu-hsiang. In this statement, which won the support of the whole nation,
Dr. Sun reiterated his opposition to imperialism and the warlords and urged
that a national assembly be called to settle the problems facing the country.
Feng Yu-hsiang originally belonged to the Chihli warlord clique, but in the
winter of 1924, when war broke out for the second time between them and the
Fengtien warlord clique, he refused to fight and led his troops back to Peking,
thus causing the downfall of Wu Pei-fu, the actual leader of the Chihli warlords.
It was then that he sent the telegram inviting Dr. Sun to Pelting.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Identity of Interests Between the Soviet Union and All Mankind







THE IDENTITY OF INTERESTS BETWEEN THE SOVIET UNION AND ALL MANKIND



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE IDENTITY OF INTERESTS BETWEEN THE SOVIET UNION AND ALL MANKIND


September 28, 1939


With the approach of the twenty-second anniversary of the Great October Socialist
Revolution, the Sino-Soviet Cultural Association has asked me for an article.
On the basis of my own observations, I should like to elucidate a few problems
concerning the Soviet Union and China. For they are being discussed by the
people in China today and apparently no definite conclusions have yet been
reached. It may be of some help if I take this opportunity to set forth my
views for the consideration of those who are concerned about the war in Europe
and about Sino-Soviet relations

Some people say that the Soviet Union does not want the world to remain at
peace because the outbreak of a world war is to its advantage, and that the
present war was precipitated by the Soviet Union's conclusion of a non-aggression
treaty with Germany instead of a treaty of mutual assistance with Britain
and France. I consider this view incorrect. The foreign policy of the Soviet
Union over a very long period of time has consistently been one of peace,
a policy based on the close links between its own interests and those of
the overwhelming majority of mankind. For its own socialist construction
the Soviet Union has always needed peace, has always needed to strengthen
its peaceful relations with other countries and prevent an anti-Soviet war;
for the sake of peace on a world scale, it has also needed to check the
aggression of the fascist countries, curb the warmongering of the so-called
democratic countries and delay the outbreak of an imperialist world war for
as long as possible. The Soviet Union has long devoted great energy to the
cause of world peace. For instance, it has joined the League of Nations,
[1] signed treaties of mutual assistance with France
and Czechoslovakia [2] and tried hard to conclude
security pacts with Britain and all other countries that might be willing
to have peace. After Germany and Italy jointly invaded Spain and when Britain,
the United States and France adopted a policy of nominal "non-intervention"
but of actual connivance at their aggression, the Soviet Union opposed the
"non-intervention" policy and gave the Spanish republican forces active help
in their resistance to Germany and Italy. After Japan invaded China and when
the same three powers adopted the same kind of "non-intervention" policy,
the Soviet Union not only concluded a non-aggression treaty with China but
gave China active help in her resistance. When Britain and France connived
at Hitler's aggression and sacrificed Austria and Czechoslovakia, the Soviet
Union spared no effort in exposing the sinister aims behind the Munich policy
and made proposals to Britain and France for checking further aggression.
When Poland became the burning question in the spring and summer of this
year and it was touch-and-go whether world war would break out, the Soviet
Union negotiated with Britain and France for over four months, despite
Chamberlain's and Daladier's complete lack of sincerity, in an endeavour
to conclude a treaty of mutual assistance to prevent the outbreak of war.
But all these efforts were blocked by the imperialist policy of the British
and French governments, a policy of conniving at, instigating and spreading
war, so that eventually the cause of world peace was thwarted and the imperialist
world war broke out. The governments of Britain, the United States and France
had no genuine desire to prevent this war; on the contrary, they helped to
bring it about. Their refusal to come to terms with the Soviet Union and
conclude a really effective treaty of mutual assistance based on equality
and reciprocity proved that they wanted not peace but war. Everybody knows
that in the contemporary world rejection of the Soviet Union means rejection
of peace. Even Lloyd George, that typical representative of the British
bourgeoisie, knows this.[3] It was in these
circumstances, and when Germany agreed to stop her anti-Soviet activities,
abandon the Agreement Against the Communist International and recognize the
inviolability of the Soviet frontiers, that the Soviet-German non-aggression
treaty was concluded. The plan of Britain, the United States and France was
to egg Germany on to attack the Soviet Union, so that they themselves, "sitting
on top of the mountain to watch the tigers fight", could come down and take
over after the Soviet Union and Germany had worn each other out. The
Soviet-German non-aggression treaty smashed this plot. In overlooking this
plot and the schemes of the Anglo-French imperialists who connived at and
instigated war and precipitated a world war, some of our fellow-countrymen
have actually been taken in by the sugary propaganda of these schemers. These
crafty politicians were not the least bit interested in checking aggression
against Spain, against China, or against Austria and Czechoslovakia, on the
contrary, they connived at aggression and instigated war, playing the proverbial
role of the fisherman who set the snipe and clam at each other and then took
advantage of both. They euphemistically described their actions as
"non-intervention", but what they actually did was to "sit on top of the
mountain to watch the tigers fight". Quite a number of people throughout
the world have been fooled by the honeyed words of Chamberlain and his partners,
failing to see the murderous intent behind their smiles, or to understand
that the Soviet-German non-aggression treaty was concluded only after Chamberlain
and Daladier had made up their minds to reject the Soviet Union and bring
about the imperialist war. It is time for these people to wake up. The fact
that the Soviet Union worked hard to preserve world peace to the very last
minute proves that the interests of the Soviet Union are identical with those
of the overwhelming majority of mankind. This is the first question I wanted
to talk about.

Some people say that now that the second imperialist world war has broken
out, the Soviet Union will probably take sides--in other words, the Soviet
Red Army seems to be on the point of joining the German imperialist front.
I consider this view incorrect. On whichever side, the Anglo-French or the
German, the war that has just broken out is an unjust, predatory and imperialist
war. The Communist Parties and the people of all countries should rise up
against it and expose the imperialist character of both belligerents, for
this imperialist war brings only harm and no benefit whatever to the people
of the world, and they should expose the criminal acts of the social-democratic
parties in supporting the imperialist war and betraying the interests of
the proletariat. The Soviet Union is a socialist country, a country in which
the Communist Party is in power, and it necessarily maintains a clear-cut
twofold attitude towards wars: (1) It firmly refuses to take part in any
unjust, predatory and imperialist war and maintains strict neutrality towards
the belligerents. Hence the Soviet Red Army will never disregard principles
and join either of the imperialist war fronts. (2) It actively supports just
and non-predatory wars of liberation. For instance, it helped the Chinese
people in their war of the Northern Expedition thirteen years ago and the
Spanish people in their war against Germany and Italy up to this last year;
it has been helping the Chinese people in their War of Resistance Against
Japan for the last two years and the Mongolian people in resisting Japan
for the last few months; and it will certainly give help to any war for the
liberation of the masses or of a nation which may break out in other countries
in the future, and will certainly give help to any wars that contribute to
the defence of peace. The history of the Soviet Union in the last twenty-two
years has already proved this, and history will prove it again in the future.
Some people regard the Soviet Union's trade with Germany, which is based
on the Soviet-German commercial agreement, as an act of participation in
the war on the German side. This view, too, is wrong, for it confuses trade
with participation in war. Trade must not be confused with participation
in war or with rendering assistance. For example, the Soviet Union traded
with Germany and Italy during the Spanish war, yet nobody in the world said
that the Soviet Union was helping Germany and Italy in their aggression against
Spain; on the contrary, people said that it was helping Spain in resisting
this aggression, the reason being that the Soviet Union actually did give
help to Spain. Again, during the present Sino-Japanese war the Soviet Union
is trading with Japan, but nobody in the world is saying that the Soviet
Union is helping Japan in its aggression against China; on the contrary,
people say that it is helping China to resist this aggression, the reason
being that it actually is helping China. At present, both sides in the world
war have trading relations with the Soviet Union, but this cannot be regarded
as assistance to either, still less as taking part in the war. Only if the
nature of the war changes, if the war in one or more countries undergoes
certain necessary changes and becomes advantageous to the Soviet Union and
the peoples of the world, will it be possible for the Soviet Union to help
or participate; otherwise it will not. As for the fact that the Soviet Union
is obliged to trade to a greater or lesser extent on more or less preferential
terms with one or another of the belligerents according to how friendly or
hostile it happens to be, that depends not on the Soviet Union but on the
attitude of the belligerents. But even if one or several countries adopt
an anti-Soviet attitude, the Soviet Union will not break off trade relations
with them so long as they, like Germany before August 23, are willing to
maintain diplomatic relations and conclude trade treaties with it, and do
not declare war on it. It should be clearly understood that such commercial
relations do not mean assistance, much less participation in war. This is
the second question I wanted to talk about.

Many people in China are bewildered by the fact that Soviet troops have entered
Poland.[4] The Polish question should be viewed
from various angles, from that of Germany, of Britain and France, of the
Polish government, of the Polish people and of the Soviet Union. Germany
started the war in order to plunder the Polish people and smash one flank
of the Anglo-French imperialist front. By its nature, Germany's war is
imperialist and should be opposed, not approved. As for Britain and France,
they have regarded Poland as an object of plunder for their finance capital,
exploited her to thwart the German imperialist attempt at a world re-division
of the spoils, and made her a flank of their own imperialist front. Thus
their war is an imperialist war, their so-called aid to Poland being merely
for the purpose of contending with Germany for the domination of Poland,
and this war, too, should be opposed, not approved. As for the Polish government,
it was a fascist, reactionary government of the Polish landlords and bourgeoisie
which ruthlessly exploited the workers and peasants and oppressed the Polish
democrats; moreover, it was a government of Greater Poland chauvinists which
ruthlessly oppressed the non-Polish minority nationalities--the Ukrainians,
Byelorussians, Jews, Germans, Lithuanians and others, who number more than
ten million; it was itself an imperialist government. In the war, this
reactionary Polish government willingly drove the Polish people to serve
as cannon-fodder for British and French finance capital, and it willingly
served as a sector of the reactionary front of international finance capital.
For twenty years the Polish government consistently opposed the Soviet Union
and, during the talks between Britain, France and the Soviet Union, it
obstinately rejected the Soviet offer to help it with troops. Moreover, it
was an utterly incompetent government, its huge army of over 1,500,000 collapsed
at the first blow, and it brought the country to ruin in just two weeks,
leaving the Polish people under the heel of German imperialism. Such were
the towering crimes of the Polish government and it would be wrong for us
to waste any sympathy on it. As for the Polish people, they are victims;
they should rise up against the oppression of the German fascists and against
their own reactionary landlord and bourgeois classes, and establish an
independent, free and democratic Polish state. Without the slightest doubt,
our sympathy must go out to the Polish people. As for the Soviet Union, its
actions have been perfectly just. It was confronted by two problems. The
first problem was whether to let the whole of Poland fall under the rule
of German imperialism or to help the minority nationalities of eastern Poland
win their liberation. It chose the second course. A vast stretch of territory
inhabited by Byelorussians and Ukrainians had been snatched from the new-born
Soviet state by the German imperialists as far back as 1918 when the Treaty
of Brest-Litovsk was signed, and it was later arbitrarily put under the rule
of the reactionary Polish government by the Treaty of Versailles. What the
Soviet Union has now done is merely to recover its lost territory, liberate
the oppressed Byelorussians and Ukrainians and save them from German oppression.
The news dispatches of the last few days show how warmly these minority
nationalities are welcoming the Red Army with food and drink as their liberator,
while not a single report of this kind has come in from western Poland which
has been occupied by German troops or from the places in western Germany
which have been occupied by French troops. This shows clearly that the Soviet
Union's war is a just and non-predatory war of liberation, a war helping
to liberate weak and small nations and free the people. On the other hand,
the war being waged by Germany and by Britain and France is an unjust, predatory
and imperialist war for the oppression of other nations and peoples. The
second problem confronting the Soviet Union was Chamberlain's endeavour to
continue his old anti-Soviet policy. His policy was, first, to impose a
large-scale blockade on Germany and bring pressure on her from the west;
second, to try to form an alliance with the United States and to buy over
Italy, Japan and the countries of northern Europe so as to isolate Germany;
and third, to bribe Germany with the offer of Poland, and even of Hungary
and Rumania. In short, Chamberlain resorted to all kinds of intimidation
and bribery to get Germany to renounce the Soviet-German non-aggression treaty
and turn her guns on the Soviet Union. This intrigue has been going on for
some time and will continue. The powerful Soviet army's entry into eastern
Poland, with the aim of recovering the Soviet Union's own territory and
liberating the weak and small nationalities there, was at the same time a
practical move to prevent the forces of German aggression from expanding
eastward and to frustrate Chamberlain's intrigue. Judging by the news reports
of the last few days, this Soviet policy has been most successful. It is
a concrete manifestation of the identity of the interests of the Soviet Union
with those of the overwhelming majority of mankind, including those of the
oppressed people under reactionary Polish rule. This is the third question
I wanted to talk about.

The whole situation since the conclusion of the Soviet-German non-aggression
treaty constitutes a great blow to Japan and a great help to China; it
strengthens the position of those resisting Japan and weakens the capitulators.
The Chinese people have rightly welcomed this treaty. However, since the
signing of the Nomonhan truce agreement, [5] British
and U.S. news agencies have been busy spreading the story that a Soviet-Japanese
non-aggression treaty is about to be signed, and this has caused concern
among some Chinese people, who think that the Soviet Union may no longer
help China. I believe they are wrong. The nature of the Nomonhan truce agreement
is the same as that of the previous Changkufeng truce agreement;
[6] that is to say, the Japanese militarists, being
compelled to admit defeat, have had to recognize the inviolability of the
Soviet and Mongolian frontiers. These truce agreements will enable the Soviet
Union to increase rather than decrease its aid to China. As for the talk
about a Japanese-Soviet non-aggression treaty, the Soviet Union has been
proposing it for many years but Japan has invariably rejected it. Now there
is a section of the Japanese ruling class that wants such a treaty with the
Soviet Union, but whether the Soviet Union will be willing depends on the
basic principle of whether the treaty will accord with the interests of the
Soviet Union and of the overwhelming majority of mankind. Specifically, it
depends on whether the treaty will conflict with the interests of China's
war of national liberation. Judging from Stalin's report to the Eighteenth
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union on March 10 this year
and Molotov's speech at the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. on May 10, I think
the Soviet Union will not alter this basic principle. Even if such a treaty
were to be concluded, the Soviet Union would certainly not agree to anything
that would restrict its freedom of action in helping China. The interests
of the Soviet Union will always conform and never conflict with the interests
of China's national liberation. I hold this as absolutely beyond doubt. People
who are prejudiced against the Soviet Union are capitalizing on the Nomonhan
truce agreement and on the talk about a Japanese-Soviet non-aggression treaty
in order to make trouble and stir up ill feeling between the two great nations
of China and the Soviet Union. This is what the British, U.S. and French
intriguers and the Chinese capitulators are doing; it is highly dangerous
and we must thoroughly expose their dirty tricks. It is obvious that China's
foreign policy must be one of resistance to Japanese aggression. This policy
means primarily relying on our own efforts, while not ignoring any possibility
of securing help from abroad. Now that the imperialist world war has broken
out, foreign help is coming chiefly from three sources: (1) the socialist
Soviet Union, (2) the people of the capitalist countries, and (3) the oppressed
nations in the colonies and semi-colonies. These are our only reliable sources
of help. Anything else that might be called foreign help, even if it might
become available, can only be regarded as supplementary and temporary. Of
course, China should try to obtain such supplementary and temporary foreign
help, but must never depend too much on it or consider it reliable. China
should maintain strict neutrality towards the belligerents in the imperialist
war and not join either side. To maintain that China should join the Anglo-French
imperialist war front is a capitulator's view, which is harmful to the War
of Resistance as well as to the independence and liberation of the Chinese
nation, and it should be flatly rejected. This is the fourth question I wanted
to talk about.

These four questions are being widely discussed by our fellow-countrymen.
It is a very good thing that they are giving attention to the study of
international problems, to the relations between the imperialist world war
and China's War of Resistance and between the Soviet Union and China, because
their aim is victory over Japanese aggression. Here I have given some of
my basic views on these questions, and I hope that readers will not spare
their comments.

NOTES


1. The League of Nations was an organization formed by
Britain, France, Japan and other imperialist powers after World War I for
the re-division of the world through bargaining and temporary adjustments
of conflicting interests. In 1931 the Japanese imperialists occupied China's
Northeast and in 1933 Japan withdrew from the League of Nations in order
to be able to extend her aggression more freely. In the same year the German
fascists came to power, and later they, too, withdrew from the League of
Nations to facilitate their preparations for a war of aggression. It was
in 1934, when the threat of a fascist war of aggression was growing, that
the Soviet Union joined the League of Nations; in this way the possibility
arose of this imperialist organization for the re-division of the world being
turned into one that might serve the cause of world peace. Italy withdrew
from the League of Nations after her invasion of Abyssinia in 1935.

2. The Treaty of Mutual Assistance Between the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and France and the Treaty of Mutual Assistance
Between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Czechoslovak Republic
were concluded in 1935.

3. The British bourgeois politician Lloyd George, who had
been Prime Minister during World War I, declared in Parliament in November
1938 when Britain, France, Germany and Italy were going to negotiate, that
peace could not be won by rejecting Soviet participation in the negotiations.

4. On September 1, 1939, the Germans invaded Poland and
occupied most of her territory. On the 17th the reactionary Polish government
fled abroad. On the same day, the Soviet Union dispatched its troops to eastern
Poland in order to recover its own lost territories, emancipate the oppressed
Ukrainian and Byelorussian peoples and check the eastward drive of the German
fascist troops.

5. The Nomonhan truce agreement was concluded in Moscow
in September 1939. In May 1939 the Japanese and the puppet "Manchukuo" troops
had jointly attacked the troops of the Soviet Union and the People's Republic
of Mongolia at Nomonhan, on the border between Mongolia and "Manchukuo",
and were completely defeated by the Soviet and Mongolian forces in a heroic
war of self-defence. The Japanese then sued for peace. The truce agreement
provided for an immediate cease-fire and the formation of a commission of
four, with two representatives from each side, to demarcate the frontier
between the Mongolian People's Republic and the puppet state of "Manchukuo"
at places where the conflict had taken place.

6. The Changkufeng truce agreement was concluded in Moscow
on August 11, 1938. At the end of July and the beginning of August 1938,
the Japanese had committed acts of provocation against the Soviet troops
in the Changkufeng district on the border between China, Korea and the Soviet
Union and had been vigorously repulsed. The Japanese sued for peace. The
truce agreement provided for an immediate cease-fire and the formation of
a commission of four, with two representatives from the Soviet side and two
from the Japanese-Manchukuo" side, to investigate the boundary lines and
make a final settlement.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Introducing The Communist







INTRODUCING THE COMMUNIST



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  INTRODUCING THE COMMUNIST


October 4, 1939

The Central Committee has long planned to publish an internal Party journal,
and now at last the plan has materialized. Such a journal is necessary for
building up a bolshevized Chinese Communist Party, a party which is national
in scale and has a broad mass character, a party which is fully consolidated
ideologically, politically and organizationally. This necessity is all the
more obvious in the present situation, which has special features: on the
one hand, the danger of capitulation, of a split and of retrogression within
the Anti-Japanese National United Front is increasing daily, while on the
other, our Party has stepped out of its narrow confines and become a major
national party. The duty of the Party is to mobilize the masses to overcome
the dangers of capitulation, a split and retrogression and prepare against
all possible eventualities so that in case they occur, the Party and the
revolution will not suffer unexpected losses. An internal Party journal is
indeed most necessary at a time like this.

This internal Party journal is called The Communist. What is its
purpose? What will it deal with? In what way will it differ from other Party
publications?

Its purpose is to help build a bolshevized Chinese Communist Party which
is national in scale, has a broad mass character, and is fully consolidated
ideologically, politically and organizationally. The building of such a party
is imperative for the victory of the Chinese revolution and on the whole
the subjective and objective conditions for it are present; indeed this great
undertaking is now in progress. A special Party periodical is needed to help
achieve this great task, which is beyond the capability of an ordinary Party
publication, and this is why The Communist is now being
published.

To a certain extent our Party is already national in scale and has a broad
mass character: and it is already a bolshevized party, consolidated
ideologically, politically and organizationally, so far as its core of
leadership, a part of its membership and its general line and revolutionary
work are concerned.

That being so, why set a new task?

The reason is that we now have many new branches, which have a great many
new members but which cannot yet be considered as having a broad mass character,
as being ideologically, politically and organizationally consolidated, or
as being bolshevized. At the same time, there is the problem of raising the
political level of the older Party members and of making further progress
in bolshevizing the older branches and consolidating them ideologically,
politically and organizationally. The circumstances in which the Party now
finds itself and the responsibilities it is shouldering are quite unlike
those in the revolutionary civil war period; the circumstances are much more
complex and the responsibilities much heavier.

This is the period of the national united front, and we have formed a united
front with the bourgeoisie; this is the period of the War of Resistance Against
Japan, and the armed forces of our Party are at the front, fighting a ruthless
war against the enemy in co-ordination with the friendly armies; this is
the period when our Party has become a major national party and is therefore
no longer what it was before. If we take all these factors together, we shall
understand how glorious and momentous is the task we have set ourselves,
the task of "building up a bolshevized Chinese Communist Party, a party which
is national in scale and has a broad mass character, a party fully consolidated
ideologically, politically and organizationally".

It is this kind of party that we now want to build, but how shall we go about
it? We cannot answer this question without going into the history of our
Party and of its eighteen years of struggle.

It is fully eighteen years since our First National Congress in 1921. In
these eighteen years our Party has gone through many great struggles. And
the members of the Party, its cadres and organizations, have all tempered
themselves in these great struggles. They have had the experience both of
splendid victories and grave defeats in the revolution. The Party established
a national united front with the bourgeoisie and, with the break-up of this
united front, engaged in a bitter armed struggle with the big bourgeoisie
and its allies. During the last three years, it has again entered into a
period of a national united front with the bourgeoisie. It is through this
kind of complex relationship with the Chinese bourgeoisie that the Chinese
revolution and the Communist Party of China have progressed in their development.
This is a special historical feature, a feature peculiar to the revolution
in colonial and semi-colonial countries and not to be found in the revolutionary
history of any capitalist country. Moreover, since China is a semi-colonial
and semi-feudal country, since her political, economic and cultural development
is uneven, since her economy is predominantly semi-feudal and since her territory
is vast, it follows that the character of the Chinese revolution in its present
stage is bourgeois-democratic, that its principal targets are imperialism
and feudalism and that its basic motive forces are the proletariat, the peasantry
and the urban petty bourgeoisie, with the national bourgeoisie taking part
at certain times and to a certain extent; it also follows that the principal
form of struggle in the Chinese revolution is armed struggle. Indeed, the
history of our Party may be called a history of armed struggle. Comrade Stalin
has said, "In China the armed revolution is fighting the armed
counter-revolution. That is one of the specific features and one of the
advantages of the Chinese revolution."[1] This
is perfectly true. The specific feature peculiar to semi-colonial China is
not present, or is not present in the same way, in the history of the revolutions
led by Communist Parties in the capitalist countries. Thus, there are two
basic specific features in the Chinese bourgeois-democratic revolution: (1)
the proletariat either establishes a revolutionary national united front
with the bourgeoisie, or is forced to break it up; and (2) armed struggle
is the principal form of the revolution. Here we do not describe the Party's
relations with the peasantry and the urban petty bourgeoisie as a basic specific
feature, first, because these relations are in principle the same as those
which confront Communist Parties all over the world, and secondly, because
armed struggle in China is, in essence, peasant war and the Party's relations
with the peasantry and its close relations with the peasant war are one and
the same thing.

It is because of these two basic specific features, in fact precisely because
of them, that the building up and bolshevization of our Party are proceeding
in special circumstances. The Party's failures or successes, its retreats
or advances, its contraction or expansion, its development and consolidation
are inevitably linked up with its relations with the bourgeoisie and with
armed struggle. When the Party takes a correct political line on the question
of forming a united front with the bourgeoisie or of breaking it up when
forced to do so, our Party moves a step forward in its development, consolidation
and bolshevization; but when it takes an incorrect line on its relations
with the bourgeoisie, then our Party moves a step backward. Similarly, when
our Party handles the question of revolutionary armed struggle correctly,
it moves a step forward in its development, consolidation and bolshevization;
but when it handles the question incorrectly, it moves a step backward. Thus,
for eighteen years, the building and bolshevization of the Party have been
closely linked with its political line, with the correct or incorrect handling
of the questions of the united front and armed struggle. This conclusion
is clearly confirmed by the eighteen years of our Party's history. Or conversely,
the more bolshevized the Party, the more correctly can it decide upon its
political line and handle the questions of the united front and armed struggle.
This conclusion, too, is clearly confirmed by the eighteen years of our Party's
history.

Therefore the united front, armed struggle and Party building are the three
fundamental questions for our Party in the Chinese revolution. Having a correct
grasp of these three questions and their interrelations is tantamount to
giving correct leadership to the whole Chinese revolution. We are now able
to draw correct conclusions concerning these three questions by virtue of
our abundant experience in the eighteen years of our Party's history, our
rich and profound experience of failures and successes, retreats and advances,
contraction and expansion. This means that we are now able to handle the
questions of the united front, of armed struggle and of Party building in
a correct way. It also means that our eighteen years of experience have taught
us that the united front, armed struggle and Party building are the Chinese
Communist Party's three "magic weapons", its three principal magic
weapons for defeating the enemy in the Chinese revolution. This is a great
achievement of the Chinese Communist Party and of the Chinese revolution.

Here let us briefly discuss each of the three magic weapons, each of the
three questions.

In the last eighteen years, the united front of the Chinese proletariat with
the bourgeoisie and other classes has developed under three different sets
of circumstances or through three different stages: the First Great Revolution
from 1924 to 1927, the War of Agrarian Revolution from 1927 to 1937, and
the present War of Resistance Against Japan. The history of the three stages
has confirmed the following laws:

  (1) The Chinese national bourgeoisie will take part in the struggle against
  imperialism and the feudal warlords at certain times and to a certain extent,
  because foreign oppression is the greatest oppression to which China is
  subjected. Therefore, at such times, the proletariat should form a united
  front with the national bourgeoisie and maintain it as far as possible. (2)
  In other historical circumstances, the Chinese national bourgeoisie will
  vacillate and defect because of its economic and political flabbiness. Therefore
  the composition of China's revolutionary united front will not remain constant
  at all times, but is liable to change. At one time the national bourgeoisie
  may take part in it, at another it may not. (3) The Chinese big bourgeoisie,
  which is comprador in character, is a class which directly serves imperialism
  and is fostered by it. Hence the comprador Chinese big bourgeoisie has always
  been a target of the revolution. However, different groups within this big
  bourgeoisie are backed by different imperialist powers, so that when
  contradictions among these powers become sharper and when the edge of the
  revolution is mainly directed against a particular power, the big bourgeois
  groups dependent upon the other powers may join the struggle against that
  particular imperialist power to a certain extent and for a certain time.
  At such times, in order to weaken the enemy and add to its own reserves,
  the Chinese proletariat may form a united front with these groups and should
  maintain it as far as possible, provided it is advantageous to the revolution.
  (4) The comprador big bourgeoisie continues to be most reactionary even when
  it joins the united front alongside the proletariat in struggling against
  the common enemy. It stubbornly opposes any ideological, political and
  organizational development of the proletariat and the proletarian party,
  tries to impose restrictions on them and employs disruptive tactics such
  as deception, blandishments, "corrosion" and savage attacks against them;
  moreover, it does all this to prepare for capitulating to the enemy and splitting
  the united front. (5) The peasantry is the firm ally of the proletariat.
  (6) The urban petty bourgeoisie is a reliable ally.


The validity of these laws was confirmed during the First Great Revolution
and the Agrarian Revolution, and it is being confirmed again in the present
War of Resistance. Therefore, in forming a united front with the bourgeoisie
(and especially with the big bourgeoisie), the party of the proletariat must
carry on a stern and resolute struggle on two fronts. On the one hand, it
is necessary to combat the error of neglecting the possibility that the
bourgeoisie may join in the revolutionary struggle at certain times and to
a certain extent. It is an error of "Left" closed-doorism to regard the
bourgeoisie in China as being the same as in the capitalist countries, and
consequently to neglect the policy of forming a united front with the bourgeoisie
and maintaining it for as long as possible. On the other hand, it is also
necessary to combat the error of identifying the programme, policy ideology,
practice, etc. of the proletariat with those of the bourgeoisie, and neglecting
the differences in principle between them. The error here consists in neglecting
the fact that the bourgeoisie (and especially the big bourgeoisie) not only
exerts an influence on the petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry, but does
its utmost to influence the proletariat and the Communist Party in a strenuous
effort to destroy their ideological, political and organizational independence,
turn them into an appendage of the bourgeoisie and its political party, and
ensure that it will reap the fruits of the revolution for itself or its political
party alone; this error also consists in neglecting the fact that the bourgeoisie
(and especially the big bourgeoisie) betrays the revolution whenever the
revolution conflicts with its own selfish interests or with those of its
own political party. To neglect all this is Right opportunism. The characteristic
feature of Chen Tu-hsiu's Right opportunism was that it led the proletariat
to accommodate itself to the selfish interests of the bourgeoisie and its
political party, and this was the subjective cause of the failure of the
First Great Revolution. The dual character of the Chinese bourgeoisie in
the bourgeois-democratic revolution exerts a great effect on our political
line and our Party building, and without grasping this dual character we
cannot have a good grasp of our political line or of Party building. One
important component of the political line of the Chinese Communist Party
is the policy both of unity with the bourgeoisie and of struggle against
it. In fact, the development and tempering of the Party through its unity
and struggle with the bourgeoisie are an important component of Party building.
Unity here means the united front with the bourgeoisie. Struggle here means
the "peaceful" and "bloodless" struggle, ideological, political and
organizational, which goes on when we are united with the bourgeoisie and
which turns into armed struggle when we are forced to break with it. If our
Party does not understand that it must unite with the bourgeoisie in certain
periods, it cannot advance and the revolution cannot develop; if our Party
does not understand that it must wage a stern and resolute "peaceful" struggle
against the bourgeoisie while uniting with it, then our Party will disintegrate
ideologically, politically and organizationally and the revolution will fail;
and if our Party does not wage a stern and resolute armed struggle against
the bourgeoisie when forced to break with it, our Party will likewise
disintegrate and the revolution will likewise fail. The truth of all this
has been confirmed by the events of the past eighteen years.

Armed struggle by the Chinese Communist Party takes the form of peasant war
under proletarian leadership. The history of this armed struggle, too, falls
into three stages. The first was the stage in which we took part in the Northern
Expedition. Our Party had already begun to realize the importance of armed
struggle, but did not understand it fully, it did not understand that armed
struggle was the principal form of struggle in the Chinese revolution. The
second stage was the War of the Agrarian Revolution. By that time our Party
had already built up its own independent armed forces, learned the art of
fighting independently, and established people's political power and base
areas. Our Party was already able to achieve direct or indirect co-ordination
of armed struggle, the principal form of struggle, with many other necessary
forms, that is, to co-ordinate it on a national scale with the workers' struggle,
the peasants' struggle (which was the main thing), the struggle of the youth,
the women and all other sections of the people, the struggle for political
power, the struggles on the economic, the anti-espionage and the ideological
fronts, and other forms of struggle. And this armed struggle was the peasant
agrarian revolution under the leadership of the proletariat. The third stage
is the present stage, the War of Resistance. In this stage we are able to
turn to good account our experience of armed struggle in the first and especially
the second stage, and our experience of co-ordinating armed struggle with
all other necessary forms of struggle. In general, armed struggle at the
present time means guerrilla warfare.[2] What is
guerrilla warfare? It is the indispensable and therefore the best form of
struggle for the people's armed forces to employ over a long period in a
backward country, a large semi-colonial country, in order to inflict defeats
on the armed enemy and build up their own bases. So far both our political
line and our Party building have been closely linked with this form of struggle.
It is impossible to have a good understanding of our political line and,
consequently, of our Party building in isolation from armed struggle, from
guerrilla warfare. Armed struggle is an important component of our political
line. For eighteen years our Party has gradually learned to wage armed struggle
and has persisted in it. We have learned that without armed struggle neither
the proletariat, nor the people, nor the Communist Party would have any standing
at all in China and that it would be impossible for the revolution to triumph.
In these years the development, consolidation and bolshevization of our Party
have proceeded in the midst of revolutionary wars; without armed struggle
the Communist Party would assuredly not be what it is today. Comrades throughout
the Party must never forget this experience for which we have paid in blood.

Similarly, there have been three distinct stages in the building up of the
Party, its development, consolidation and bolshevization.

  The first stage was the Party's infancy. In the early and middle phases of
  this stage the Party's line was correct and the revolutionary zeal both of
  the rank and file and of the cadres was exceedingly high; hence the victories
  in the First Great Revolution. But after all, ours was then still an infant
  Party, it lacked experience concerning the three basic problems of the united
  front, armed struggle and Party building, it did not have much knowledge
  of Chinese history and Chinese society or of the specific features and laws
  of the Chinese revolution, and it lacked a comprehensive understanding of
  the unity between the theory of Marxism-Leninism and the practice of the
  Chinese revolution. Hence in the last phase of this stage, or at the critical
  juncture of this stage, those occupying a dominant position in the Party's
  leading body failed to lead the Party in consolidating the victories of the
  revolution and, as a result, they were deceived by the bourgeoisie and brought
  the revolution to defeat. The Party organizations expanded in this stage
  but they were not consolidated, and they failed to help Party members and
  cadres become firm and stable ideologically and politically. There were plenty
  of new members but they were not given the necessary Marxist-Leninist education.
  There was also abundant experience in work, but it was not summed up properly.
  Many careerists sneaked into the Party, but they were not combed out. The
  Party was caught in a maze of schemes and intrigues both of enemies and of
  allies, but it lacked vigilance. Within the Party, activists came forward
  in great numbers, but they were not turned into the mainstay of the Party
  in good time. The Party had some revolutionary armed units under its command,
  but it was unable to keep a tight grip on them. The reasons for all this
  were inexperience, insufficient depth of revolutionary understanding, and
  ineptitude in integrating the theory of Marxism-Leninism with the practice
  of the Chinese revolution. Such was the first stage of Party building.
  
  The second stage was the War of the Agrarian Revolution. Our Party was able
  to wage a successful agrarian revolutionary struggle for ten years because
  of the experience it had gained in the first stage, because of its better
  understanding of Chinese history and society and of the specific features
  and laws of the Chinese revolution, and because its cadres had a better grasp
  of the theory of Marxism-Leninism and were better able to integrate it with
  the practice of the Chinese revolution. Although the bourgeoisie had turned
  traitor, our Party was able to rely firmly on the peasantry. The Party
  organization not only grew afresh but also became consolidated. Day in day
  out the enemy tried to sabotage our Party, but the Party drove out the saboteurs.
  Once again large numbers of cadres came forward in the Party, and this time
  they became its mainstay. The Party blazed the trail of people's political
  power and thus learned the art of government. The Party created strong armed
  forces and thus learned the art of war. These were momentous advances and
  achievements. Nevertheless, in the course of these great struggles some of
  our comrades sank into the quagmire of opportunism, or did so at least for
  a time, and again the reasons were that they did not learn modestly from
  the experience of the past, did not acquire an understanding of Chinese history
  and society and of the specific features and laws of the Chinese revolution,
  and did not have an understanding of the unity between the theory of
  Marxism-Leninism and the practice of the Chinese revolution. Hence throughout
  this stage certain people who held leading positions in the Party failed
  to adhere to correct political and organizational lines. At one time the
  Party and the revolution were damaged by Comrade Li Li-san's "Left"
  opportunism, at another by "Left" opportunism in the revolutionary war and
  in the work in the White areas. Not until the Tsunyi Meeting (the meeting
  of the Political Bureau at Tsunyi, Kweichow, in January 1935) did the Party
  definitively take the road of bolshevization and lay the foundations for
  its subsequent victory over Chang Kuo-tao's Right opportunism and for the
  establishment of an anti-Japanese national united front. This was the second
  stage in the Party's development.
  
  The third stage is that of the Anti-Japanese National United Front. We have
  been in this stage for three years now and these years of struggle
  are extremely important. Drawing on its experience in the two preceding
  revolutionary stages, on its organizational strength and the strength of
  its armed forces, on its high political prestige among the people of the
  whole country, and on its deeper understanding of the unity between the theory
  of Marxism-Leninism and the practice of the Chinese revolution, our Party
  has not only established the Anti-Japanese National United Front but has
  also been conducting the great War of Resistance Against Japan. Organizationally,
  it has stepped out of its narrow confines and become a major national party.
  Its armed forces are again growing and are becoming still stronger in the
  struggle against the Japanese aggressors. Its influence among the whole people
  is becoming more extensive. These are all great achievements. However, many
  of our new Party members have not yet been given education, many of the new
  organizations have not yet been consolidated, and there is still a vast
  difference between them and the older members and organizations. Many of
  the new Party members and cadres have not yet had sufficient revolutionary
  experience. They still know little or nothing about Chinese history and society
  or about the specific features and laws of the Chinese revolution. Their
  understanding of the unity between the theory of Marxism-Leninism and the
  practice of the Chinese revolution is far from being comprehensive. During
  the expansion of the Party's organizations, a good many careerists and enemy
  saboteurs did succeed in sneaking in despite the fact that the Central Committee
  stressed the slogan "Expand the Party boldly, but do not let a single undesirable
  in". Although the united front was formed and has been maintained for three
  years now, the bourgeoisie, and especially the big bourgeoisie, has constantly
  been trying to destroy our Party, the big bourgeois capitulators and die-hards
  have been instigating serious friction throughout the country, and the
  anti-Communist clamour is incessant. All this is being used by the big bourgeois
  capitulators and die-hards to prepare the way for capitulating to Japanese
  imperialism, breaking up the united front and dragging China backwards.
  Ideologically, the big bourgeoisie is trying to "corrode" communism, whilst
  politically and organizationally it is trying to liquidate the Communist
  Party, the Border Region and the Party's armed forces. In these circumstances
  it is undoubtedly our task to overcome the dangers of capitulation, a split
  and retrogression, to maintain the national united front and Kuomintang-Communist
  co-operation as far as possible, to work for continued resistance to Japan
  and continued unity and progress, and at the same time to prepare against
  all possible eventualities so that in case they occur, the Party and the
  revolution will not suffer unexpected losses. To this end, we must strengthen
  the Party's organization and its armed forces, and mobilize the whole people
  for resolute struggle against capitulation, a split and retrogression. The
  accomplishment of this task depends upon the efforts of the whole Party,
  upon the unrelenting and persistent struggle of all Party members, cadres
  and organizations everywhere and at every level. We are confident that the
  Chinese Communist Party with its eighteen years of experience will be able
  to achieve these objectives by the joint efforts of its experienced older
  members and cadres and its vigorous and youthful newer members and cadres,
  by the joint efforts of its well-tried bolshevized Central Committee and
  its local organizations, and by the joint efforts of its powerful armed forces
  and the progressive masses.


We have set out the principal experiences and principal problems of our Party
in its eighteen years of history.

Our eighteen years of experience show that the united front and armed struggle
are the two basic weapons for defeating the enemy. The united front is a
united front for carrying on armed struggle. And the Party is the heroic
warrior wielding the two weapons, the united front and the armed struggle,
to storm and shatter the enemy's positions. That is how the three are related
to each other.

How are we to build up our Party today? How can we build up "a bolshevized
Chinese Communist Party, a party which is national in scale and has a broad
mass character, a party which is fully consolidated ideologically, politically
and organizationally"? The answer can be found by studying the Party's history,
by studying Party building in Connection with the united front and armed
struggle, in connection with the problem of both uniting and struggling with
the bourgeoisie, and with that of persistence in guerrilla warfare against
Japan by the Eighth Route and the New Fourth Armies and the establishment
of anti-Japanese base areas.

To sum up our eighteen years of experience and our current new, experience
on the basis of our understanding of the unity between the theory of
Marxism-Leninism and the practice of the Chinese revolution, and to spread
this experience throughout the Party, so that our Party becomes as solid
as steel and avoids repeating past mistakes-- such is our task.

NOTES


1. J. V. Stalin, "The Prospects of the Revolution in China",
Works, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1954, Vol. VIII, p. 379.

2. In saying that in general, armed struggle in the Chinese
revolution means guerrilla warfare, Comrade Mao Tse-tung is summing up China's
experience of revolutionary war from the Second Revolutionary Civil War to
the early days of the War of Resistance Against Japan. During the long period
of the Second Revolutionary Civil War, all the armed struggles led by the
Chinese Communist Party took the form of guerrilla warfare. In the latter
phase of that period, as the strength of the Red Army grew, guerrilla warfare
changed into mobile warfare of a guerrilla character which, as Comrade Mao
Tse-tung defines it, is guerrilla warfare on a higher level. But in the War
of Resistance Against Japan, with a different enemy and in different
circumstances, there was a shift back to guerrilla warfare. In the early
days of the anti-Japanese war, those Party comrades who committed the error
of Right opportunism belittled the guerrilla warfare led by the Party and
pinned their hopes on the operations of the Kuomintang army. Comrade Mao
Tse-tung refuted their views in his "Problems of Strategy in Guerrilla War
Against Japan", "On Protracted War" and "Problems of War and Strategy", and
in the present article he gave a theoretical summing-up of the experience
gained in waging the prolonged armed struggle of the Chinese revolution which
took the form of guerrilla warfare. In the latter stage of the anti-Japanese
war, and more particularly in the period of the Third Revolutionary Civil
War (1945--49), guerrilla warfare changed into regular warfare as the main
form of armed struggle under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party,
and this was due to the further growth of the revolutionary forces and the
changes in the enemy's circumstances. The latter stage of the Third Revolutionary
Civil war witnessed a further development, when operations were conducted
by huge formations, which, equipped with heavy arms, were able to storm strongly
fortified enemy positions.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Current Situation and the Party's Tasks







THE CURRENT SITUATION AND THE PARTY'S TASKS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE CURRENT SITUATION AND THE PARTY'S TASKS


October 10, 1939

[This was a decision drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China.]
  

1. The outbreak of the imperialist world war is the result of the
attempt of the imperialist countries to extricate themselves from a new economic
and political crisis. Whether on the German side or the Anglo-French, the
war is unjust, predatory and imperialist in character. The Communist Parties
throughout the world must firmly oppose this war and also the criminal action
of the social-democratic parties in betraying the proletariat by supporting
it. The socialist Soviet Union is persevering as before in its policy of
peace, is maintaining strict neutrality towards both belligerents and, by
sending its armed forces into Poland, has checked the eastward expansion
of the German forces of aggression, strengthened peace in Eastern Europe,
and liberated its brother nations in western Ukraine and Byelorussia from
the oppression of the Polish rulers. The Soviet Union has concluded a number
of pacts with neighbouring countries to prevent any possible attacks by the
forces of international reaction and is endeavouring to restore world peace.

2. The policy of Japanese imperialism in this new international situation
is to concentrate its attacks on China in order to settle the China question,
in preparation for extending its international adventures in the future.
The policy by which it is attempting to settle the China question is as follows:

  (a) With regard to the occupied areas, its policy is to tighten its hold
  on them in preparation for subjugating the whole of China. To do this it
  has to "mop up" the anti-Japanese guerrilla base areas, exploit economic
  resources, set up puppet regimes and break the people's national spirit.

  (b) With regard to China's rear areas, its policy is to launch mainly political
  offensives, supplemented by military offensives. Political offensives mean
  concentration not on launching large scale military attacks but on disrupting
  the anti-Japanese united front, breaking up Kuomintang-Communist co-operation
  and inducing the Kuomintang government to capitulate.


In the present period the enemy is not likely to launch big strategic offensives
like the one against Wuhan, because of the blows dealt by China's heroic
resistance during the past two years and of the inadequacy of his armed strength
and financial resources. In this sense, basically the War of Resistance has
reached the stage of strategic stalemate. And the stage of strategic stalemate
is the stage of preparation for our counter-offensive. But first, when we
say that basically a stalemate has been reached, we do not rule out the
possibility of further offensive campaigns by the enemy; Changsha is now
being attacked and other places may be attacked later. Second, as the possibility
of a stalemate at the front grows, the enemy will intensify his "mopping-up"
operations against our guerrilla base areas. Third, if China should fail
to disrupt the enemy's occupation of the areas he has seized and allow him
to succeed in his attempts to tighten his hold on them and exploit them,
if China should fail to repulse the enemy's political offensives and to persist
in resistance, unity and progress and thus fail to accumulate strength for
the counter-offensive, or if the Kuomintang government should capitulate
of its own accord, then the enemy may still launch bigger offensives. In
other words, the stalemate that has now been reached may still be broken
by the enemy or by the capitulators.

3. The danger of capitulation, a split and retrogression within the anti-Japanese
united front is still the greatest current danger, and the present anti-Communist
and retrogressive actions of the big landlords and the big bourgeoisie continue
to be preparatory steps to their capitulation. In order to build up strength
for the counter-offensive, it is still our task, in co-operation with all
Chinese patriots, to mobilize the masses for the effective application of
the three great political slogans put forward in our Party's Manifesto of
July 7: "Persist in resistance and oppose capitulation", "Persist in unity
and oppose a split", and "Persist in progress and oppose retrogression".
To achieve this objective, behind the enemy lines it is imperative to keep
up guerrilla warfare, defeat the enemy's "mopping-up" operations, disrupt
the enemy's occupation of the areas he has seized, and introduce radical
political and economic changes beneficial to the masses who are resisting
Japan. At the front, it is imperative to sustain military defence and repel
any offensive campaigns the enemy may launch. In China's rear area, it is
imperative to introduce speedy and genuine political reforms, end the
Kuomintang's one-party dictatorship, convene a national assembly truly
representative of the people's will and invested with real power, draw up
and adopt a constitution, and put constitutional government into practice.
Any vacillation or procrastination, any contrary policy, is absolutely wrong.
At the same time the leading bodies of our Party at all levels and all Party
members must exercise more vigilance in the present situation and do their
utmost to achieve the ideological, political and organizational consolidation
of our Party and of the armed forces and organs of political power under
its leadership, in order to be ready for any emergency endangering the Chinese
revolution and to prevent unexpected losses to the Party and the revolution.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Recruit Large Numbers of Intellectuals







RECRUIT LARGE NUMBERS OF INTELLECTUALS [1]



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  RECRUIT LARGE NUMBERS OF INTELLECTUALS [1]


December 1,1939

[This was a decision drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central Committee
of the Chinese Communist Party.]
  

1. In the long and ruthless war of national liberation, in the great struggle
to build a new China, the Communist Party must be good at winning intellectuals,
for only in this way will it be able to organize great strength for the War
of Resistance, organize the millions of peasants, develop the revolutionary
cultural movement and expand the revolutionary united front. Without the
participation of the intellectuals victory in the revolution is impossible.

2. Our Party and our army have made considerable efforts to recruit intellectuals
during the last three years, and many revolutionary intellectuals have been
absorbed into the Party, the army, the organs of government, the cultural
movement and the mass movement, thus broadening the united front; this is
a major achievement. But many of the army cadres are not yet alive to the
importance of the intellectuals, they still regard them with some apprehension
and are even inclined to discriminate against them or shut them out. Many
of our training institutes are still hesitant about enrolling young students
in large numbers. Many of our local Party branches are still reluctant to
let intellectuals join. All this is due to failure to understand the importance
of the intellectuals for the revolutionary cause, the difference between
intellectuals in colonial and semi-colonial countries and those in capitalist
countries and the difference between intellectuals who serve the landlords
and the bourgeoisie and those who serve the working class and the peasantry,
as well as the seriousness of the situation in which the bourgeois political
parties are desperately contending with us for the intellectuals and in which
the Japanese imperialists are also trying in every possible way to buy over
Chinese intellectuals or corrupt their minds; in particular, it is due to
the failure to understand the favourable factor that our Party and our army
have already developed a hard core of well-tested cadres and are thus capable
of leading the intellectuals.

3. From now on attention should therefore be paid to the following:

  (a) All Party organizations in the war areas and all army units led by the
  Party should recruit large numbers of intellectuals into our army, training
  institutes and organs of government. We should use various ways and means
  to recruit all intellectuals who are willing to fight Japan and who are fairly
  loyal, hard-working and able to endure hardship; we should give them political
  education and help them to temper themselves in war and work and to serve
  the army, the government and the masses; and, taking each case on its merits,
  we should admit into the Party those who measure up to the requirements of
  Party membership. As for those who do not qualify or do not wish to join
  the Party, we should have good working relations with them and give them
  guidance in their work with us.

  (b) In applying the policy of recruiting intellectuals in large numbers,
  we must undoubtedly take great care to prevent the infiltration of those
  elements sent in by the enemy and the bourgeois political parties and to
  keep out other disloyal elements. We must be very strict about keeping out
  such elements. Those who have already sneaked into our Party, army or government
  organs must be firmly but discriminatingly combed out on the basis of conclusive
  evidence. But we must not on that account suspect reasonably loyal intellectuals,
  and we must be strictly on guard against the false accusation of innocent
  people by counter-revolutionaries.

  (c) We should assign appropriate work to all intellectuals who are reasonably
  loyal and useful, and we should earnestly give them political education and
  guidance so that in the long course of the struggle they gradually overcome
  their weaknesses, revolutionize their outlook, identify themselves with the
  masses, and merge with the older Party members and cadres and the worker
  and peasant members of the Party.

  (d) The necessity of admitting intellectuals into our work should be brought
  home to those cadres, and especially to certain cadres in the main forces
  of our army, who are opposed to their admission. At the same time, we should
  work effectively to encourage worker and peasant cadres to study hard and
  raise their cultural level. Thus worker and peasant cadres will at the same
  time become intellectuals, while the intellectuals will at the same time
  become workers and peasants.

  (e) In the main the principles stated above are also applicable in the Kuomintang
  areas and in the Japanese-occupied areas, except that, on admitting intellectuals
  into the Party, more attention must be paid to their degree of loyalty, so
  as to ensure still tighter Party organization in those areas. We should maintain
  suitable contact with the huge numbers of non-Party intellectuals who sympathize
  with us and organize them in the great struggle for resistance to Japan and
  for democracy, and in the cultural movement and the work of the united front.


4. All our Party comrades must understand that a correct policy towards the
intellectuals is an important prerequisite for victory in the revolution.
There must be no repetition of the incorrect attitude towards intellectuals
which Party organizations in many localities and army units adopted during
the Agrarian Revolution; the proletariat cannot produce intellectuals of
its own without the help of the existing intellectuals. The Central Committee
hopes that the Party committees at all levels and all Party comrades will
give this matter their serious attention.

NOTES


1. The term "intellectuals" refers to all those who have
had middle school or higher education and those with similar educational
levels. They include university and middle school teachers and staff members,
university and middle school students, primary school teachers, professionals,
engineers and technicians, among whom the university and middle school students
occupy an important position.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese Communist Party







THE CHINESE REVOLUTION AND THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE CHINESE REVOLUTION AND THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY


December 1939

[The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese Communist Party is a
textbook which was written jointly by Comrade Mao Tse-tung and several other
comrades in Yenan to the winter of 1939. The first chapter, "Chinese Society",
was drafted by other comrades and revised by Comrade Mao Tse-tung. The second
chapter, "The Chinese Revolution", was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung
himself. Another chapter, scheduled to deal with "Party Building", was left
unfinished by the comrades working on it. The two published chapters, and
especially Chapter II, have played a great educational role in the Chinese
Communist Party and among the Chinese people. The views on New Democracy
set out by Comrade Mao Tse-tung in Chapter II were considerably developed
in his "On New Democracy", written in January 1940.]
  

CHAPTER I


CHINESE SOCIETY


1. THE CHINESE NATION

China is one of the largest countries in the world, her territory being about
the size of the whole of Europe. In this vast country of ours there are large
areas of fertile land which provide us with food and clothing; mountain ranges
across its length and breadth with extensive forests and rich mineral deposits;
many rivers and lakes which provide us with water transport and irrigation;
and a long coastline which facilitates communication with nations beyond
the seas. From ancient times our forefathers have laboured, lived and multiplied
on this vast territory.

China borders on the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in the northeast,
the northwest and part of the west; the Mongolian People's Republic in the
north; Afghanistan, India, Bhutan and Nepal in the southwest and part of
the west; Burma and Indo-China in the south; and Korea in the east, where
she is also a close neighbor of Japan and the Philippines. China's geographical
setting has its advantages and disadvantages for the Chinese people's revolution.
It is an advantage to be adjacent to the Soviet Union and fairly distant
from the major imperialist countries in Europe and America, and to have many
colonial or semi-colonial countries around us. It is a disadvantage that
Japanese imperialism, making use of its geographical proximity, is constantly
threatening the very existence of all China's nationalities and the Chinese
people's revolution.

China has a population of 450 million, or almost a quarter of the world total.
Over nine-tenths of her inhabitants belong to the Han nationality. There
are also scores of minority nationalities, including the Mongol, Hui, Tibetan,
Uighur, Miao, Yi, Chuang, Chungchia and Korean nationalities, all with long
histories though at different levels of cultural development. Thus China
is a country with a very large population composed of many nationalities.

Developing along the same lines as many other nations of the world, the Chinese
people (here we refer mainly to the Hans) went through many thousands of
years of life in classless primitive communes. Some 4,000 years have gone
by since the collapse of these primitive communes and the transition to class
society, which took the form first of slave and then of feudal society.
Throughout the history of Chinese civilization its agriculture and handicrafts
have been renowned for their high level of development; there have been many
great thinkers, scientists, inventors, statesmen, soldiers, men of letters
and artists, and we have a rich store of classical works. The compass was
invented in China very long ago.[1] The art of
paper-making was discovered as early as 1,800 years
ago.[2] Block-printing was invented 1,300 years
ago,[3] and movable type 800 years
ago.[4] The use of gunpowder was known to the Chinese
before the Europeans.[5] Thus China has one of
the oldest civilizations in the world; she has a recorded history of nearly
4,000 years.

The Chinese nation is known throughout the world not only for its industriousness
and stamina, but also for its ardent love of freedom and its rich revolutionary
traditions. The history of the Han people, for instance, demonstrates that
the Chinese never submit to tyrannical rule but invariably use revolutionary
means to overthrow or change it. In the thousands of years of Han history,
there have been hundreds of peasant uprisings, great and small, against the
dark rule of the landlords and the nobility. And most dynastic changes came
about as a result of such peasant uprisings. All the nationalities of China
have resisted foreign oppression and have invariably resorted to rebellion
to shake it off. They favour a union on the basis of equality but are against
the oppression of one nationality by another. During the thousands of years
of recorded history, the Chinese nation has given birth to many national
heroes and revolutionary leaders. Thus the Chinese nation has a glorious
revolutionary tradition and a splendid historical heritage.

2. THE OLD FEUDAL SOCIETY


Although China is a great nation and although she is a vast country with
an immense population, a long history, a rich revolutionary tradition and
a splendid historical heritage, her economic, political and cultural development
was sluggish for a long time after the transition from slave to feudal society.
This feudal society, beginning with the Chou and Chin Dynasties, lasted about
3,000 years.

The main features of the economic and political system of China's feudal
era were as follows:

(1) A self-sufficient natural economy predominated. The peasants produced
for themselves not only agricultural products but most of the handicraft
articles they needed. What the landlords and the nobility exacted from them
in the form of land rent was also chiefly for private enjoyment and not for
exchange. Although exchange developed as time went on, it did not play a
decisive role in the economy as a whole.

(2) The feudal ruling class composed of landlords, the nobility and the emperor
owned most of the land, while the peasants had very little or none at all.
The peasants tilled the land of the landlords, the nobility and the royal
family with their own farm implements and had to turn over to them for their
private enjoyment 40, 50, 60, 70, or even 80 per cent or more of the crop.
In effect the peasants were still serfs.

(3) Not only did the landlords, the nobility and the royal family live on
rent extorted from the peasants, but the landlord state also exacted tribute,
taxes and corvee services from them to support a horde of government
officials and an army which was used mainly for their repression.

(4) The feudal landlord state was the organ of power protecting this system
of feudal exploitation. While the feudal state was torn apart into rival
principalities in the period before the Chin Dynasty, it became autocratic
and centralized after the first Chin emperor unified China, though some feudal
separatism remained. The emperor reigned supreme in the feudal state, appointing
officials in charge of the armed forces, the law courts, the treasury and
state granaries in all parts of the county and relying on the landed gentry
as the mainstay of the entire system of feudal rule.

It was under such feudal economic exploitation and political oppression that
the Chinese peasants lived like slaves, in poverty and suffering, through
the ages. Under the bondage of feudalism they had no freedom of person. The
landlord had the right to beat, abuse or even kill them at will, and they
had no political rights whatsoever. The extreme poverty and backwardness
of the peasants resulting from ruthless landlord exploitation and oppression
is the basic reason why Chinese society remained at the same stage of
socio-economic development for several thousand years.

The principal contradiction in feudal society was between the peasantry and
the landlord class.

The peasants and the handicraft workers were the basic classes which created
the wealth and culture of this society.

The ruthless economic exploitation and political oppression of the Chinese
peasants forced them into numerous uprisings against landlord rule. There
were hundreds of uprisings, great and small, all of them peasant revolts
or peasant revolutionary wars--from the uprisings of Chen Sheng, Wu Kuang,
Hsiang Yu and Liu Pang [6] in the Chin Dynasty,
those of Hsinshih, Pinglin, the Red Eyebrows, the Bronze Horses
[7] and the Yellow Turbans
[8] in the Han Dynasty, those of Li Mi and Tou
Chien-the [9] in the Sui Dynasty, those of Wang
Hsienchih and Huang Chao [10] in the Tang Dynasty,
those of Sung Chiang and Fang La [11] in the Sung
Dynasty, that of Chu Yuan-chang [12] the Yuan
Dynasty, and that of Li Tzu-cheng [13] in the
Ming Dynasty, down to the uprising known as the War of the Taiping Heavenly
Kingdom in the Ching Dynasty. The scale of peasant uprisings and peasant
wars in Chinese history has no parallel anywhere else. The class struggles
of the peasants, the peasant uprisings and peasant wars constituted the real
motive force of historical development in Chinese feudal society. For each
of the major peasant uprisings and wars dealt a blow to the feudal regime
of the time, and hence more or less furthered the growth of the social productive
forces. However, since neither new productive forces, nor new relations of
production, nor new class forces, nor any advanced political party existed
in those days, the peasant uprisings and wars did not have correct leadership
such as the proletariat and the Communist Party provide today; every peasant
revolution failed, and the peasantry was invariably used by the landlords
and the nobility, either during or after the revolution, as a lever for bringing
about dynastic change. Therefore' although some social progress was made
after each great peasant revolutionary struggle, the feudal economic relations
and political system remained basically unchanged.

It is only in the last hundred years that a change of a different order has
taken place.

3. PRESENT-DAY COLONIAL, SEMI-COLONIAL AND SEMI-FEUDAL
  SOCIETY


As explained above, Chinese society remained feudal for 3,000 years. But
is it still completely feudal today? No, China has changed. After the Opium
War of 1840 China gradually changed into a semi-colonial and semi-feudal
society. Since the Incident of September 18 1931, when the Japanese imperialists
started their armed aggression, China has changed further into a colonial,
semi-colonial and semi-feudal society. We shall now describe the course of
this change.

As discussed in Section 2, Chinese feudal society lasted for about 3,000
years. It was not until the middle of the 19th century, with the penetration
of foreign capitalism, that great changes took place in Chinese society.

As China's feudal society had developed a commodity economy, and so carried
within itself the seeds of capitalism, China would of herself have developed
slowly into a capitalist society even without the impact of foreign capitalism.
Penetration by foreign capitalism accelerated this process. Foreign capitalism
played an important part in the disintegration of China's social economy,
on the one hand it undermined the foundations of her self-sufficient natural
economy and wrecked the handicraft industries both in the cities and in the
peasants' homes, and on the other, it hastened the growth of a commodity
economy in town and country.

Apart from its disintegrating effects on the foundations of China's feudal
economy, this state of affairs gave rise to certain objective conditions
and possibilities for the development of capitalist production in China.
For the destruction of the natural economy created a commodity market for
capitalism, while the bankruptcy of large numbers of peasants and handicraftsmen
provided it with a labour market

In fact, some merchants, landlords and bureaucrats began investing in modern
industry as far back as sixty years ago, in the latter part of the
19th century, under the stimulus of foreign capitalism and because
of certain cracks in the feudal economic structure. About forty years ago,
at the turn of the century, China's national capitalism took its first steps
forward. Then about twenty years ago, during the first imperialist world
war, China's national industry expanded, chiefly in textiles and flour milling,
because the imperialist countries in Europe and America were preoccupied
with the war and temporarily relaxed their oppression of China.

The history of the emergence and development of national capitalism is at
the same time the history of the emergence and development of the Chinese
bourgeoisie and proletariat. Just as a section of the merchants, landlords
and bureaucrats were precursors of the Chinese bourgeoisie, so a section
of the peasants and handicraft workers were the precursors of the Chinese
proletariat. As distinct social classes, the Chinese bourgeoisie and proletariat
are new-born and never existed before in Chinese history. They have evolved
into new social classes from the womb of feudal society. They are twins born
of China's old (feudal) society, at once linked to each other and antagonistic
to each other. However, the Chinese proletariat emerged and grew simultaneously
not only with the Chinese national bourgeoisie but also with the enterprises
directly operated by the imperialists in China. Hence, a very large section
of the Chinese proletariat is older and more experienced than the Chinese
bourgeoisie, and is therefore a greater and more broadly based social force.

However, the emergence and development of capitalism is only one aspect of
the change that has taken place since the imperialist penetration of China.
There is another concomitant and obstructive aspect, namely, the collusion
of imperialism with the Chinese feudal forces to arrest the development of
Chinese capitalism.

It is certainly not the purpose of the imperialist powers invading China
to transform feudal China into capitalist China. On the contrary, their purpose
is to transform China into their own semi-colony or colony.

To this end the imperialist powers have used and continue to use military,
political, economic and cultural means of oppression, so that China has gradually
become a semi-colony and colony. They are as follows:

(1) The imperialist powers have waged many wars of aggression against China,
for instance, the Opium War launched by Britain in 1840, the war launched
by the Anglo-French allied forces in 1857,[14]
the Sino-French War of 1884,[15] the Sino-Japanese
War of 1894, and the war launched by the allied forces of the eight powers
in 1900.[16] After defeating China in war, they
not only occupied many neighbouring countries formerly under her protection,
but seized or "leased" parts of her territory. For instance, Japan occupied
Taiwan and the Penghu Islands and "leased" the port of Lushun, Britain seized
Hongkong and France "leased" Kwangchowwan. In addition to annexing territory,
they exacted huge indemnities. Thus heavy blows were struck at China's huge
feudal empire.

(2) The imperialist powers have forced China to sign numerous unequal treaties
by which they have acquired the right to station land and sea forces and
exercise consular jurisdiction in China, [17]
and they have carved up the whole country into imperialist spheres of influence.
[18]

(3) The imperialist powers have gained control of all the important trading
ports in China by these unequal treaties and have marked off areas in many
of these ports as concessions under their direct
administration.[19] They have also gained control
of China's customs, foreign trade and communications (sea, land, inland water
and air). Thus they have been able to dump their goods in China, turn her
into a market for their industrial products, and at the same time subordinate
her agriculture to their imperialist needs.

(4) The imperialist powers operate many enterprises in both light and heavy
industry in China in order to utilize her raw materials and cheap labour
on the spot, and they thereby directly exert economic pressure on China's
national industry and obstruct the development of her productive forces.

(5) The imperialist powers monopolize China's banking and finance by extending
loans to the Chinese government and establishing banks in China. Thus they
have not only overwhelmed China's national capitalism in commodity competition,
they have also secured a stranglehold on her banking and finance.

(6) The imperialist powers have established a network of comprador and
merchant-usurer exploitation right across China, from the trading ports to
the remote hinterland, and have created a comprador and merchant-usurer class
in their service, so as to facilitate their exploitation of the masses of
the Chinese peasantry and other sections of the people.

(7) The imperialist powers have made the feudal landlord class as well as
the comprador class the main props of their rule in China. Imperialism "first
allies itself with the ruling strata of the previous social structure, with
the feudal lords and the trading and money-lending bourgeoisie, against the
majority of the people. Everywhere imperialism attempts to preserve and to
perpetuate all those pre-capitalist forms of exploitation (especially in
the villages) which serve as the basis for the existence of its reactionary
allies".[20] "Imperialism, with all its financial
and military might, is the force in China that supports, inspires, fosters
and preserves the feudal survivals, together with their entire
bureaucratic-militarist superstructure." [21]

(8) The imperialist powers supply the reactionary government with large
quantities of munitions and a host of military advisers, in order to keep
the warlords fighting among themselves and to suppress the Chinese people.

(9) Furthermore, the imperialist powers have never slackened their efforts
to poison the minds of the Chinese people. This is their policy of cultural
aggression. And it is carried out through missionary work, through establishing
hospitals and schools, publishing newspapers and inducing Chinese students
to study abroad. Their aim is to train intellectuals who will serve their
interests and to dupe the people.

(10) Since September 18, 1931, the large-scale invasion of Japanese imperialism
has turned a big chunk of semi-colonial China into a Japanese colony.

These facts represent the other aspect of the change that has taken place
since the imperialist penetration of China--the blood-stained picture of
feudal China being reduced to semi-feudal, semi-colonial and colonial China.

It is thus clear that in their aggression against China the imperialist powers
have on the one hand hastened the disintegration of feudal society and the
growth of elements of capitalism, thereby transforming a feudal into a
semi-feudal society, and on the other imposed their ruthless rule on China,
reducing an independent country to a semi-colonial and colonial country.

Taking both these aspects together, we can see that China's colonial,
semi-colonial and semi-feudal society possesses the following
characteristics:

(1) The foundations of the self-sufficient natural economy of feudal times
have been destroyed, but the exploitation of the peasantry by the landlord
class, which is the basis of the system of feudal exploitation, not only
remains intact but, linked as it is with exploitation by comprador and usurer
capital, clearly dominates China's social and economic life.

(2) National capitalism has developed to a certain extent and has played
a considerable part in China's political and cultural life but it has not
become the principal pattern in China's social economy, it is flabby and
is mostly associated with foreign imperialism and domestic feudalism in varying
degrees.

(3) The autocratic rule of the emperors and nobility has been overthrown,
and in its place there have arisen first the warlord-bureaucrat rule of the
landlord class and then the joint dictatorship of the landlord class and
the big bourgeoisie. In the occupied areas there is the rule of Japanese
imperialism and its puppets.

(4) Imperialism controls not only China's vital financial and economic arteries
but also her political and military power. In the occupied areas everything
is in the hands of Japanese imperialism.

(5) China's economic, political and cultural development is very uneven,
because she has been under the complete or partial domination of many imperialist
powers, because she has actually been in a state of disunity for a long time,
and because her territory is immense.

(6) Under the twofold oppression of imperialism and feudalism and especially
as a result of the large-scale invasion of Japanese imperialism, the Chinese
people, and particularly the peasants, have become more and more impoverished
and have even been pauperized in large numbers, living in hunger and cold
and without any political rights. The poverty and lack of freedom among the
Chinese people are on a scale seldom found elsewhere.

Such are the characteristics of China's colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal
society.

This situation has in the main been determined by the Japanese and other
imperialist forces; it is the result of the collusion of foreign imperialism
and domestic feudalism.

The contradiction between imperialism and the Chinese nation and the
contradiction between feudalism and the great masses of the people are the
basic contradictions in modern Chinese society. Of course, there are others,
such as the contradiction between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat and
the contradictions within the reactionary ruling classes themselves. But
the contradiction between imperialism and the Chinese nation is the principal
one. These contradictions and their intensification must inevitably result
in the incessant growth of revolutionary movements. The great revolutions
in modern and contemporary China have emerged and grown on the basis of these
basic contradictions.

CHAPTER II


THE CHINESE REVOLUTION


1. THE REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENTS IN THE LAST HUNDRED
  YEARS


The history of China's transformation into a semi-colony and colony by
imperialism in collusion with Chinese feudalism is at the same time a history
of struggle by the Chinese people against imperialism and its lackeys. The
Opium War, the Movement of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom, the Sino-French
War, the Sino-Japanese War, the Reform Movement of 1898, the Yi Ho Tuan Movement,
the Revolution of 1911, the May 4th Movement, the May 30th Movement, the
Northern Expedition, the Agrarian Revolutionary War and the present War of
Resistance Against Japan--all testify to the Chinese people's indomitable
spirit in fighting imperialism and its lackeys.

Thanks to the Chinese people's unrelenting and heroic struggle during the
last hundred years, imperialism has not been able to subjugate China, nor
will it ever be able to do so.

The valiant Chinese people will certainly fight on, even though Japanese
imperialism is now exerting its full strength in an all-out offensive and
many landlord and big bourgeois elements, such as the overt and covert Wang
Ching-weis, have already capitulated to the enemy or are preparing to do
so. This heroic struggle will not cease until the Chinese people have driven
Japanese imperialism out of China and achieved the complete liberation
of the country.

The national revolutionary struggle of the Chinese people has a history of
fully one hundred years counting from the Opium War of 1840, or of thirty
years counting from the Revolution of 1911. It has not yet run its full course,
nor has it yet performed its tasks with any signal success; therefore the
Chinese people, and above all the Communist Party, must shoulder the
responsibility of resolutely fighting on

What are the targets of the revolution? What are its tasks? What are its
motive forces? What is its character? And what are its perspectives? These
are the questions we shall now deal with. 

2. THE TARGETS OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTON


From our analysis in the third section of Chapter I, we know that present-day
Chinese society is a colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal society. Only
when we grasp the nature of Chinese society will we be able clearly to understand
the targets, tasks, motive forces and character of the Chinese revolution
and its perspectives and future transition. A clear understanding of the
nature of Chinese society, that is, of Chinese conditions, is therefore
the key to a clear understanding of all the problems of the revolution.

Since the nature of present-day Chinese society is colonial, semi-colonial
and semi-feudal, what are the chief targets or enemies at this stage of the
Chinese revolution?

They are imperialism and feudalism, the bourgeoisie of the imperialist countries
and the landlord class of our country. For it is these two that are the chief
oppressors, the chief obstacles to the progress of Chinese society at the
present stage. The two collude with each other in oppressing the Chinese
people, and imperialism is the foremost and most ferocious enemy of the Chinese
people, because national oppression by imperialism is the more onerous.

Since Japan's armed invasion of China, the principal enemy of the revolution
has been Japanese imperialism together with all the Chinese traitors and
reactionaries in league with it, whether they have capitulated openly or
are preparing to do so.

The Chinese bourgeoisie, which is also a victim of imperialist oppression,
once led or played a principal role in revolutionary struggles such as the
Revolution of 1911, and has participated in revolutionary struggles such
as the Northern Expedition and the present War of Resistance Against Japan.
In the long period from 1927 to 1937, however, its upper stratum, namely,
the section represented by the reactionary clique within the Kuomintang,
collaborated with imperialism, formed a reactionary alliance with the landlord
class, betrayed the friends who had helped it--the Communist Party, the
proletariat, the peasantry and other sections of the petty bourgeoisie--betrayed
the Chinese revolution and brought about its defeat. At that time therefore,
the revolutionary people and the revolutionary political party (the Communist
Party) could not but regard these bourgeois elements as one of the targets
of the revolution. In the War of Resistance a section of the big landlord
class and big bourgeoisie, represented by Wang Ching-wei, has turned traitor
and deserted to the enemy. Consequently, the anti-Japanese people cannot
but regard these big bourgeois elements who have betrayed our national interests
as one of the targets of the revolution.

It is evident, then, that the enemies of the Chinese revolution are very
powerful. They include not only powerful imperialists and powerful feudal
forces, but also, at times, the bourgeois reactionaries who collaborate with
the imperialist and feudal forces to oppose the people. Therefore, it is
wrong to underestimate the strength of the enemies of the revolutionary Chinese
people.

In the face of such enemies, the Chinese revolution cannot be other than
protracted and ruthless. With such powerful enemies, the revolutionary forces
cannot be built up and tempered into a power capable of crushing them except
over a long period of time. With enemies who so ruthlessly suppress the Chinese
revolution, the revolutionary forces cannot hold their own positions, let
alone capture those of the enemy, unless they steel themselves and display
their tenacity to the full. It is therefore wrong to think that the forces
of the Chinese revolution can be built up in the twinkling of an eye, or
that China's revolutionary struggle can triumph overnight.

In the face of such enemies, the principal means or form of the Chinese
revolution must be armed struggle, not peaceful struggle. For our enemies
have made peaceful activity impossible for the Chinese people and have deprived
them of all political freedom and democratic rights. Stalin says, "In China
the armed revolution is fighting the armed counter-revolutionary. That is
one of the specific features and one of the advantages of the Chinese
revolution."[22] This formulation is perfectly
correct. Therefore, it is wrong to belittle armed struggle, revolutionary
war, guerrilla war and army work.

In the face of such enemies, there arises the question of revolutionary base
areas. Since China's key cities have long been occupied by the powerful
imperialists and their reactionary Chinese allies, it is imperative for the
revolutionary ranks to turn the backward villages into advanced, consolidated
base areas, into great military, political, economic and cultural bastions
of the revolution from which to fight their vicious enemies who are using
the cities for attacks on the rural districts, and in this way gradually
to achieve the complete victory of the revolution through protracted fighting;
it is imperative for them to do so if they do not wish to compromise with
imperialism and its lackeys but are determined to fight on, and if they intend
to build up and temper their forces, and avoid decisive battles with a powerful
enemy while their own strength is inadequate. Such being the case, victory
in the Chinese revolution can be won first in the rural areas and this is
possible because China's economic development is uneven (her economy not
being a unified capitalist economy), because her territory is extensive (which
gives the revolutionary forces room to manoeuvre), because the
counter-revolutionary camp is disunited and full of contradictions, and because
the struggle of the peasants who are the main force in the revolution is
led by the Communist Party, the party of the proletariat; but on the other
hand, these very circumstances make the revolution uneven and render the
task of winning complete victory protracted and arduous. Clearly then the
protracted revolutionary struggle in the revolutionary base areas consists
mainly in peasant guerrilla warfare led by the Chinese Communist Party.
Therefore, it is wrong to ignore the necessity of using rural districts as
revolutionary base areas, to neglect painstaking work among the peasants,
and to neglect guerrilla warfare.

However, stressing armed struggle does not mean abandoning other forms of
struggle; on the contrary, armed struggle cannot succeed unless co-ordinated
with other forms of struggle. And stressing the work in the rural base areas
does not mean abandoning our work in the cities and in the other vast rural
areas which are still under the enemy's rule; on the contrary, without the
work in the cities and in these other rural areas, our own rural base areas
would be isolated and the revolution would suffer defeat. Moreover, the final
objective of the revolution is the capture of the cities, the enemy's main
bases, and this objective cannot be achieved without adequate work in the
cities.

It is thus clear that the revolution cannot triumph either in the rural areas
or in the cities without the destruction of the enemy's army, its chief weapon
against the people. Therefore, besides annihilating the enemy's troops in
battle, there is the important task of disintegrating them.

It is also clear that the Communist Party must not be impetuous and adventurist
in its propaganda and organizational work in the urban and rural areas which
have been occupied by the enemy and dominated by the forces of reaction and
darkness for a long time but that it must have well-selected cadres working
underground, must accumulate strength and bide its time there. In leading
the people in struggle against the enemy, the Party must adopt the tactics
of advancing step by step slowly and surely, keeping to the principle of
waging struggles on just grounds, to our advantage, and with restraint, and
making use of such open forms of activity as are permitted by law, decree
and social custom; empty clamour and reckless action can never lead to success.


3. THE TASKS OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION


Imperialism and the feudal landlord class being the chief enemies of the
Chinese revolution at this stage, what are the present tasks of the revolution?

Unquestionably, the main tasks are to strike at these two enemies, to carry
out a national revolution to overthrow foreign imperialist oppression and
a democratic revolution to overthrow feudal landlord oppression, the primary
and foremost task being the national revolution to overthrow imperialism.

These two great tasks are interrelated. Unless imperialist rule is overthrown,
the rule of the feudal landlord class cannot be terminated, because imperialism
is its main support. Conversely, unless help is given to the peasants in
their struggle to overthrow the feudal landlord class, it will be impossible
to build powerful revolutionary contingents to overthrow imperialist rule,
because the feudal landlord class is the main social base of imperialist
rule in China and the peasantry is the main force in the Chinese revolution.
Therefore the two fundamental tasks, the national revolution and the democratic
revolution, are at once distinct and united.

In fact, the two revolutionary tasks are already linked, since the main immediate
task of the national revolution is to resist the Japanese imperialist invaders
and since the democratic revolution must be accomplished in order to win
the war. It is wrong to regard the national revolution and the democratic
revolution as two entirely different stages of the revolution.

4. THE MOTIVE FORCES OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION


Given the nature of Chinese society and the present targets and tasks of
the Chinese revolution as analysed and defined above, what are the motive
forces of the Chinese revolution?

Since Chinese society is colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal, since the
targets of the revolution are mainly foreign imperialist rule and domestic
feudalism, and since its tasks are to overthrow these two oppressors, which
of the various classes and strata in Chinese society constitute the forces
capable of fighting them? This is the question of the motive forces of the
Chinese revolution at the present stage. A clear understanding of this question
is indispensable to a correct solution of the problem of the basic tactics
of the Chinese revolution.

What classes are there in present-day Chinese society? There are the landlord
class and the bourgeoisie, the landlord class and the upper stratum of the
bourgeoisie constituting the ruling classes in Chinese society. And there
are the proletariat, the peasantry, and the different sections of the petty
bourgeoisie other than the peasantry, all of which are still the subject
classes in vast areas of China.

The attitude and the stand of these classes towards the Chinese revolution
are entirely determined by their economic status in society. Thus the motive
forces as well as the targets and tasks of the revolution are determined
by the nature of China's socio-economic system.

Let us now analyse the different classes in Chinese society.

1. The Landlord Class


The landlord class forms the main social base for imperialist rule in China;
it is a class which uses the feudal system to exploit and oppress the peasants,
obstructs China's political, economic and cultural development and plays
no progressive role whatsoever.

Therefore, the landlords, as a class, are a target and not a motive force
of the revolution.

In the present War of Resistance a section of the big landlords, along with
one section of the big bourgeoisie (the capitulationists), has surrendered
to the Japanese aggressors and turned traitor, while another section of the
big landlords, along with another section of the big bourgeoisie (the die-hards),
is increasingly wavering even though it is still in the anti-Japanese camp.
But a good many of the enlightened gentry who are middle and small landlords
and who have some capitalist colouration display some enthusiasm for the
war, and we should unite with them in the common fight against Japan,

2. The Bourgeoisie


There is a distinction between the comprador big bourgeoisie and the national
bourgeoisie.

The comprador big bourgeoisie is a class which directly serves the capitalists
of the imperialist countries and is nurtured by them; countless ties link
it closely with the feudal forces in the countryside. Therefore, it is a
target of the Chinese revolution and never in the history of the revolution
has it been a motive force.

However, different sections of the comprador big bourgeoisie owe allegiance
to different imperialist powers, so that when the contradictions among the
latter become very acute and the revolution is directed mainly against one
particular imperialist power, it becomes possible for the sections of the
comprador class which serve other imperialist groupings to join the current
anti-imperialist front to a certain extent and for a certain period. But
they will turn against the Chinese revolution the moment their masters do.

In the present war the pro-Japanese big bourgeoisie (the capitulationists)
have either surrendered or are preparing to surrender. The pro-European and
pro-American big bourgeoisie (the die-hards) are wavering more and more,
even though they are still in the anti-Japanese camp, and they are playing
the double game of simultaneously resisting Japan and opposing the Communist
Party. Our policy towards the big bourgeois capitulationists is to treat
them as enemies and resolutely strike them down. Towards the big bourgeois
die-hards, we employ a revolutionary dual policy; on the one hand, we unite
with them because they are still anti-Japanese and we should make use of
their contradictions with Japanese imperialism, but on the other hand, we
firmly struggle against them because they pursue a high-handed anti-Communist,
reactionary policy detrimental to resistance and unity, both of which would
be jeopardized without such a struggle.

The national bourgeoisie is a class with a dual character.

On the one hand, it is oppressed by imperialism and fettered by feudalism
and consequently is in contradiction with both of them. In this respect it
constitutes one of the revolutionary forces. In the course of the Chinese
revolution it has displayed a certain enthusiasm for fighting imperialism
and the governments of bureaucrats and warlords.

But on the other hand, it lacks the courage to oppose imperialism and feudalism
thoroughly because it is economically and politically flabby and still has
economic ties with imperialism and feudalism. This emerges very clearly when
the people's revolutionary forces grow powerful.

It follows from the dual character of the national bourgeoisie that, at certain
times and to a certain extent, it can take part in the revolution against
imperialism and the governments of bureaucrats and warlords and can become
a revolutionary force, but that at other times there is the danger of its
following the comprador big bourgeoisie and acting as its accomplice in
counter-revolution.

The national bourgeoisie in China, which is mainly the middle bourgeoisie,
has never really held political power but has been restricted by the reactionary
policies of the big landlord class and big bourgeoisie which are in power,
although it followed them in opposing the revolution in the period from 1927
to 1931 (before the September 18th Incident). In the present war, it differs
not only from the capitulationists of the big landlord class and big bourgeoisie
but also from the big bourgeois die-hards, and so far has been a fairly good
any of ours. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to have a prudent policy
towards the national bourgeoisie.

3. The Different Sections of the Petty Bourgeoisie Other than the
  Peasantry


The petty bourgeoisie, other than the peasantry, consists of the vast numbers
of intellectuals, small trades men, handicraftsmen and professional people.

Their status somewhat resembles that of the middle peasants, they all suffer
under the oppression of imperialism, feudalism and the big bourgeoisie, and
they are being driven ever nearer to bankruptcy or destitution.

Hence these sections of the petty bourgeoisie constitute one of the motive
forces of the revolution and are a reliable ally of the proletariat. Only
under the leadership of the proletariat can they achieve their liberation.

Let us now analyse the different sections of the petty bourgeoisie other
than the peasantry.

First, the intellectuals and student youth. They do not constitute a separate
class or stratum. In present-day China most of them may be placed in the
petty-bourgeois category, judging by their family origin, their living conditions
and their political outlook. Their numbers have grown considerably during
the past few decades. Apart from that section of the intellectuals which
has associated itself with the imperialists and the big bourgeoisie and works
for them against the people, most intellectuals and students are oppressed
by imperialism, feudalism and the big bourgeoisie, and live in fear of
unemployment or of having to discontinue their studies. Therefore, they tend
to be quite revolutionary. They are more or less equipped with bourgeois
scientific knowledge, have a keen political sense and often play a vanguard
role or serve as a link with the masses in the present stage of the revolution.
The movement of the Chinese students abroad before the Revolution of 1911,
the May 4th Movement of 1919, the May 30th Movement of 1925 and the December
9th Movement of 1935 are striking proofs of this. In particular, the large
numbers of more or less impoverished intellectuals can join hands with the
workers and peasants in supporting or participating in the revolution. In
China, it was among the intellectuals and young students that Marxist-Leninist
ideology was first widely disseminated and accepted. The revolutionary forces
cannot be successfully organized and revolutionary work cannot be successfully
conducted without the participation of revolutionary intellectuals. But the
intellectuals often tend to be subjective and individualistic, impractical
in their thinking and irresolute in action until they have thrown themselves
heart and soul into mass revolutionary struggles, or made up their minds
to serve the interests of the masses and become one with them. Hence although
the mass of revolutionary intellectuals in China can play a vanguard role
or serve as a link with the masses, not all of them will remain revolutionaries
to the end. Some will drop out of the revolutionary ranks at critical moments
and become passive, while a few may even become enemies of the revolution.
The intellectuals can overcome their shortcomings only in mass struggles
over a long period.

Second, the small tradesmen. Generally they run small shops and employ few
or no assistants. They live under the threat of bankruptcy as a result of
exploitation by imperialism, the big bourgeoisie and the usurers.

Third, the handicraftsmen. They are very numerous. They possess their own
means of production and hire no workers, or only one or two apprentices or
helpers. Their position is similar to that of the middle peasants.

Fourth, professional people. They include doctors and men of other professions.
They do not exploit other people, or do so only to a slight degree. Their
position is similar to that of the handicraftsmen.

These sections of the petty bourgeoisie make up a vast multitude of people
whom we must win over and whose interests we must protect because in general
they can support or join the revolution and are good allies. Their weakness
is that some of them are easily influenced by the bourgeoisie; consequently,
we must carry on revolutionary propaganda and organizational work among them.

4. The Peasantry


The peasantry constitutes approximately 80 per cent of China's total population
and is the main force in her national economy today.

A sharp process of polarization is taking place among the peasantry.

First, the rich peasants. They form about 5 per cent of the rural population
(or about 10 per cent together with the landlords) and constitute the rural
bourgeoisie. Most of the rich peasants in China are semi-feudal in character,
since they let a part of their land, practice usury and ruthlessly exploit
the farm labourers. But they generally engage in labour themselves and in
this sense are part of the peasantry. The rich-peasant form of production
will remain useful for a definite period. Generally speaking, they might
make some contribution to the anti-imperialist struggle of the peasant masses
and stay neutral in the agrarian revolutionary struggle against the landlords.
Therefore we should not regard the rich peasants as belonging to the same
class as the landlords and should not prematurely adopt a policy of liquidating
the rich peasantry.

Second, the middle peasants. They form about 20 per cent of China's rural
population. They are economically self-supporting (they may have something
to lay aside when the crops are good, and occasionally hire some labour or
lend small sums of money at interest); and generally they do not exploit
others but are exploited by imperialism, the landlord class and the bourgeoisie.
They have no political rights. Some of them do not have enough land, and
only a section (the well-to-do middle peasants) have some surplus land. Not
only can the middle peasants join the anti-imperialist revolution and the
Agrarian Revolution, but they can also accept socialism. Therefore the whole
middle peasantry can be a reliable ally of the proletariat and is an important
motive force of the revolution. The positive or negative attitude of the
middle peasants is one of the factors determining victory or defeat in the
revolution, and this is especially true after the agrarian revolution when
they become the majority of the rural population.

Third, the poor peasants. The poor peasants in China, together with the farm
labourers, form about 70 per cent of the rural population. They are the broad
peasant masses with no land or insufficient land, the semi-proletariat of
the countryside, the biggest motive force of the Chinese revolution, the
natural and most reliable ally of the proletariat and the main contingent
of China's revolutionary forces. Only under the leadership of the proletariat
can the poor and middle peasants achieve their liberation, and only by forming
a firm alliance with the poor and middle peasants can the proletariat lead
the revolution to victory. Otherwise neither is possible. The term
"peasantry" refers mainly to the poor and middle peasants.

  
  5. The Proletariat


Among the Chinese proletariat, the modern industrial workers number from
2,500,000 to 3,000,000, the workers in small-scale industry and in handicrafts
and the shop assistants in the cities total about 12,000,000, and in addition
there are great numbers of rural proletarians (the farm labourers) and other
propertyless people in the cities and the countryside.

In addition to the basic qualities it shares with the proletariat everywhere--its
association with the most advanced form of economy, its strong sense of
organization and discipline and its lack of private means of production--the
Chinese proletariat has many other outstanding qualities.

What are they?

First, the Chinese proletariat is more resolute and thoroughgoing in
revolutionary struggle than any other class because it is subjected to a
threefold oppression (imperialist, bourgeois and feudal) which is marked
by a severity and cruelty seldom found in other countries. Since there is
no economic basis for social reformism in colonial and semi-colonial China
as there is in Europe, the whole proletariat, with the exception of a few
scabs, is most revolutionary.

Secondly, from the moment it appeared on the revolutionary scene, the Chinese
proletariat came under the leadership of its own revolutionary party--the
Communist Party of China--and became the most politically conscious class
in Chinese society.

Thirdly, because the Chinese proletariat by origin is largely made up of
bankrupted peasants, it has natural ties with the peasant masses, which
facilitates its forming a close alliance with them.

Therefore, in spite of certain unavoidable weaknesses, for instance, its
smallness (as compared with the peasantry), its youth (as compared with the
proletariat in the capitalist countries) and its low educational level (as
compared with the bourgeoisie), the Chinese proletariat is nonetheless the
basic motive force of the Chinese revolution. Unless it is led by the
proletariat, the Chinese revolution cannot possibly succeed. To take an example
from the past, the Revolution of 1911 miscarried because the proletariat
did not consciously participate in it and the Communist Party was not yet
in existence. More recently, the revolution of 1924-27 achieved great success
for a time because the proletariat consciously participated and exercised
leadership and the Communist Party was already in existence; it ended in
defeat because the big bourgeoisie betrayed its alliance with the proletariat
and abandoned the common revolutionary programme, and also because the Chinese
proletariat and its political party did not yet have enough revolutionary
experience. Now take the present anti-Japanese war--because the proletariat
and the Communist Party are exercising leadership in the Anti-Japanese National
United Front, the whole nation has been united and the great War of Resistance
has been launched and is being resolutely pursued.

The Chinese proletariat should understand that although it is the class with
the highest political consciousness and sense of organization, it cannot
win victory by its own strength alone. In order to win, it must unite, according
to varying circumstances, with all classes and strata that can take part
in the revolution, and must organize a revolutionary united front. Among
all the classes in Chinese society, the peasantry is a firm ally of the working
class, the urban petty bourgeoisie is a reliable ally, and the national
bourgeoisie is an ally in certain periods and to a certain extent. This is
one of the fundamental laws established by China's modern revolutionary history.

6. The Vagrants


China's status as a colony and semi-colony has given rise to a multitude
of rural and urban unemployed. Denied proper means of making a living, many
of them are forced to resort to illegitimate ones, hence the robbers, gangsters,
beggars and prostitutes and the numerous people who live on superstitious
practices. This social stratum is unstable; while some are apt to be bought
over by the reactionary forces, others may join the revolution. These people
lack constructive qualities and are given to destruction rather than
construction; after joining the revolution, they become a source of roving-rebel
and anarchist ideology in the revolutionary ranks. Therefore, we should know
how to remould them and guard against their destructiveness.

The above is our analysis of the motive forces of the Chinese revolution.


5. THE CHARACTER OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION


We have now gained an understanding of the nature of Chinese society, i.e.,
of the specific conditions in China; this understanding is the essential
prerequisite for solving all China's revolutionary problems. We are also
clear about the targets, the tasks and the motive forces of the Chinese
revolution; these are basic issues at the present stage of the revolution
and arise from the special nature of Chinese society, i.e., from
China's specific conditions. Understanding all this, we can now understand
another basic issue of the revolution at the present stage, i.e., the
character of the Chinese revolution.

What, indeed, is the character of the Chinese revolution at the present stage?
Is it a bourgeois-democratic or a proletarian-socialist revolution? Obviously,
it is not the latter but the former.

Since Chinese society is colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal, since the
principal enemies of the Chinese revolution are imperialism and feudalism,
since the tasks of the revolution are to overthrow these two enemies by means
of a national and democratic revolution in which the bourgeoisie sometimes
takes part, and since the edge of the revolution is directed against imperialism
and feudalism and not against capitalism and capitalist private property
in general even if the big bourgeoisie betrays the revolution and becomes
its enemy -- since all this is true, the character of the Chinese revolution
at the present stage is not proletarian-socialist but
bourgeois-democratic.[23]

However, in present-day China the bourgeois-democratic revolution is no longer
of the old general type, which is now obsolete, but one of a new special
type. We call this type the new-democratic revolution and it is developing
in all other colonial and semi-colonial countries as well as in China. The
new-democratic revolution is part of the world proletarian-socialist revolution,
for it resolutely opposes imperialism, i.e., international capitalism.
Politically, it strives for the joint dictatorship of the revolutionary classes
over the imperialists, traitors and reactionaries, and opposes the transformation
of Chinese society into a society under bourgeois dictatorship. Economically,
it aims at the nationalization of all the big enterprises and capital of
the imperialists, traitors and reactionaries, and the distribution among
the peasants of the land held by the landlords, while preserving private
capitalist enterprise in general and not eliminating the rich-peasant economy.
Thus, the new type of democratic revolution clears the way for capitalism
on the one hand and creates the prerequisites for socialism on the other.
The present stage of the Chinese revolution is a stage of transition between
the abolition of the colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal society and
the establishment of a socialist society, i.e., it is a process
of new-democratic revolution. This process, begun only after the First World
War and the Russian October Revolution, started in China with the May 4th
Movement of 1919. A new-democratic revolution is an anti-imperialist and
anti-feudal revolution of the broad masses of the people under the leadership
of the proletariat. Chinese society can advance to socialism only through
such a revolution; there is no other way.

The new-democratic revolution is vastly different from the democratic revolutions
of Europe and America in that it results not in a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie
but in a dictatorship of the united front of all the revolutionary classes
under the leadership of the proletariat. In the present War of Resistance,
the anti-Japanese democratic political power established in the base areas
which are under the leadership of the Communist Party is the political power
of the Anti-Japanese National United Front; this is neither a bourgeois nor
a proletarian one-class dictatorship, but a joint dictatorship of the
revolutionary classes under the leadership of the proletariat. All who stand
for resistance to Japan and for democracy are entitled to share in this political
power, regardless of their party affiliation.

The new-democratic revolution also differs from a socialist revolution in
that it overthrows the rule of the imperialists, traitors and reactionaries
in China but does not destroy any section of capitalism which is capable
of contributing to the anti-imperialist, anti-feudal struggle.

The new-democratic revolution is basically in line with the revolution envisaged
in the Three People's Principles as advocated by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in 1924.
In the Manifesto of the First National Congress of the Kuomintang issued
in that year, Dr. Sun stated:

  The so-called democratic system in modern states is usually monopolized by
  the bourgeoisie and has become simply an instrument for oppressing the common
  people. On the other hand the Kuomintang's Principle of Democracy means a
  democratic system shared by all the common people and not privately owned
  by the few.


He added:

  Enterprises, such as banks, railways and airlines, whether Chinese-owned
  or foreign-owned, which are either monopolistic in character or too big for
  private management, shall be operated and administrated by the state, so
  that private capital cannot dominate the livelihood of the people: this is
  the main principle of the regulation of capital.


And again in his Testament, Dr. Sun pointed out the fundamental principle
for domestic and foreign policy: "We must arouse the masses of the people
and unite in a common struggle with those nations of the world which treat
us as equals." The Three People's Principles of the old democracy, which
were adapted to the old international and domestic conditions, were thus
reshaped into the Three People's Principles of New Democracy, which are adapted
to the new international and domestic conditions. The Communist Party of
China was referring to the latter kind of Three People's Principles and to
no other when, in its Manifesto of September 22, 1937, it declared that "the
Three People's Principles being what China needs today, our Party is ready
to fight for their complete realization". These Three People's Principles
embody Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Three Great Policies--alliance with Russia, co-operation
with the Communist Party and assistance to the peasants and workers. In the
new international and domestic conditions, any kind of Three People's Principles
which departs from the Three Great Policies is not revolutionary. (Here we
shall not deal with the fact that, while communism and the Three People's
Principles agree on the basic political programme for the democratic revolution,
they differ in all other respects.)

Thus, the role of the proletariat, the peasantry and the other sections of
the petty bourgeoisie in China's bourgeois-democratic revolution cannot be
ignored, either in the alignment of forces for the struggle (that is, in
the united front) or in the organization of state power. Anyone who tries
to bypass these classes will certainly be unable to solve the problem of
the destiny of the Chinese nation or indeed any of China's problems. The
Chinese revolution at the present stage must strive to create a democratic
republic in which the workers, the peasants and the other sections of the
petty bourgeoisie all occupy a definite position and play a definite role.
In other words, it must be a democratic republic based on a revolutionary
alliance of the workers' peasants, urban petty bourgeoisie and all others
who are against imperialism and feudalism. Only under the leadership of the
proletariat can such a republic be completely realized.

6. THE PERSPECTIVES OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION


Now that the basic issues--the nature of Chinese society and the targets,
tasks, motive forces and character of the Chinese revolution at the present
stage--have been clarified, it is easy to see its perspectives, that is,
to understand the relation between the bourgeois-democratic and the
proletarian-socialist revolution, or between the present and future stages
of the Chinese revolution.

There can be no doubt that the ultimate perspective of the Chinese revolution
is not capitalism but socialism and communism, since China's bourgeois-democratic
revolution at the present stage is not of the old general type but is a
democratic revolution of a new special type-- a new-democratic revolution--and
since it is taking place in the new international environment of the Nineteen
Thirties and Forties characterized by the rise of socialism and the decline
of capitalism, in the period of the Second World War and the era of revolution.

However, it is not at all surprising but entirely to be expected that a
capitalist economy will develop to a certain extent within Chinese society
with the sweeping away of the obstacles to the development of capitalism
after the victory of the revolution, since the purpose of the Chinese revolution
at the present stage is to change the existing colonial, semi-colonial and
semi-feudal state of society, i.e., to strive for the completion
of the new-democratic revolution. A certain degree of capitalist development
will be an inevitable result of the victory of the democratic revolution
in economically backward China. But that will be only one aspect of the outcome
of the Chinese revolution and not the whole picture. The whole picture will
show the development of socialist as well as capitalist factors. What will
the socialist factors be? The increasing relative importance of the proletariat
and the Communist Party among the political forces in the country; leadership
by the proletariat and the Communist Party which the peasantry, intelligentsia
and the urban petty bourgeoisie already accept or are likely to accept; and
the state sector of the economy owned by the democratic republic, and the
co-operative sector of the economy owned by the working people. All these
will be socialist factors. With the addition of a favourable international
environment, these factors render it highly probable that China's
bourgeois-democratic revolution will ultimately avoid a capitalist future
and enjoy a socialist future.

7. THE TWOFOLD TASK OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION AND THE CHINESE
  COMMUNIST PARTY


Summing up the foregoing sections of this chapter, we can see that the Chinese
revolution taken as a whole involves a twofold task. That is to say, it embraces
both the bourgeois-democratic revolution (the new-democratic revolution)
and the proletarian-socialist revolution, i.e., both the present
and future stages of the revolution. The leadership in this twofold revolutionary
task devolves on the Chinese Communist Party, the party of the proletariat,
without whose leadership no revolution can succeed.

To complete China's bourgeois-democratic revolution (the new-democratic
revolution) and to transform it into a socialist revolution when all the
necessary conditions are ripe--such is the sum total of the great and glorious
revolutionary task of the Chinese Communist Party. Every Party member must
strive for its accomplishment and must under no circumstances give up halfway.
Some immature Communists think that our task is confined to the present
democratic revolution and does not include the future socialist revolution,
or that the present revolution or the Agrarian Revolution is actually a socialist
revolution. It must be emphatically pointed out that these views are wrong.
Every Communist ought to know that, taken as a whole, the Chinese revolutionary
movement led by the Communist Party embraces the two stages, i.e., the
democratic and the socialist revolutions, which are two essentially different
revolutionary processes, and that the second process can be carried through
only after the first has been completed. The democratic revolution is the
necessary preparation for the socialist revolution, and the socialist revolution
is the inevitable sequel to the democratic revolution. The ultimate aim for
which all communists strive is to bring about a socialist and communist society.
A clear understanding of both the differences and the interconnections between
the democratic and the socialist revolutions is indispensable to correct
leadership in the Chinese revolution.

Except for the Communist Party, no political party (bourgeois or petty-bourgeois)
is equal to the task of leading China's two great revolutions, the democratic
and the socialist revolutions, to complete fulfilment. From the very day
of its birth, the Communist Party has taken this twofold task on its own
shoulders and for eighteen years has fought strenuously for its accomplishment.

It is a task at once glorious and arduous. And it cannot be accomplished
without a bolshevized Chinese Communist Party which is national in scale
and has a broad mass character, a party fully consolidated ideologically,
politically and organizationally. Therefore every Communist has the duty
of playing an active part in building up such a Communist Party.

NOTES


1. With reference to the invention of the compass, the
magnetic power of the loadstone was mentioned as early as the 3rd century
BC by Lu Pu-wei in his Almanac, and at the beginning of the 1st
century AD, Wang Chung, the materialist philosopher, observed in his Lun
Heng that the loadstone points to the south, which indicates that magnetic
polarity was known by then. Works of travel written at the beginning of the
12th century show that the compass was already in general
use among Chinese navigators at that time.

2. It is recorded in ancient documents that Tsai Lun, a
eunuch of the Eastern Han Dynasty (AD 25-220), invented paper, which he had
made from bark, hemp, rags and worn-out fishing nets. In AD 105 (the last
year of the reign of Emperor Ho Ti), Tsai Lun presented his invention to
the emperor, and subsequently this method of making paper from plant fibre
gradually spread in China.

3. Block-printing was invented about A.D. 600, in the Sui
Dynasty.

4. Movable type was invented by Pi Sheng in the Sung Dynasty
between 1041 and 1048.

5. According to tradition, gunpowder was invented in China
in the 9th century and by the 11th century it was already
in use for firing cannon.

6. Chen Sheng, Wu Kuang, Hsian Yu and Liu Pang were leaders
of the first great peasant uprising in the Chin Dynasty. In 209 B.C. Chen
Sheng and Wu Kuang, who were among nine hundred conscripts on their way to
take up garrison duty at a frontier post, organized a revolt in Chihsien
County (now Suhsien County in Anhwei Province) against the tyranny of the
Chin Dynasty. Hsiang Yu and Liu Pang were the most prominent of those who
rose in response to this armed uprising all over the country. Hsiang Yu's
army annihilated the main forces of Chin, and Liu Pang's troops took Chin's
capital. In the ensuing struggle between Liu Pang and Hsiang Yu, Liu Pang
defeated Hsiang Yu and founded the Han Dynasty.

7. The Hsinshih, the Pinglin, the Red Eyebrows and the
Bronze Horses are the names of peasant uprisings in the latter years of the
Western Han Dynasty when peasant unrest was widespread. In A.D. 8, Wang Mang
overthrew the reigning dynasty, ascended the throne and introduced a few
reforms to stave off the peasant unrest. But the starving masses in Hsinshih
(in what is now Chingshan County in Hupeh) and Pinglin (in what is now Suihsien
County in Hupeh) rose in revolt. The Bronze Horses and the Red Eyebrows were
the peasant forces which revolted during his reign in what are now central
Hopei and central Shantung Provinces. The Red Eyebrows, the largest of the
peasant forces, were so named because the soldiers painted their eyebrows
red.

8. The Yellow Turbans, a peasant force which revolted in
A.D. 184, were named after their headgear.

9. Li Mi and Tou Chien-teh were leaders of great peasant
uprisings against the Sui Dynasty in Honan and Hopei respectively at the
opening of the 7th century.

10. Wang Hsien-chih organized an uprising in Shantung
in A.D. 874. In the following year Huang Chao organized an uprising to support
him.

11. Sung Chiang and Fang La were famous leaders of peasant
uprisings early in the 12th century; Sung Chiang was active along the borders
between Shantung, Hopei, Honan and Kiangsu, while Fang La was active in Chekiang
and Anhwei.

12. In 1351, the people in many parts of the country rose
in revolt against the rule of the Yuan (Mongol) Dynasty. In 1352, Chu Yuan-chang
joined the rebel forces led by Kuo Tzu-hsing and became their commander upon
the latter's death. In 1368, he finally succeeded in overthrowing the rule
of the Mongol Dynasty, which had been tottering under the attacks of the
people's forces, and founded the Ming Dynasty.

13. Li Tzu-cheng, also called King Chuang (the Dare-All
King), native of Michih, northern Shensi, was the leader of a peasant revolt
which led to the overthrow of the Ming Dynasty. The revolt first started
in northern Shensi in 1628. Li joined the forces led by Kao Ying-hsiang and
campaigned through Honan and Anhwei and back to Shensi. After Kao's death
in 1636, Li succeeded him, becoming King Chuang, and campaigned in and out
of the provinces of Shensi, Szechuan, Honan and Hupeh. Finally he captured
the imperial capital of Peking in 1644, whereupon the last Ming emperor committed
suicide. The chief slogan he spread among the masses was "Support King Chuang,
and pay no grain taxes". Another slogan of his to enforce discipline among
his men ran: "Any murder means the killing of my father, any rape means the
violation of my mother." Thus he won the support of the masses and his movement
became the main current of the peasant revolts raging all over the country.
As he, too, roamed about without ever establishing relatively consolidated
base areas, he was eventually defeated by Wu San-kuei, a Ming general, who
colluded with the Ching troops in a joint attack on Li.

14. From 1856 to 1860 Britain and France jointly waged
a war of aggression against China, with the United States and tsarist Russia
supporting them from the side-lines. The government of the Ching Dynasty
was then devoting all its energies to suppressing the peasant revolution
of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom and adopted a policy of passive resistance
towards the foreign aggressors. The Anglo-French forces occupied such major
cities as Canton, Tientsin and Peking, plundered and burned down the Yuan
Ming Yuan Palace in Peking and forced the Ching government to conclude the
Treaties of Tientsin and Peking. Their main provisions included the opening
of Tientsin, Newchwang, Tengchow, Taiwan, Tamsui, Chaochow, Chiungchow, Nanking,
Chinkiang, Kinkiang and Hankow as treaty ports, and the granting to foreigners
of special privileges for travel, missionary activities and inland navigation
in China's interior. From then on, the foreign forces of aggression spread
through all China's coastal provinces and penetrated deep into the hinterland.

15. In 1882-83, the French aggressors invaded the northern
part of Indo-China. In 1884-85 they extended their war of aggression to the
Chinese provinces of Kwangsi, Taiwan, Fukien and Chekiang. Despite the victories
gained in this war, the corrupt Ching government signed the humiliating Treaty
of Tientsin.

16. In 1900 eight imperialist powers, Britain, the United
States, Germany, France, tsarist Russia, Japan, Italy and Austria, sent a
joint force to attack China in their attempt to suppress the Yi Ho Tuan Movement
of the Chinese people against aggression. The Chinese people resisted heroically.
The allied forces of the eight powers captured Taku and occupied Tientsin
and Peking. In 1901 the Ching government concluded a treaty with the eight
imperialist countries; its main provisions were that China had to pay those
countries the huge sum of 450 million taels of silver as war reparations
and grant them the special privilege of stationing troops in Peking and in
the area from Peking to Tientsin and Shanhaikuan.

17. Consular jurisdiction was one of the special privileges
provided in the unequal treaties which the imperialist powers forced on the
governments of old China-- beginning with the supplementary treaty to the
Sino-British Treaty of Nanking, signed at Humen (the Bogue) in 1843, and
with the Sino-American Treaty of Wanghia in 1844. It meant that, if a national
of any country enjoying the privilege of consular jurisdiction in China became
a defendant in a lawsuit, civil or criminal, he was not to be tried by a
Chinese court but by the consul of his own country.

18. Spheres of influence were different parts of China
marked off at the end of the 19th century by the imperialist powers that
committed aggression against China. Each of these powers marked off those
areas which fell within its economic and military influence. Thus, the provinces
in the lower and middle Yangtse valley were specified as the British sphere
of influence; Yunnan, Kwangtung and Kwangsi as the French; Shantung as the
German sphere; Fukien as the Japanese, and the three northeastern provinces
(the present provinces of Liaoning, Kirin and Heilungkiang) as the tsarist
Russian sphere. After the Russo-Japanese War of 1905 the southern part of
the three northeastern provinces came under Japanese influence.

19. The foreign concessions were areas which the imperialist
powers seized in the treaty ports after compelling the Ching government to
open these ports. In these so-called concessions they enforced an imperialist
system of colonial rule entirely independent of Chinese law and administration.
Through those concessions, the imperialists exercised direct or indirect
political and economic control over the Chinese feudal and comprador regime.
During the revolution of 1924-27 the revolutionary people led by the Chinese
Communist Party started a movement to abolish the concessions, and in January
1927 they took over the British concessions in Hankow and Kiukiang. However,
the imperialists retained various concessions after Chiang Kai-shek betrayed
the revolution.

20. "The Theses on the Revolutionary Movement in Colonial
and Semi-Colonial Countries" adopted by the Sixth Comintern Congress,
stenographic record of the Sixth Comintern Congress, issue No. 6, Russ. ed.,
Moscow, 1929, p. 128.

21. J. V. Stalin, "The Revolution in China and the Tasks
of the Comintern", Works, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1954, Vol. IX,
p. 292.

22. J. V. Stalin, "The Prospects of the Revolution in
China", Works, Eng. ed. FLPH, Moscow, 1954, Vol. VIII, p. 379.

23. See V. I. Lenin, "The Agrarian Programme of
Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907", Collected
Works, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1962, Vol. XIII, pp. 219-429.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Stalin, Friend of the Chinese People







STALIN, FRIEND OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

STALIN, FRIEND OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE


December 20, 1939


On the Twenty-first of December, Comrade Stalin will be sixty years old[1]. We can be sure that his birthday will evoke warm and
affectionate congratulations from the hearts of all revolutionary people
throughout the world who know of the occasion.

Congratulating Stalin is not a formality. Congratulating Stalin means supporting
him and his cause, supporting the victory of socialism, and the way forward
for mankind which he points out, it means supporting a dear friend. For the
great majority of mankind today are suffering, and mankind can free itself
from suffering only by the road pointed out by Stalin and with his help.

Living in a period of the bitterest suffering in our history, we Chinese
people most urgently need help from others. The Book of Odes says,
"A bird sings out to draw a friend's response." This aptly describes our
present situation.

But who are our friends?

There are so-called friends, self-styled friends of the Chinese people, whom
even some Chinese unthinkingly accept as friends. But such friends can only
be classed with Li Lin-fu,[2] the prime minister
in the Tang Dynasty who was notorious as a man with "honey on his lips and
murder in his heart". They are indeed "friends" with "honey on their lips
and murder in their hearts". Who are these people? They are the imperialists
who profess sympathy with China.

However, there are friends of another kind, friends who have real sympathy
with us and regard us as brothers. Who are they? They are the Soviet people
and Stalin.

No other country has renounced its privileges in China; the Soviet Union
alone has done so.

All the imperialists opposed us during our First Great Revolution; the Soviet
Union alone helped us.

No government of any imperialist country has given us real help since the
outbreak of the War of Resistance Against Japan; the Soviet Union alone has
helped China with its aviation and supplies.

Is not the point clear enough?

Only the land of socialism, its leaders and people, and socialist thinkers,
statesmen and workers can give real help to the cause of liberation of the
Chinese nation and the Chinese people, and without their help our cause cannot
win final victory.

Stalin is the true friend of the cause of liberation of the Chinese people.
No attempt to sow dissension, no lies and calumnies, can affect the Chinese
people's whole-hearted love and respect for Stalin and our genuine friendship
for the Soviet Union.

NOTES


1. Stalin's birthday was actually 18 December 1878, making
this his 61st birthday. -- MIA
2. Li Lin-fu (8th century) was a prime minister under Emperor
Hsuan Tsung of the Tang Dynasty. Although feigning friendship, he
plotted the ruin of all those who surpassed him in ability and fame or found
favour in the emperor's eyes. Hence he was known to his contemporaries as
a man with "honey on his lips and murder in his heart".

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project. 
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## In Memory of Norman Bethune







IN MEMORY OF NORMAN BETHUNE 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

IN MEMORY OF NORMAN BETHUNE


December 21, 1939


Comrade Norman Bethune,[1] a member of the Communist
Party of Canada, was around fifty when he was sent by the Communist Parties
of Canada and the United States to China; he made light of travelling thousands
of miles to help us in our War of Resistance Against Japan. He arrived in
Yenan in the spring of last year, went to work in the Wutai Mountains, and
to our great sorrow died a martyr at his post. What kind of spirit is this
that makes a foreigner selflessly adopt the cause of the Chinese people's
liberation as his own? It is the spirit of internationalism, the spirit of
communism, from which every Chinese Communist must learn. Leninism teaches
that the world revolution can only succeed if the proletariat of the capitalist
countries supports the struggle for liberation of the colonial and semi-colonial
peoples and if the proletariat of the colonies and semi-colonies supports
that of the proletariat of the capitalist
countries.[2] Comrade Bethune put this Leninist
line into practice. We Chinese Communists must also follow this line in our
practice. We must unite with the proletariat of all the capitalist countries,
with the proletariat of Japan, Britain, the United States, Germany, Italy
and all other capitalist countries, for this is the only way to overthrow
imperialism, to liberate our nation and people and to liberate the other
nations and peoples of the world. This is our internationalism, the
internationalism with which we oppose both narrow nationalism and narrow
patriotism.

Comrade Bethune's spirit, his utter devotion to others without any thought
of self, was shown in his great sense of responsibility in his work and his
great warm-heartedness towards all comrades and the people. Every Communist
must learn from him. There are not a few people who are irresponsible in
their work, preferring the light and shirking the heavy, passing the burdensome
tasks on to others and choosing the easy ones for themselves. At every turn
they think of themselves before others. When they make some small contribution,
they swell with pride and brag about it for fear that others will not know.
They feel no warmth towards comrades and the people but are cold, indifferent
and apathetic. In truth such people are not Communists, or at least cannot
be counted as devoted Communists. No one who returned from the front failed
to express admiration for Bethune whenever his name was mentioned, and none
remained unmoved by his spirit. In the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei border area, no
soldier or civilian was unmoved who had been treated by Dr. Bethune or had
seen how he worked. Every Communist must learn this true communist spirit
from Comrade Bethune.

Comrade Bethune was a doctor, the art of healing was his profession and he
was constantly perfecting his skill, which stood very high in the Eighth
Route Army's medical service. His example is an excellent lesson for those
people who wish to change their work the moment they see something different
and for those who despise technical work as of no consequence or as promising
no future.

Comrade Bethune and I met only once. Afterwards he wrote me many letters.
But I was busy, and I wrote him only one letter and do not even know if he
ever received it. I am deeply grieved over his death. Now we are all
commemorating him, which shows how profoundly his spirit inspires everyone.
We must all learn the spirit of absolute selflessness from him. With this
spirit everyone can be very useful to the people. A man's ability may be
great or small, but if he has this spirit, he is already noble-minded and
pure, a man of moral integrity and above vulgar interests, a man who is of
value to the people.

NOTES


1. The distinguished surgeon Norman Bethune was a member
of the Canadian Communist Party. In 1936 when the German and Italian fascist
bandits invaded Spain, he went to the front and worked for the anti-fascist
Spanish people. In order to help the Chinese people in their War of Resistance
Against Japan, he came to China at the head of a medical team and arrived
in Yenan in the spring of 1938. Soon after he went to the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei
border area. Imbued with ardent internationalism and the great communist
spirit, he served the army and the people of the Liberated Areas for nearly
two years. He contracted blood poisoning while operating on wounded soldiers
and died in Tanghsien, Hopei, on November 12, 1939

2. See J. V. Stalin, "The Foundations of Leninism",
Problems of Leninism, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1954, pp. 70-79.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On New Democracy







ON NEW DEMOCRACY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON NEW DEMOCRACY


January 1940

I. WHITHER CHINA?


A lively atmosphere has prevailed throughout the country ever since the War
of Resistance began, there is a general feeling that a way out of the impasse
has been found, and people no longer knit their brows in despair. Of late,
however, the dust and din of compromise and anti-communism have once again
filled the air, and once again the people are thrown into bewilderment. Most
susceptible, and the first to be affected, are the intellectuals and the
young students. The question once again arises: What is to be done? Whither
China? On the occasion of the publication of Chinese
Culture,[1] it may therefore be
profitable to clarify the political and cultural trends in the country. I
am a layman in matters of culture; I would like to study them, but have only
just begun to do so. Fortunately, there are many comrades in Yenan who have
written at length in this field, so that my rough and ready words may serve
the same purpose as the beating of the gongs before a theatrical performance.
Our observations may contain a grain of truth for the nation's advanced cultural
workers and may serve as a modest spur to induce them to come forward with
valuable contributions of their own, and we hope that they will join in the
discussion to reach correct conclusions which will meet our national needs.
To "seek truth from facts" is the scientific approach, and presumptuously
to claim infallibility and lecture people will never settle anything. The
troubles that have befallen our nation are extremely serious, and only a
scientific approach and a spirit of responsibility can lead it on to the
road of liberation. There is but one truth, and the question of whether or
not one has arrived at it depends not on subjective boasting but on objective
practice. The only yardstick of truth is the revolutionary practice of millions
of people. This, I think, can be regarded as the attitude of Chinese
Culture.

II. WE WANT TO BUILD A NEW CHINA


For many years we Communists have struggled for a cultural revolution as
well as for a political and economic revolution, and our aim is to build
a new society and a new state for the Chinese nation. That new society and
new state will have not only a new politics and a new economy but a new culture.
In other words, not only do we want to change a China that is politically
oppressed and economically exploited into a China that is politically free
and economically prosperous, we also want to change the China which is being
kept ignorant and backward under the sway of the old culture into an enlightened
and progressive China under the sway of a new culture. In short, we want
to build a new China. Our aim in the cultural sphere is to build a new Chinese
national culture.

III. CHINA'S HISTORICAL CHARACTERISTICS


We want to build a new national culture, but what kind of culture should
it be?

Any given culture (as an ideological form) is a reflection of the politics
and economics of a given society, and the former in turn has a tremendous
influence and effect upon the latter; economics is the base and politics
the concentrated expression of economics.[2] This
is our fundamental view of the relation of culture to politics and economics
and of the relation of politics to economics. It follows that the form of
culture is first determined by the political and economic form, and only
then does it operate on and influence the given political and economic form.
Marx says, "It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being,
but, on the contrary, their social being that determines their
consciousness."[3] He also says, "The philosophers
have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point, however,
is to change it."[4] For the first time
in human history, these scientific formulations correctly solved the problem
of the relationship between consciousness and existence, and they are the
basic concepts underlying the dynamic revolutionary theory of knowledge as
the reflection of reality which was later elaborated so profoundly by Lenin.
These basic concepts must be kept in mind in our discussion of China's cultural
problems.

Thus it is quite clear that the reactionary elements of the old national
culture we want to eliminate are inseparable from the old national politics
and economics, while the new national culture which we want to build up is
inseparable from the new national politics and economics. The old politics
and economics of the Chinese nation form the basis of its old culture, just
as its new politics and economics will form the basis of its new culture.

What are China's old politics and economics? And what is her old culture?

From the Chou and Chin Dynasties onwards, Chinese society was feudal, as
were its politics and its economy. And the dominant culture, reflecting the
politics and economy, was feudal culture.

Since the invasion of foreign capitalism and the gradual growth of capitalist
elements in Chinese society, the country has changed by degrees into a colonial,
semi-colonial and semi-feudal society. China today is colonial in the
Japanese-occupied areas and basically semi-colonial in the Kuomintang areas,
and it is predominantly feudal or semi-feudal in both. Such, then, is the
character of present-day Chinese society and the state of affairs in our
country. The politics and the economy of this society are predominantly colonial,
semi-colonial and semi-feudal, and the predominant culture, reflecting the
politics and economy, is also colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal.

It is precisely against these predominant political, economic and cultural
forms that our revolution is directed. What we want to get rid of is the
old colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal politics and economy and the
old culture in their service. And what we want to build up is their direct
opposite, i.e., the new politics, the new economy and the new culture
of the Chinese nation.

What, then, are the new politics and the new economy of the Chinese nation,
and what is its new culture?

In the course of its history the Chinese revolution must go through two stages,
first, the democratic revolution, and second, the socialist revolution, and
by their very nature they are two different revolutionary processes. Here
democracy does not belong to the old category-- it is not the old democracy,
but belongs to the new category--it is New Democracy.

It can thus be affirmed that China's new politics are the politics of New
Democracy, that China's new economy is the economy of New Democracy and that
China's new culture is the culture of New Democracy.

Such are the historical characteristics of the Chinese revolution at the
present time. Any political party, group or person taking part in the Chinese
revolution that fails to understand this will not be able to direct the
revolution and lead it to victory, but will be cast aside by the people and
left to grieve out in the cold.

IV. THE CHINESE REVOLUTION IS PART OF THE WORLD
  REVOLUTION


The historical characteristic of the Chinese revolution lies in its division
into the two stages, democracy and socialism, the first being no longer democracy
in general, but democracy of the Chinese type, a new and special type, namely,
New Democracy. How, then, has this historical characteristic come into being?
Has it been in existence for the past hundred years, or is it of recent origin?

A brief study of the historical development of China and of the world shows
that this characteristic did not emerge immediately after the Opium War,
but took shape later, after the first imperialist world war and the October
Revolution in Russia. Let us now examine the process of its formation.

Clearly, it follows from the colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal character
of present-day Chinese society that the Chinese revolution must be divided
into two stages. The first step is to change the colonial, semi-colonial
and semi-feudal form of society into an independent, democratic society.
The second is to carry the revolution forward and build a socialist society.
At present the Chinese revolution is taking the first step.

The preparatory period for the first step began with the opium War in 1840,
i.e., when China's feudal society started changing into a semi-colonial
and semi-feudal one. Then came the Movement of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom,
the Sino-French War, the Sino-Japanese war, the Reform Movement of 1898,
the Revolution of 1911, the May 4th Movement, the Northern Expedition, the
War of the Agrarian Revolution and the present War of Resistance Against
Japan. Together these have taken up a whole century and in a sense they represent
that first step, being struggles waged by the Chinese people, on different
occasions and in varying degrees, against imperialism and the feudal forces
in order to build up an independent, democratic society and complete the
first revolution. The Revolution of 1911 was in a fuller sense the beginning
of that revolution. In its social character, this revolution is a
bourgeois-democratic and not a proletarian-socialist revolution. It is still
unfinished and still demands great efforts, because to this day its enemies
are still very strong. When Dr. Sun Yat-sen said, "The revolution is not
yet completed, all my comrades must struggle on", he was referring to the
bourgeois-democratic revolution.

A change, however, occurred in China's bourgeois-democratic revolution after
the outbreak of the first imperialist world war in 1914 and the founding
of a socialist state on one-sixth of the globe as a result of the Russian
October Revolution of 1917.

Before these events, the Chinese bourgeois-democratic revolution came within
the old category of the bourgeois-democratic world revolution, of which it
was a part.

Since these events, the Chinese bourgeois-democratic revolution has changed,
it has come within the new category of bourgeois-democratic revolutions and,
as far as the alignment of revolutionary forces is concerned, forms part
of the proletarian-socialist world revolution.

Why? Because the first imperialist world war and the first victorious socialist
revolution, the October Revolution, have changed the whole course of world
history and ushered in a new era.

It is an era in which the world capitalist front has collapsed in one part
of the globe (one-sixth of the world) and has fully revealed its decadence
everywhere else, in which the remaining capitalist parts cannot survive without
relying more than ever on the colonies and Semi-colonies, in which a socialist
state has been established and has proclaimed its readiness to give active
support to the liberation movement of all colonies and semi-colonies, and
in which the proletariat of the capitalist countries is steadily freeing
itself from the social-imperialist influence of the social-democratic parties
and has proclaimed its support for the liberation movement in the colonies
and semi-colonies. In this era, any revolution in a colony or semi-colony
that is directed against imperialism, i.e., against the international
bourgeoisie or international capitalism, no longer comes within the old category
of the bourgeois-democratic world revolution, but within the new category.
It is no longer part of the old bourgeois, or capitalist, world revolution,
but is part of the new world revolution, the proletarian-socialist world
revolution. Such revolutionary colonies and semi-colonies can no longer be
regarded as allies of the counter revolutionary front of world capitalism;
they have become allies of the revolutionary front of world socialism.

Although such a revolution in a colonial and semi-colonial country is still
fundamentally bourgeois-democratic in its social character during its first
stage or first step, and although its objective mission is to clear the path
for the development of capitalism, it is no longer a revolution of the old
type led by the bourgeoisie with the aim of establishing a capitalist society
and a state under bourgeois dictatorship. It belongs to the new type of
revolution led by the proletariat with the aim, in the first stage, of
establishing a new-democratic society and a state under the joint dictatorship
of all the revolutionary classes. Thus this revolution actually serves the
purpose of clearing a still wider path for the development of socialism.
In the course of its progress, there may be a number of further sub-stages,
because of changes on the enemy's side and within the ranks of our allies,
but the fundamental character of the revolution remains unchanged.

Such a revolution attacks imperialism at its very roots, and is therefore
not tolerated but opposed by imperialism. However, it is favoured by socialism
and supported by the land of socialism and the socialist international
proletariat.

Therefore, such a revolution inevitably becomes part of the proletarian-socialist
world revolution.

The correct thesis that "the Chinese revolution is part of the world revolution"
was put forward as early as 1924-27 during the period of China's First Great
Revolution. It was put forward by the Chinese Communists and endorsed by
all those taking part in the anti-imperialist and anti-feudal struggle of
the time. However, the significance of this thesis was not fully expounded
in those days, and consequently it was only vaguely understood.

The "world revolution" no longer refers to the old world revolution, for
the old bourgeois world revolution has long been a thing of the past, it
refers to the new world revolution, the socialist world revolution. Similarly,
to form "part of" means to form part not of the old bourgeois but of the
new socialist revolution. This is a tremendous change unparalleled in the
history of China and of the world.

This correct thesis advanced by the Chinese Communists is based on Stalin's
theory.

As early as 1918, in an article commemorating the first anniversary of the
October Revolution, Stalin wrote:

  The great world-wide significance of the October Revolution chiefly consists
  in the fact that:

  1) It has widened the scope of the national question and converted it from
  the particular question of combating national oppression in Europe into the
  general question of emancipating the oppressed peoples, colonies and
  semi-colonies from imperialism;
  
  2) It has opened up wide possibilities for their emancipation and the right
  paths towards it, has thereby greatly facilitated the cause of the emancipation
  of the oppressed peoples of the West and the East, and has drawn them into
  the common current of the victorious struggle against imperialism;
  
  3) It has thereby erected a bridge between the socialist West and the
  enslaved East, having created a new front of revolutions against
  world imperialism, extending from the proletarians of the West, through
  the Russian Revolution, to the oppressed peoples of the
  East.[5]


Since writing this article, Stalin has again and again expounded the theory
that revolutions in the colonies and semi-colonies have broken away from
the old category and become part of the proletarian-socialist revolution.
The clearest and most precise explanation is given in an article published
on June 3o, 1925, in which Stalin carried on a controversy with
the Yugoslav nationalists of the time. Entitled "The National Question Once
Again", it is included in a book translated by Chang Chung-shih and published
under the title Stalin on the National Question. It contains the
following passage:

  Semich refers to a passage in Stalin's pamphlet Marxism and the National
  Question, written at the end of 1912. There it says that "the national
  struggle under the conditions of rising capitalism is a struggle
  of the bourgeois classes among themselves". Evidently, by this Semich is
  trying to suggest that his formula defining the social significance of the
  national movement under the present historical conditions is correct. But
  Stalin's pamphlet was written before the imperialist war, when the national
  question was not yet regarded by Marxists as a question of world significance,
  when the Marxists' fundamental demand for the right to self-determination
  was regarded not as part of the proletarian revolution, but as part of the
  bourgeois-democratic revolution. It would be ridiculous not to see that since
  then the international situation has radically changed, that the war, on
  the one hand, and the October Revolution in Russia, on the other, transformed
  the national question from a part of the bourgeois-democratic revolution
  into a part of the proletarian-socialist revolution. As far back as October
  1916, in his article, "The Discussion on Self-Determination Summed Up", Lenin
  said that the main point of the national question, the right to
  self-determination, had ceased to be a part of the general democratic movement,
  that it had already become a component part of the general proletarian, socialist
  revolution. I do not even mention subsequent works on the national question
  by Lenin and by other representatives of Russian communism. After all this,
  what significance can Semich's reference to the passage in Stalin's pamphlet,
  written in the period of the bourgeois-democratic revolution in
  Russia, have at the present time, when, as a consequence of the new historical
  situation, we have entered a new epoch, the epoch of proletarian
  revolution? It can only signify that Semich quotes outside of space
  and time, without reference to the living historical situation, and thereby
  violates the most elementary requirements of dialectics, and ignores the
  fact that what is right for one historical situation may prove to be wrong
  in another historical situation.[6]


From this it can be seen that there are two kinds of world revolution, the
first belonging to the bourgeois or capitalist category. The era of this
kind of world revolution is long past, having come to an end as far back
as 1914 when the first imperialist world war broke out, and more particularly
in 1917 when the October Revolution took place. The second kind, namely,
the proletarian-socialist world revolution, thereupon began. This revolution
has the proletariat of the capitalist countries as its main force and the
oppressed peoples of the colonies and semi-colonies as its allies. No matter
what classes, parties or individuals in an oppressed nation join the revolution,
and no matter whether they themselves are conscious of the point or
understand it, so long as they oppose imperialism, their revolution becomes
part of the proletarian-socialist world revolution and they become its allies.

Today, the Chinese revolution has taken on still greater significance. This
is a time when the economic and political crises of capitalism are dragging
the world more and more deeply into the Second World War, when the Soviet
Union has reached the period of transition from socialism to communism and
is capable of leading and helping the proletariat and oppressed nations of
the whole world in their fight against imperialist war and capitalist reaction,
when the proletariat of the capitalist countries is preparing to overthrow
capitalism and establish socialism, and when the proletariat, the peasantry,
the intelligentsia and other sections of the petty bourgeoisie in China have
become a mighty independent political force under the leadership of the Chinese
Communist Party. Situated as we are in this day and age, should we not make
the appraisal that the Chinese revolution has taken on still greater world
significance? I think we should. The Chinese revolution has become a very
important part of the world revolution.

Although the Chinese revolution in this first stage (with its many sub-stages)
is a new type of bourgeois-democratic revolution and is not yet itself a
proletarian-socialist revolution in its social character, it has long become
a part of the proletarian-socialist world revolution and is now even a very
important part and a great ally of this world revolution. The first step
or stage in our revolution is definitely not, and cannot be, the establishment
of a capitalist society under the dictatorship of the Chinese bourgeoisie,
but will result in the establishment of a new-democratic society under the
joint dictatorship of all the revolutionary classes of China headed by the
Chinese proletariat The revolution will then be carried forward to the second
stage, in which a socialist society will be established in China.

This is the fundamental characteristic of the Chinese revolution of today,
of the new revolutionary process of the past twenty years (counting from
the May 4th Movement of 1919), and its concrete living essence.

V. THE POLITICS OF NEW DEMOCRACY


The new historical characteristic of the Chinese revolution is its division
into two stages, the first being the new-democratic revolution. How does
this manifest itself concretely in internal political and economic relations?
Let us consider the question.

Before the May 4th Movement of 1919 (which occurred after the first imperialist
world war of 1914 the Russian October Revolution of 1917), the petty bourgeoisie
and the bourgeoisie (through their intellectuals) were the political leaders
of the bourgeois-democratic revolution. The Chinese proletariat had not yet
appeared on the political scene as an awakened and independent class force,
but participated in the revolution only as a follower of the petty bourgeoisie
and the bourgeoisie. Such was the case with the proletariat at the time of
the Revolution of 1911.

After the May 4th Movement, the political leader of China's bourgeois-democratic
revolution was no longer the bourgeoisie but the proletariat, although the
national bourgeoisie continued to take part in the revolution. The Chinese
proletariat rapidly became an awakened and independent political force as
a result of its maturing and of the influence of the Russian Revolution.
It was the Chinese Communist Party that put forward the slogan "Down with
imperialism" and the thoroughgoing programme for the whole bourgeois-democratic
revolution, and it was the Chinese Communist Party alone that carried out
the Agrarian Revolution.

Being a bourgeoisie in a colonial and semi-colonial country and oppressed
by imperialism, the Chinese national bourgeoisie retains a certain revolutionary
quality at certain periods and to a certain degree--even in the era of
imperialism--in its opposition to the foreign imperialists and the domestic
governments of bureaucrats and warlords (instances of opposition to the latter
can be found in the periods of the Revolution of 1911 and the Northern
Expedition), and it may ally itself with the proletariat and the petty
bourgeoisie against such enemies as it is ready to oppose. In this respect
the Chinese bourgeoisie differs from the bourgeoisie of old tsarist Russia.
Since tsarist Russia was a military-feudal imperialism which carried on
aggression against other countries, the Russian bourgeoisie was entirely
lacking in revolutionary quality. There, the task of the proletariat was
to oppose the bourgeoisie, not to unite with it. But China's national bourgeoisie
has a revolutionary quality at certain periods and to a certain degree, because
China is a colonial and semi-colonial country which is a victim of aggression.
Here, the task of the proletariat is to form a united front with the national
bourgeoisie against imperialism and the bureaucrat and warlord governments
without overlooking its revolutionary quality.

At the same time, however, being a bourgeois class in a colonial and
semi-colonial country and so being extremely flabby economically and politically,
the Chinese national bourgeoisie also has another quality, namely, a proneness
to conciliation with the enemies of the revolution. Even when it takes part
in the revolution, it is unwilling to break with imperialism completely and,
moreover, it is closely associated with the exploitation of the rural areas
through land rent; thus it is neither willing nor able to overthrow imperialism,
and much less the feudal forces, in a thorough way. So neither of the two
basic problems or tasks of China's bourgeois-democratic revolution can be
solved or accomplished by the national bourgeoisie. As for China's big
bourgeoisie, which is represented by the Kuomintang, all through the long
period from 1927 to 1937 it nestled in the arms of the imperialists and formed
an alliance with the feudal forces against the revolutionary people. In 1927
and for some time afterwards, the Chinese national bourgeoisie also followed
the counter-revolution. During the present anti-Japanese war, the section
of the big bourgeoisie represented by Wang Ching-wei has capitulated to the
enemy, which constitutes a fresh betrayal on the part of the big bourgeoisie.
In this respect, then, the bourgeoisie in China differs from the earlier
bourgeoisie of the European and American countries, and especially of France.
When the bourgeoisie in those countries, and especially in France, was still
in its revolutionary era, the bourgeois revolution was comparatively thorough,
whereas the bourgeoisie in China lacks even this degree of thoroughness.

Possible participation in the revolution on the one hand and proneness to
conciliation with the enemies of the revolution on the other-- such is the
dual character of the Chinese bourgeoisie, it faces both ways Even the
bourgeoisie in European and American history had shared this dual character.
When confronted by a formidable enemy, they united with the workers and peasants
against him, but when the workers and peasants awakened, they turned round
to unite with the enemy against the workers and peasants. This is a general
rule applicable to the bourgeoisie everywhere in the world, but the trait
is more pronounced in the Chinese bourgeoisie.

In China, it is perfectly clear that whoever can lead the people in overthrowing
imperialism and the forces of feudalism can win the people's confidence,
because these two, and especially imperialism, are the mortal enemies of
the people. Today, whoever can lead the people in driving out Japanese
imperialism and introducing democratic government will be the saviours of
the people. History has proved that the Chinese bourgeoisie cannot fulfil
this responsibility, which inevitably falls upon the shoulders of the
proletariat.

Therefore, the proletariat, the peasantry, the intelligentsia and the other
sections of the petty bourgeoisie undoubtedly constitute the basic forces
determining China's fate. These classes, some already awakened and others
in the process of awakening, will necessarily become the basic components
of the state and governmental structure in the democratic republic of China,
with the proletariat as the leading force. The Chinese democratic republic
which we desire to establish now must be a democratic republic under the
joint dictatorship of all anti-imperialist and anti-feudal people led by
the proletariat, that is, a new-democratic republic, a republic of the genuinely
revolutionary new Three People's Principles with their Three Great Policies.

This new-democratic republic will be different from the old European-American
form of capitalist republic under bourgeois dictatorship, which is the old
democratic form and already out of date. On the other hand, it will also
be different from the socialist republic of the Soviet type under the
dictatorship of the proletariat which is already flourishing in the U.S.S.R.,
and which, moreover, will be established in all the capitalist countries
and will undoubtedly become the dominant form of state and governmental structure
in all the industrially advanced countries. However, for a certain historical
period, this form is not suitable for the revolutions in the colonial and
semi-colonial countries. During this period, therefore, a third form of state
must be adopted in the revolutions of all colonial and semi-colonial countries,
namely, the new-democratic republic. This form suits a certain historical
period and is therefore transitional; nevertheless, it is a form which is
necessary and cannot be dispensed with.

Thus the numerous types of state system in the world can be reduced to three
basic kinds according to the class character of their political power: (1)
republics under bourgeois dictatorship; (2) republics under the dictatorship
of the proletariat; and (3) republics under the joint dictatorship of several
revolutionary classes.

The first kind comprises the old democratic states. Today, after the outbreak
of the second imperialist war, there is hardly a trace of democracy in many
of the capitalist countries, which have come or are coming under the bloody
militarist dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. Certain countries under the joint
dictatorship of the landlords and the bourgeoisie can be grouped with this
kind.

The second kind exists in the Soviet Union, and the conditions for its birth
are ripening in capitalist countries. In the future, it will be the dominant
form throughout the world for a certain period.

The third kind is the transitional form of state to be adopted in the revolutions
of the colonial and semi-colonial countries. Each of these revolutions will
necessarily have specific characteristics of its own, but these will be minor
variations on a general theme. So long as they are revolutions in colonial
or semi-colonial countries, their state and governmental structure will of
necessity be basically the same, i.e., a new-democratic state under
the joint dictatorship of several anti-imperialist classes. In present-day
China, the anti-Japanese united front represents the new-democratic form
of state. It is anti-Japanese and anti-imperialist; it is also a united front,
an alliance of several revolutionary classes. But unfortunately, despite
the fact that the war has been going on for so long, the work of introducing
democracy has hardly started in most of the country outside the democratic
anti-Japanese base areas under the leadership of the Communist Party, and
the Japanese imperialists have exploited this fundamental weakness to stride
into our country. If nothing is done about it, our national future will be
gravely imperilled.

The question under discussion here is that of the "state system". After several
decades of wrangling since the last years of the Ching Dynasty, it has still
not been cleared up. Actually it is simply a question of the status of the
various social classes within the state. The bourgeoisie, as a rule, conceals
the problem of class status and carries out its one-class dictatorship under
the "national" label. Such concealment is of no advantage to the revolutionary
people and the matter should be clearly explained to them. The term "national"
is all right, but it must not include counter-revolutionaries and traitors.
The kind of state we need today is a dictatorship of all the revolutionary
classes over the counter-revolutionaries and traitors.

The so-called democratic system in modern states is usually monopolized by
the bourgeoisie and has become simply an instrument for oppressing the common
people. On the other hand, the Kuomintang's Principle of Democracy means
a democratic system shared by all the common people and not privately owned
by the few.

Such was the solemn declaration made in the Manifesto of the First National
Congress of the Kuomintang, held in 1924 during the period of
Kuomintang-Communist co-operation. For sixteen years the Kuomintang has violated
this declaration and as a result it has created the present grave national
crisis. This is a gross blunder, which we hope the Kuomintang will correct
in the cleansing flames of the anti-Japanese war.

As for the question of "the system of government", this is a matter of how
political power is organized, the form in which one social class or
another chooses to arrange its apparatus of political power to oppose
its enemies and protect itself. There is no state which does not have an
appropriate apparatus of political power to represent it. China may now adopt
a system of people's congresses, from the national people's congress down
to the provincial, county, district and township people's congresses, with
all levels electing their respective governmental bodies. But if there is
to be a proper representation for each revolutionary class according to its
status in the state, a proper expression of the people's will, a proper direction
for revolutionary struggles and a proper manifestation of the spirit of New
Democracy, then a system of really universal and equal suffrage, irrespective
of sex, creed, property or education, must be introduced. Such is the system
of democratic centralism. Only a government based on democratic centralism
can fully express the will of all the revolutionary people and fight the
enemies of the revolution most effectively. There must be a spirit of
refusal to be "privately owned by the few" in the government and the
army; without a genuinely democratic system this cannot be attained and the
system of government and the state system will be out of harmony.

The state system, a joint dictatorship of all the revolutionary classes and
the system of government, democratic centralism--these constitute the politics
of New Democracy, the republic of New Democracy, the republic of the
anti-Japanese united front, the republic of the new Three People's Principles
with their Three Great Policies' the Republic of China in reality as well
as in name. Today we have a Republic of China in name but not in reality,
and our present task is to create the reality that will fit the name.

Such are the internal political relations which a revolutionary China, a
China fighting Japanese aggression, should and must establish without fail;
such is the orientation, the only correct orientation, for our present work
of national reconstruction.

VI. THE ECONOMY OF NEW DEMOCRACY


If such a republic is to be established in China, it must be new-democratic
not only in its politics but also in its economy.

It will own the big banks and the big industrial and commercial enterprises.

Enterprises, such as banks, railways and airlines, whether Chinese-owned
or foreign-owned, which are either monopolistic in character or too big for
private management, shall be operated and administered by the state, so that
private capital cannot dominate the livelihood of the people: this is the
main principle of the regulation of capital.

This is another solemn declaration in the Manifesto of the Kuomintang's First
National Congress held during the period of Kuomintang-Communist co-operation,
and it is the correct policy for the economic structure of the new-democratic
republic. In the new-democratic republic under the leadership of the proletariat,
the state enterprises will be of a socialist character and will constitute
the leading force in the whole national economy, but the republic will neither
confiscate capitalist private property in general nor forbid the development
of such capitalist production as does not "dominate the livelihood of the
people", for China's economy is still very backward.

The republic will take certain necessary steps to confiscate the land of
the landlords and distribute it to those peasants having little or no land,
carry out Dr. Sun Yat-sen's slogan of "land to the tiller", abolish feudal
relations in the rural areas, and turn the land over to the private ownership
of the peasants. A rich peasant economy will be allowed in the rural areas.
Such is the policy of "equalization of landownership". "Land to the tiller"
is the correct slogan for this policy. In general, socialist agriculture
will not be established at this stage, though various types of co-operative
enterprises developed on the basis of "land to the tiller" will contain elements
of socialism.

China's economy must develop along the path of the "regulation of capital"
and the "equalization of landownership", and must never be "privately owned
by the few"; we must never permit the few capitalists and landlords to "dominate
the livelihood of the people"; we must never establish a capitalist society
of the European-American type or allow the old semi-feudal society to survive.
Whoever dares to go counter to this line of advance will certainly not succeed
but will run into a brick wall.

Such are the internal economic relations which a revolutionary China, a China
fighting Japanese aggression, must and necessarily will establish.

Such is the economy of New Democracy.

And the politics of New Democracy are the concentrated expression of the
economy of New Democracy.

VII. REFUTATION OF BOURGEOIS DICTATORSHIP


More than 90 per cent of the people are in favour of a republic of this kind
with its new-democratic politics and new-democratic economy; there is no
alternative road.

What about the road to a capitalist society under bourgeois dictatorship?
To be sure, that was the old road taken by the European and American bourgeoisie,
but whether one likes it or not, neither the international nor the domestic
situation allows China to do the same.

Judging by the international situation, that road is blocked. In its
fundamentals, the present international situation is one of a struggle between
capitalism and socialism, in which capitalism is on the downgrade and socialism
on the upgrade. In the first place international capitalism, or imperialism,
will not permit the establishment in China of a capitalist society under
bourgeois dictatorship. Indeed the history of modern China is a history of
imperialist aggression, of imperialist opposition to China's independence
and to her development of capitalism. Earlier revolutions failed in China
because imperialism strangled them, and innumerable revolutionary martyrs
died, bitterly lamenting the non-fulfilment of their mission. Today a powerful
Japanese imperialism is forcing its way into China and wants to reduce her
to a colony; it is not China that is developing Chinese capitalism but Japan
that is developing Japanese capitalism in our country; and it is not the
Chinese bourgeoisie but the Japanese bourgeoisie that is exercising dictatorship
in our country. True enough, this is the period of the final struggle of
dying imperialism--imperialism is "moribund
capitalism".[7] But just because it is dying, it
is all the more dependent on colonies and semi-colonies for survival and
will certainly not allow any colony or semi-colony to establish anything
like a capitalist society under the dictatorship of its own bourgeoisie.
Just because Japanese imperialism is bogged down in serious economic and
political crises, just because it is dying, it must invade China and reduce
her to a colony, thereby blocking the road to bourgeois dictatorship and
national capitalism in China.

In the second place, socialism will not permit it. All the imperialist powers
in the world are our enemies, and China cannot possibly gain her independence
without the assistance of the land of socialism and the international
proletariat. That is, she cannot do so without the help of the Soviet Union
and the help which the proletariat of Japan, Britain, the United States,
France, Germany, Italy and other countries provide through their struggles
against capitalism. Although no one can say that the victory of the Chinese
revolution must wait upon the victory of the revolution in all of these
countries, or in one or two of them, there is no doubt that we cannot win
without the added strength of their proletariat. In particular, Soviet assistance
is absolutely indispensable for China's final victory in the War of Resistance.
Refuse Soviet assistance, and the revolution will fail. Don't the anti-Soviet
campaigns from 1927 onwards [8] provide an
extraordinarily clear lesson? The world today is in a new era of wars and
revolutions, an era in which capitalism is unquestionably dying and socialism
is unquestionably prospering. In these circumstances, would it not be sheer
fantasy to desire the establishment in China of a capitalist society under
bourgeois dictatorship after the defeat of imperialism and feudalism?

Even though the petty Kemalist dictatorship of the bourgeoisie
[9] did emerge in Turkey after the first imperialist
world war and the October Revolution owing to certain specific conditions
(the bourgeoisie's success in repelling Greek aggression and the weakness
of the proletariat), there can be no second Turkey, much less a "Turkey"
with a population of 450 million, after World War II and the accomplishment
of socialist construction in the Soviet Union. In the specific conditions
of China (the flabbiness of the bourgeoisie with its proneness to conciliation
and the strength of the proletariat with its revolutionary thoroughness),
things just never work out so easily as in Turkey. Did not some members of
the Chinese bourgeoisie clamour for Kemalism after the First Great Revolution
failed in 1927? But where is China's Kemal? And where are China's bourgeois
dictatorship and capitalist society? Besides, even Kemalist Turkey eventually
had to throw herself into the arms of Anglo-French imperialism, becoming
more and more of a semi-colony and part of the reactionary imperialist world.
In the international situation of today, the "heroes"' in the colonies and
semi-colonies either line up on the imperialist front and become part of
the forces of world counter-revolution, or they line up on the anti-imperialist
front and become part of the forces of world revolution. They must do one
or the other, for there is no third choice.

Judging by the domestic situation, too, the Chinese bourgeoisie should have
learned its lesson by now. No sooner had the strength of the proletariat
and of the peasant and other petty bourgeois masses brought the revolution
of 1927 to victory than the capitalist class, headed by the big bourgeoisie,
kicked the masses aside, seized the fruits of the revolution, formed a
counter-revolutionary alliance with imperialism and the feudal forces, and
strained themselves to the limit in a war of "Communist suppression" for
ten years. But what was the upshot? Today, when a powerful enemy has penetrated
deep into our territory and the anti-Japanese war has been going on for two
years, is it possible that there are still people who want to copy the obsolete
recipes of the European and American bourgeoisie? A decade was spent on
"suppressing the Communists" out of existence, but no capitalist society
under bourgeois dictatorship was "suppressed" into existence. Is it possible
that there are still people who want to have another try? True, a "one-party
dictatorship" was "suppressed" into existence through the decade of "Communist
suppression", but it is a semi-colonial and semi-feudal dictatorship. What
is more, at the end of four years of "Communist suppression" (from 1927 to
the Incident of September 18, 1931), "Manchukuo" was "suppressed" into existence
and in 1937, after another six years of such "suppression", the Japanese
imperialists made their way into China south of the Great Wall. Today if
anyone wants to carry on "suppression" for another decade, it would mean
a new type of "Communist suppression", somewhat different from the old. But
is there not one fleet-footed person who has already outstripped everyone
else and boldly undertaken this new enterprise of "Communist suppression"?
Yes, Wang Ching-wei, who has become the new-style anti-Communist celebrity.
Anyone who wishes to join his gang can please himself; but wouldn't that
turn out to be an added embarrassment when talking big about bourgeois
dictatorship, capitalist society, Kemalism, a modern state, a one-party
dictatorship, "one doctrine", and so on and so forth? And if, instead of
joining the Wang Ching-wei gang, someone wants to come into the "fight Japan"
camp of the people but imagines that once the war is won he will be able
to kick aside the people fighting Japan, seize the fruits of the victory
of the fight against Japan and establish a "perpetual one-party dictatorship",
isn't he just daydreaming? "Fight Japan!" "Fight Japan!" But who is doing
the fighting? Without the workers and the peasants and other sections of
the petty bourgeoisie, you cannot move a step. Anyone who still dares to
try and kick them aside will himself be crushed. Hasn't this, too, become
a matter of common sense? But the die-hards among the Chinese bourgeoisie
(I am referring solely to the die-hards) seem to have learned nothing in
the past twenty years. Aren't they still shouting: "Restrict communism",
"Corrode communism" and "Combat communism"? Haven't we seen "Measures for
Restricting the Activities of Alien Parties" followed by "Measures for Dealing
with the Alien Party Problem" and still later by "Directives for Dealing
with the Alien Party Problem"? Heavens! With all this "restricting" and "dealing
with" going on, one wonders what kind of future they are preparing for our
nation and for themselves! We earnestly and sincerely advise these gentlemen:
Open your eyes, take a good look at China and the world, see how things stand
inside as well as outside the country, and do not repeat your mistakes. If
you persist in your mistakes, the future of our nation will of course be
disastrous, but I am sure things will not go well with you either. This is
absolutely true, absolutely certain. Unless the die-hards among the Chinese
bourgeoisie wake up, their future will be far from bright--they will only
bring about their own destruction. Therefore we hope that China's anti-Japanese
united front will be maintained and that, with the cooperation of all instead
of the monopoly of a single clique, the anti-Japanese cause will be brought
to victory; it is the only good policy-- any other policy is bad. This is
the sincere advice we Communists are giving, and do not blame us for not
having forewarned you.

"If there is food, let everyone share it." This old Chinese saying contains
much truth. Since we all share in fighting the enemy, we should all share
in eating, we should all share in the work to be done, and we should all
share access to education. Such attitudes as "I and I alone will take everything"
and "no one dare harm me" are nothing but the old tricks of feudal lords
which simply will not work in the Nineteen Forties.

We Communists will never push aside anyone who is revolutionary; we shall
persevere in the united front and practice long-term co-operation with all
those classes, strata, political parties and groups and individuals that
are willing to fight Japan to the end. But it will not do if certain people
want to push aside the Communist Party. it will not do if they want to split
the united front. China must keep on fighting Japan, uniting and moving forward,
and we cannot tolerate anyone who tries to capitulate, cause splits or move
backward.

VIII. REFUTATION OF "LEFT" PHRASE-MONGERING


If the capitalist road of bourgeois dictatorship is out of the question,
then is it possible to take the socialist road of proletarian dictatorship?

No, that is not possible either.

Without a doubt, the present revolution is the first step, which will develop
into the second step, that of socialism, at a later date. And China will
attain true happiness only when she enters the socialist era. But today is
not yet the time to introduce socialism. The present task of the revolution
in China is to fight imperialism and feudalism, and socialism is out of the
question until this task is completed. The Chinese revolution cannot avoid
taking the two steps, first of New Democracy and then of socialism. Moreover,
the first step will need quite a long time and cannot be accomplished overnight.
We are not utopians and cannot divorce ourselves from the actual conditions
confronting us.

Certain malicious propagandists, deliberately confusing these two distinct
revolutionary stages, advocate the so-called theory of a single revolution
in order to prove that the Three People's Principles apply to all kinds of
revolutions and that communism therefore loses its raison d'être.
Utilizing this "theory", they frantically oppose communism and the Communist
Party, the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies, and the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region. Their real purpose is to root out all revolution, to oppose
a thoroughgoing bourgeois-democratic revolution and thoroughgoing resistance
to Japan and to prepare public opinion for their capitulation to the Japanese
aggressors. This is deliberately being fostered by the Japanese imperialists.
Since their occupation of Wuhan, they have come to realize that military
force alone cannot subjugate China and have therefore resorted to political
offensives and economic blandishments. Their political offensives consist
in tempting wavering elements in the anti-Japanese camp, splitting the united
front and undermining Kuomintang-Communist co-operation. Their economic
blandishments take the form of the so-called joint industrial enterprises.
In central and southern China the Japanese aggressors are allowing Chinese
capitalists to invest 51 per cent of the capital in such enterprises, with
Japanese capital making up the other 49 per cent; in northern China they
are allowing Chinese capitalists to invest 49 per cent of the capital, with
Japanese capital making up the other 51 per cent. The Japanese invaders have
also promised to restore the former assets of the Chinese capitalists to
them in the form of capital shares in the investment. At the prospect of
profits, some conscienceless capitalists forget all moral principles and
itch to have a go. One section, represented by Wang Ching-wei, has already
capitulated. Another section lurking in the anti-Japanese camp would also
like to cross over. But, with the cowardice of thieves, they fear that the
Communists will block their exit and, what is more, that the common people
will brand them as traitors. So they have put their heads together and decided
to prepare the ground in cultural circles and through the press. Having
determined on their policy, they have lost no time in hiring some
"metaphysics-mongers"[10] plus a few Trotskyites
who, brandishing their pens like lances, are tilting in all directions and
creating bedlam. Hence the whole bag of tricks for deceiving those who do
not know what is going on in the world around them--the "theory of a single
revolution", the tales that communism does not suit the national conditions
of China, that there is no need for a Communist Party in China, that the
Eighth Route and the New Fourth Armies are sabotaging the anti-Japanese war
and are merely moving about without fighting, that the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region is a feudal separatist regime, that the Communist Party is
disobedient, dissident, intriguing and disruptive--and all for the purpose
of providing the capitalists with good grounds for getting their 49 or 51
per cent and selling out the nation's interests to the enemy at the opportune
moment. This is "stealing the beams and pillars and replacing them with rotten
timbers",--preparing the public mind for their projected capitulation. Thus,
these gentlemen who, in all apparent seriousness, are pushing the "theory
of a single revolution" to oppose communism and the Communist Party are out
for nothing but their 49 or 51 per cent. How they must have cudgelled their
brains ! The "theory of a single revolution" is simply a theory of no revolution
at all, and that is the heart of the matter.

But there are other people, apparently with no evil intentions, who are misled
by the "theory of a single revolution" and the fanciful notion of "accomplishing
both the political revolution and the social revolution at one stroke"; they
do not understand that our revolution is divided into stages, that we can
only proceed to the next stage of revolution after accomplishing the first,
and that there is no such thing as "accomplishing both at one stroke". Their
approach is likewise very harmful because it confuses the steps to be taken
in the revolution and weakens the effort directed towards the current task.
It is correct and in accord with the Marxist theory of revolutionary development
to say of the two revolutionary stages that the first provides the conditions
for the second and that the two must be consecutive, without allowing any
intervening stage of bourgeois dictatorship. However, it is a utopian view
rejected by true revolutionaries to say that the democratic revolution does
not have a specific task and period of its own but can be merged and accomplished
simultaneously with another task, i.e., the socialist task (which
can only be carried out in another period), and this is what they call
"accomplishing both at one stroke".

IX. REFUTATION OF THE DIE-HARDS


The bourgeois die-hards in their turn come forward and say: "Well, you Communists
have postponed the socialist system to a later stage and have declared, 'The
Three People's Principles being what China needs today, our Party is ready
to fight for their complete realization.' [11]
All right then, fold up your communism for the time being." A fearful hullabaloo
has recently been raised with this sort of argument in the form of the "one
doctrine" theory. In essence it is the howl of the die-hards for bourgeois
despotism. Out of courtesy, however, we may simply describe it as totally
lacking in common sense.

Communism is at once a complete system of proletarian ideology and a new
social system. It is different from any other ideology or social system,
and is the most complete, progressive, revolutionary and rational system
in human history. The ideological and social system of feudalism has a place
only in the museum of history. The ideological and social system of capitalism
has also become a museum piece in one part of the world (in the Soviet Union),
while in other countries it resembles "a dying person who is sinking fast,
like the sun setting beyond the western hills", and will soon be relegated
to the museum. The communist ideological and social system alone is full
of youth and vitality, sweeping the world with the momentum of an avalanche
and the force of a thunderbolt. The introduction of scientific communism
into China has opened new vistas for people and has changed the face of the
Chinese revolution. Without communism to guide it, China's democratic revolution
cannot possibly succeed, let alone move on to the next stage. This is the
reason why the bourgeois die-hards are so loudly demanding that communism
be "folded up". But it must not be "folded up", for once communism is "folded
up", China will be doomed. The whole world today depends on communism for
its salvation, and China is no exception.

Everybody knows that the Communist Party has an immediate and a future programme,
a minimum and a maximum programme, with regard to the social system it advocates.
For the present period, New Democracy, and for the future, socialism; these
are two parts of an organic whole, guided by one and the same communist ideology.
Is it not, therefore, in the highest degree absurd to clamour for communism
to be "folded up" on the ground that the Communist Party's minimum programme
is in basic agreement with the political tenets of the Three People's Principles?
It is precisely because of this basic agreement between the two that we
Communists find it possible to recognize "the Three People's Principles as
the political basis for the anti-Japanese united front" and to acknowledge
that "the Three People's Principles being what China needs today, our Party
is ready to fight for their complete realization"; otherwise no such possibility
would exist. Here we have a united front between communism and the Three
People's Principles in the stage of the democratic revolution, the kind of
united front Dr. Sun Yat-sen had in mind when he said: "communism is the
good friend of the Three People's
Principles."[12] To reject communism is in fact
to reject the united front. The die-hards have concocted absurd arguments
for the rejection of communism. Just because they want to reject the united
front and practice their one-party doctrine.

Moreover, the "one doctrine" theory is an absurdity. So long as classes exist,
there will be as many doctrines as there are classes, and even various groups
in the same class may have their different doctrines. Since the feudal class
has a feudal doctrine, the bourgeoisie a capitalist doctrine, the Buddhists
Buddhism, the Christians Christianity and the peasants polytheism, and since
in recent years, some people have also advocated Kemalism, fascism,
vitalism,[13] the "doctrine of distribution according
to labour",[14] and what not, why then cannot
the proletariat have its communism? Since there are countless "isms", why
should the cry of "Fold it up !" be raised at the sight of communism alone?
Frankly, "folding it up" will not work. Let us rather have a contest. If
communism is beaten, we Communists will admit defeat in good grace. But if
not, then let all that stuff about "one doctrine", which violates the Principle
of Democracy, be "folded up" as soon as possible.

To avoid misunderstanding and for the edification of the die-hards, it is
necessary to show clearly where the Three People's Principles and communism
do coincide and where they do not.

Comparison of the two reveals both similarities and differences.

First for the similarities. They are to be found in the basic political programme
of both doctrines during the stage of the bourgeois-democratic revolution
in China. The three political tenets of the revolutionary Three People's
Principles of Nationalism, Democracy and the People's Livelihood as reinterpreted
by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in 1924 are basically similar to the communist political
programme for the stage of the democratic revolution in China. Because of
these similarities and because of the carrying out of the Three People's
Principles, the united front of the two doctrines and the two parties came
into existence. It is wrong to ignore this aspect.

Next for the differences. (1) There is a difference in part of the programme
for the stage of the democratic revolution. The communist programme for the
whole course of the democratic revolution includes full rights for the people,
the eight-hour working day and a thorough agrarian revolution, whereas the
Three People's Principles do not. Unless these points are added to the Three
People's Principles and there is the readiness to carry them out, the two
democratic programmes are only basically the same and cannot be described
as altogether the same. (2) Another difference is that one includes the stage
of the socialist revolution, and the other does not. Communism envisages
the stage of the socialist revolution beyond the stage of the democratic
revolution, and hence, beyond its minimum programme it has a maximum programme,
i.e., the programme for the attainment of socialism and communism.
The Three People's Principles which envisage only the stage of the democratic
revolution and not the stage of the socialist revolution have only a minimum
programme and not a maximum programme, i.e., they have no programme
for the establishment of socialism and communism. (3) There is the difference
in world outlook. The world outlook of communism is dialectical and historical
materialism, while the Three People's Principles explain history in terms
of the people's livelihood, which in essence is a dualist or idealist outlook;
the two world outlooks are opposed to each other .(4) There is the difference
in revolutionary thoroughness. With communists, theory and practice go together,
i.e.; communists possess revolutionary thoroughness. With the followers
of the Three People's Principles, except for those completely loyal to the
revolution and to truth, theory and practice do not go together and their
deeds contradict their words, i.e., they lack revolutionary
thoroughness. The above are the differences between the two. They distinguish
communists from the followers of the Three People's Principles. It is undoubtedly
very wrong to ignore this distinction and see only the aspect of unity and
not of contradiction.

Once all this is understood, it is easy to see what the bourgeois die-hards
have in mind when they demand that communism be "folded up". If it does not
mean bourgeois despotism, then there is no sense to it at all.

X. THE THREE PEOPLE'S PRINCIPLES, OLD AND NEW


The bourgeois die-hards have no understanding whatsoever of historical change;
their knowledge is so poor that it is practically nonexistent. They do not
know the difference either between communism and the Three People's Principles
or between the new Three People's principles and the old.

We Communists recognize "the Three People's Principles as the political basis
for the Anti-Japanese National United Front", we acknowledge that "the Three
People's Principles being what China needs today, our Party is ready to fight
for their complete realization" and we admit the basic agreement between
the communist minimum programme and the political tenets of the Three People's
Principles. But which kind of Three People's Principles? The Three People's
Principles as reinterpreted by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in the Manifesto of the First
National Congress of the Kuomintang, and no other. I wish the die-hard gentlemen
would spare a moment from the work of "restricting communism", "corroding
communism" and "combating communism", in which they are so gleefully engaged,
to glance through this manifesto. In the manifesto Dr. Sun Yat-sen said:
"Here is the true interpretation of the Kuomintang's Three People's Principles."
Hence these are the only genuine Three People's Principles and all others
are spurious. The only "true interpretation" of the Three People's Principles
is the one contained in the Manifesto of the First National Congress of the
Kuomintang, and all other interpretations are false. Presumably this is no
Communist fabrication, for many Kuomintang members and I myself personally
witnessed the adoption of the manifesto.

The manifesto marks off the two epochs in the history of the Three People's
Principles. Before it, they belonged to the old category; they were the Three
People's Principles of the old bourgeois-democratic revolution in a semi-colony,
the Three People's Principles of old democracy, the old Three People's
Principles.

After it, they came within the new category; they became the Three People's
Principles of the new bourgeois-democratic revolution in a semi-colony, the
Three People's Principles of New Democracy, the new Three People's Principles.
These and these alone are the revolutionary Three People's Principles of
the new period.

The revolutionary Three People's Principles of the new period, the new or
genuine Three People's Principles, embody the Three Great Policies of alliance
with Russia, co-operation with the Communist Party and assistance to the
peasants and workers. Without each and every one of these Three Great Policies,
the Three People's Principles become either false or incomplete in the new
period.

In the first place, the revolutionary, new or genuine Three People's Principles
must include alliance with Russia. As things are today, it is perfectly clear
that unless there is the policy of alliance with Russia, with the land of
socialism, there will inevitably be a policy of alliance with imperialism,
with the imperialist powers. Is this not exactly what happened after 1927?
Once the conflict between the socialist Soviet Union and the imperialist
powers grows sharper, China will have to take her stand on one side or the
other. This is an inevitable trend. Is it possible to avoid leaning to either
side? No, that is an illusion The whole world will be swept into one or the
other of these two fronts, and "neutrality" will then be merely a deceptive
term. Especially is this true of China which, fighting an imperialist power
that has penetrated deep into her territory, cannot conceive of ultimate
victory without the assistance of the Soviet Union. If alliance with Russia
is sacrificed for the sake of alliance with imperialism, the word "revolutionary"
will have to be expunged from the Three People's Principles, which will then
become reactionary. In the last analysis, there can be no "neutral" Three
People's Principles; they can only be either revolutionary or
counter-revolutionary. Would it not be more heroic to "fight against attacks
from both sides"[15] as Wang Ching-wei once remarked,
and to have the kind of Three People's Principles that serves this "fight"?
Unfortunately, even its inventor Wang Chingwei himself has abandoned (or
"folded up") this kind of Three People's Principles, for he has adopted the
Three People's Principles of alliance with imperialism. If it is argued that
there is a difference between Eastern and Western imperialism, and that,
unlike Wang Ching-wei who has allied himself with Eastern imperialism, one
should ally oneself with some of the Western imperialists to march eastward
and attack, then would not such conduct be quite revolutionary? However,
whether you like it or not, the Western imperialists are determined to oppose
the Soviet Union and communism, and if you ally yourself with them, they
will ask you to march northward and attack, and your revolution will come
to nothing. All these circumstances make it essential for the revolutionary,
new and genuine Three People's Principles to include alliance with Russia,
and under no circumstances alliance with imperialism against Russia.

In the second place, the revolutionary, new and genuine Three People's Principles
must include co-operation with the Communist Party. Either you co-operate
with the Communist Party or you oppose it. Opposition to communism is the
policy of the Japanese imperialists and Wang Ching-wei, and if that is what
you want, very well, they will invite you to join their Anti-Communist Company.
But wouldn't that look suspiciously like turning traitor? You may say, "I
am not following Japan, but some other country." That is just ridiculous.
No matter whom you follow, the moment you oppose the Communist Party you
become a traitor, because you can no longer resist Japan. If you say, "I
am going to oppose the Communist Party independently", that is arrant nonsense.
How can the "heroes" in a colony or semi-colony tackle a counter-revolutionary
job of this magnitude without depending on the strength of imperialism? For
ten long years, virtually all the imperialist forces in the world were enlisted
against the Communist Party, but in vain. How can you suddenly oppose it
"independently"? Some people outside the Border Region, we are told, are
now saying "Opposing the Communist Party is good, but you can never succeed
in it." This remark, if it is not simply hearsay, is only half wrong, for
what "good" is there in opposing the Communist Party? But the other half
is true, you certainly can "never succeed in it". Basically, the reason lies
not with the Communists but with the common people, who like the Communist
Party and do not like "opposing" it. If you oppose the Communist Party at
a juncture when our national enemy is penetrating deep into our territory,
the people will be after your hide; they will certainly show you no mercy.
This much is certain, whoever wants to oppose the Communist Party must be
prepared to be ground to dust. If you are not keen on being ground to dust,
you had certainly better drop this opposition. This is our sincere advice
to all the anti-Communist "heroes". Thus it is as clear as can be that the
Three People's Principles of today must include co-operation with the Communist
Party, or otherwise those Principles will perish. It is a question of life
and death for the Three People's Principles. Co-operating with the Communist
Party, they will survive; opposing the Communist Party, they will perish.
Can anyone prove the contrary?

In the third place, the revolutionary, new and genuine Three People's Principles
must include the policy of assisting the peasants and workers. Rejection
of this policy, failure whole-heartedly to assist the peasants and workers
or failure to carry out the behest in Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Testament to "arouse
the masses of the people", amounts to preparing the way for the defeat of
the revolution, and one's own defeat into the bargain. Stalin has said that
"in essence, the national question is a peasant
question".[16] This means that the Chinese revolution
is essentially a peasant revolution and that the resistance to Japan now
going on is essentially peasant resistance. Essentially, the politics of
New Democracy means giving the peasants their rights. The new and genuine
Three People's Principles are essentially the principles of a peasant revolution.
Essentially, mass culture means raising the cultural level of the peasants.
The anti-Japanese war is essentially a peasant war. We are now living in
a time when the "principle of going up into the hills"
[17] applies; meetings, work, classes, newspaper
publication, the writing of books, theatrical performances--everything is
done up in the hills, and all essentially for the sake of the peasants. And
essentially it is the peasants who provide everything that sustains the
resistance to Japan and keeps us going. By "essentially" we mean basically,
not ignoring the other sections of the people, as Stalin himself has explained.
As every schoolboy knows, 80 per cent of China's population are peasants.
So the peasant problem becomes the basic problem of the Chinese revolution
and the strength of the peasants is the main strength of the Chinese revolution.
In the Chinese population the workers rank second to the peasants in number.
There are several million industrial workers in China and several tens of
millions of handicraft workers and agricultural labourers. China cannot live
without her workers in the various industries, because they are the producers
in the industrial sector of the economy. And the revolution cannot succeed
without the modern industrial working class, because it is the leader of
the Chinese revolution and is the most revolutionary class. In these
circumstances, the revolutionary, new and genuine Three People's Principles
must include the policy of assisting the peasants and workers. Any other
kind of Three People's Principles which lack this policy, do not give the
peasants and workers whole-hearted assistance or do not carry out the behest
to "arouse the masses of the people"; will certainly perish.

Thus it is clear that there is no future for any Three People's Principles
which depart from the Three Great Policies of alliance with Russia, co-operation
with the Communist Party and assistance to the peasants and workers. Every
conscientious follower of the Three People's Principles must seriously consider
this point.

The Three People's Principles comprising the Three Great Policies --in other
words, the revolutionary, new and genuine Three People's Principles--are
the Three People's Principles of New Democracy, a development of the old
Three People's Principles, a great contribution of Dr. Sun Yat-sen's and
a product of the era in which the Chinese revolution has become part of the
world socialist revolution. It is only these Three People's Principles which
the Chinese Communist Party regards as "being what China needs today" and
for whose "complete realization" it declares itself pledged "to fight". These
are the only Three People's Principles which are in basic agreement with
the Communist Party's political programme for the stage of democratic revolution
namely, with its minimum programme.

As for the old Three People's Principles, they were a product of the old
period of the Chinese revolution. Russia was then an imperialist power, and
naturally there could be no policy of alliance with her; there was then no
Communist Party in existence in our country, and naturally there could be
no policy of co-operation with it; the movement of the workers and peasants
had not yet revealed its full political significance and aroused people's
attention, and naturally there could be no policy of alliance with them.
Hence the Three Peoples Principles of the period before the reorganization
of the Kuomintang in 1924 belonged to the old category, and they became obsolete.
The Kuomintang could not have gone forward unless it had developed them into
the new Three People's Principles. Dr. Sun Yat-sen in his wisdom saw this
point, secured the help of the Soviet Union and the Chinese Communist Party
and reinterpreted the Three People's Principles so as to endow them with
new characteristics suited to the times; as a result, a united front was
formed between the Three People's Principles and communism, Kuomintang-Communist
cooperation was established for the first time, the sympathy of the people
of the whole country was won, and the revolution of 1924-27 was launched.

The old Three People's Principles were revolutionary in the old period and
reflected its historical features. But if the old stuff is repeated in the
new period after the new Three People's Principles have been established,
or alliance with Russia is opposed after the socialist state has been
established, or co-operation with the Communist Party is opposed after the
Communist Party has come into existence, or the policy of assisting the peasants
and workers is opposed after they have awakened and demonstrated their political
strength, then that is reactionary and shows ignorance of the times. The
period of reaction after 1927 was the result of such ignorance. The old proverb
says, "Whosoever understands the signs of the times is a great man." I hope
the followers of the Three People's Principles today will bear this in mind.

Were the Three People's Principles to fall within the old category, then
they would have nothing basically in common with the communist minimum programme,
because they would belong to the past and be obsolete. Any sort of Three
People's Principles that oppose Russia, the Communist Party or the peasants
and workers are definitely reactionary; they not only have absolutely nothing
in common with the communist minimum programme but are the enemy of communism,
and there is no common ground at all. This, too, the followers of the Three
People's Principles should carefully consider.

In any case, people with a conscience will never forsake the new Three People's
Principles until the task of opposing imperialism and feudalism is basically
accomplished. The only ones who do are people like Wang Ching-wei. No matter
how energetically they push their spurious Three People's Principles which
oppose Russia, the Communist Party and the peasants and workers, there will
surely be no lack of people with a conscience and sense of justice who will
continue to support Sun Yat-sen's genuine Three People's Principles. Many
followers of the genuine Three People's Principles continued the struggle
for the Chinese revolution even after the reaction of 1927, and their numbers
will undoubtedly swell to tens upon tens of thousands now that the national
enemy has penetrated deep into our territory. We Communists will always persevere
in long-term co-operation with all the true followers of the Three People's
Principles and, while rejecting the traitors and the sworn enemies of communism,
will never forsake any of our friends.

XI. THE CULTURE OF NEW DEMOCRACY


In the foregoing we have explained the historical characteristics of Chinese
politics in the new period and the question of the new-democratic republic.
We can now proceed to the question of culture.

A given culture is the ideological reflection of the politics and economics
of a given society. There is in China an imperialist culture which is a
reflection of imperialist rule, or partial rule, in the political and economic
fields. This culture is fostered not only by the cultural organizations run
directly by the imperialists in China but by a number of Chinese who have
lost all sense of shame. Into this category falls all culture embodying a
slave ideology. China also has a semi-feudal culture which reflects her
semi-feudal politics and economy, and whose exponents include all those who
advocate the worship of Confucius, the study of the Confucian canon, the
old ethical code and the old ideas in opposition to the new culture and new
ideas. Imperialist culture and semi-feudal culture are devoted brothers and
have formed a reactionary cultural alliance against China's new culture.
This kind of reactionary culture serves the imperialists and the feudal class
and must be swept away. Unless it is swept away, no new culture of any kind
can be built up. There is no construction without destruction, no flowing
without damming and no motion without rest; the two are locked in a
life-and-death struggle.

As for the new culture, it is the ideological reflection of the new politics
and the new economy which it sets out to serve.

As we have already stated in Section 3, Chinese society has gradually changed
in character since the emergence of a capitalist economy in China; it is
no longer an entirely feudal but a semi-feudal society, although the feudal
economy still predominates. Compared with the feudal economy, this capitalist
economy is a new one. The political forces of the bourgeoisie, the petty
bourgeoisie and the proletariat are the new political forces which have emerged
and grown simultaneously with this new capitalist economy. And the new culture
reflects these new economic and political forces in the field of ideology
and serves them. Without the capitalist economy, without the bourgeoisie,
the petty bourgeoisie and the proletariat, and without the political forces
of these classes, the new ideology or new culture could not have emerged.

These new political, economic and cultural forces are all revolutionary forces
which are opposed to the old politics, the old economy and the old culture.
The old is composed of two parts, one being China's own semi-feudal politics,
economy and culture, and the other the politics, economy and culture of
imperialism, with the latter heading the alliance. Both are bad and should
be completely destroyed. The struggle between the new and the old in Chinese
society is a struggle between the new forces of the people (the various
revolutionary classes) and the old forces of imperialism and the feudal class.
It is a struggle between revolution and counter-revolution. This struggle
has lasted a full hundred years if dated from the Opium War, and nearly thirty
years if dated from the Revolution of 1911.

But as already indicated, revolutions too can be classified into old and
new, and what is new in one historical period becomes old in another. The
century of China's bourgeois-democratic revolution can be divided into two
main stages, a first stage of eighty years and a second of twenty years.
Each has its basic historical characteristics: China's bourgeois-democratic
revolution in the first eighty years belongs to the old category, while in
the last twenty years, owing to the change in the international and domestic
political situation, it belongs to the new category. Old democracy is the
characteristic of the first eighty years. New Democracy is the characteristic
of the last twenty. This distinction holds good in culture as well as in
politics.

How does it manifest itself in the field of culture? We shall explain this
next.

XII. THE HISTORICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF CHINA'S CULTURAL
  REVOLUTION


On the cultural or ideological front, the two periods preceding and following
the May 4th Movement form two distinct historical periods.

Before the May 4th Movement, the struggle on China's cultural front was one
between the new culture of the bourgeoisie and the old culture of the feudal
class. The struggles between the modern school system and the imperial
examination system,[18] between the new learning
and the old learning, and between Western learning and Chinese learning,
were all of this nature. The so-called modern schools or new learning or
Western learning of that time concentrated mainly (we say mainly, because
in part pernicious vestiges of Chinese feudalism still remained) on the natural
sciences and bourgeois social and political theories, which were needed by
the representatives of the bourgeoisie. At the time, the ideology of the
new learning played a revolutionary role in fighting the Chinese feudal ideology,
and it served the bourgeois-democratic revolution of the old period. However,
because the Chinese bourgeoisie lacked strength and the world had already
entered the era of imperialism, this bourgeois ideology was only able to
last out a few rounds and was beaten back by the reactionary alliance of
the enslaving ideology of foreign imperialism and the "back to the ancients"
ideology of Chinese feudalism; as soon as this reactionary ideological alliance
started a minor counter-offensive, the so-called new learning lowered its
banners, muffled its drums and beat a retreat, retaining its outer form but
losing its soul. The old bourgeois-democratic culture became enervated and
decayed in the era of imperialism, and its failure was inevitable.

But since the May 4th Movement things have been different. A brand-new cultural
force came into being in China, that is, the communist culture and ideology
guided by the Chinese Communists, or the communist world outlook and theory
of social revolution. The May 4th Movement occurred in 1919, and in 1921
came the founding of the Chinese Communist Party and the real beginning of
China's labour movement--all in the wake of the First World War and the October
Revolution, i.e., at a time when the national problem and the colonial
revolutionary movements of the world underwent a change, and the connection
between the Chinese revolution and the world revolution became quite obvious.
The new political force of the proletariat and the Communist Party entered
the Chinese political arena, and as a result, the new cultural force, in
new uniform and with new weapons, mustering all possible allies and deploying
its ranks in battle array, launched heroic attacks on imperialist culture
and feudal culture. This new force has made great strides in the domain of
the social sciences and of the arts and letters, whether of philosophy,
economics, political science, military science, history, literature or art
(including the theatre, the cinema, music, sculpture and painting). For the
last twenty years, wherever this new cultural force has directed its attack,
a great revolution has taken place both in ideological content and in form
(for example, in the written language). Its influence has been so great and
its impact so powerful that it is invincible wherever it goes. The numbers
it has rallied behind it have no parallel in Chinese history. Lu Hsun was
the greatest and the most courageous standard-bearer of this new cultural
force. The chief commander of China's cultural revolution, he was not only
a great man of letters but a great thinker and revolutionary. Lu Hsun was
a man of unyielding integrity, free from all sycophancy or obsequiousness;
this quality is invaluable among colonial and semi-colonial peoples. Representing
the great majority of the nation, Lu Hsun breached and stormed the enemy
citadel; on the cultural front he was the bravest and most correct, the firmest,
the most loyal and the most ardent national hero, a hero without parallel
in our history. The road he took was the very road of China's new national
culture.

Prior to the May 4th Movement, China's new culture was a culture of the
old-democratic kind and part of the capitalist cultural revolution of the
world bourgeoisie. Since the May 4th Movement, it has become new-democratic
and part of the socialist cultural revolution of the world proletariat.

Prior to the May 4th Movement, China's new cultural movement, her cultural
revolution, was led by the bourgeoisie, which still had a leading role to
play. After the May 4th Movement, its culture and ideology became even more
backward than its politics and were incapable of playing any leading role;
at most, they could serve to a certain extent as an ally during revolutionary
periods, while inevitably the responsibility for leading the alliance rested
on proletarian culture and ideology. This is an undeniable fact.

The new-democratic culture is the anti-imperialist and anti-feudal culture
of the broad masses; today it is the culture of the anti-Japanese united
front. This culture can be led only by the culture and ideology of the
proletariat, by the ideology of communism, and not by the culture and ideology
of any other class. In a word, new-democratic culture is the proletarian-led,
anti-imperialist and anti-feudal culture of the broad masses.

XIII. THE FOUR PERIODS


A cultural revolution is the ideological reflection of the political and
economic revolution and is in their service. In China there is a united front
in the cultural as in the political revolution.

The history of the united front in the cultural revolution during the last
twenty years can be divided into four periods. The first covers the two years
from 1919 to 1921, the second the six years from 1921 to 1927, the third
the ten years from 1927 to 1937, and the fourth the three years from 1937
to the present.

The first period extended from the May 4th Movement of 1919 to the founding
of the Chinese Communist Party in 1921. The May 4th Movement was its chief
landmark.

The May 4th Movement was an anti-imperialist as well as an anti-feudal movement.
Its outstanding historical significance is to be seen in a feature which
was absent from the Revolution of 1911, namely, its thorough and uncompromising
opposition to imperialism as well as to feudalism. The May 4th Movement possessed
this quality because capitalism had developed a step further in China and
because new hopes had arisen for the liberation of the Chinese nation as
China's revolutionary intellectuals saw the collapse of three great imperialist
powers, Russia, Germany and Austria-Hungary, and the weakening of two others,
Britain and France, while the Russian proletariat had established a socialist
state and the German, Hungarian and Italian proletariat had risen in revolution.
The May 4th Movement came into being at the call of the world revolution,
of the Russian Revolution and of Lenin. It was part of the world proletarian
revolution of the time. Although the Communist Party had not yet come into
existence, there were already large numbers of intellectuals who approved
of the Russian Revolution and had the rudiments of Communist ideology. In
the beginning the May 4th Movement was the revolutionary movement of a united
front of three sections of people--communist intellectuals, revolutionary
petty-bourgeois intellectuals and bourgeois intellectuals (the last forming
the right wing of the movement). Its shortcoming was that it was confined
to the intellectuals and that the workers and peasants did not join in. But
as soon as it developed into the June 3rd Movement,
[19] not only the intellectuals but the mass of the
proletariat, the petty bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie joined in, and it
became a nation-wide revolutionary movement. The cultural revolution ushered
in by the May 4th Movement was uncompromising in its opposition to feudal
culture; there had never been such a great and thoroughgoing cultural revolution
since the dawn of Chinese history. Raising aloft the two great banners of
the day, "Down with the old ethics and up with the new!" and "Down with the
old literature and up with the new!", the cultural revolution had great
achievements to its credit. At that time it was not yet possible for this
cultural movement to become widely diffused among the workers and peasants.
The slogan of "Literature for the common people" was advanced, but in fact
the "common people" then could only refer to the petty-bourgeois and bourgeois
intellectuals in the cities, that is, the urban intelligentsia. Both in ideology
and in the matter of cadres, the May 4th Movement paved the way for the founding
of the Chinese Communist Party in 1921 and for the May 30th Movement in 1925
and the Northern Expedition. The bourgeois intellectuals, who constituted
the right wing of the May 4th Movement, mostly compromised with the enemy
in the second period and went over to the side of reaction.

In the second period, whose landmarks were the founding of the Chinese Communist
Party, the May 30th Movement and the Northern Expedition, the united front
of the three classes formed in the May 4th Movement was continued and expanded,
the peasantry was drawn into it and a political united front of all these
classes, the first instance of Kuomintang-Communist co-operation, was
established. Dr. Sun Yat-sen was a great man not only because he led the
great Revolution of 1911 (although it was only a democratic revolution of
the old period), but also because, "adapting himself to the trends of the
world and meeting the needs of the masses", he had the capacity to bring
forward the revolutionary Three Great Policies of alliance with Russia,
co-operation with the Communist Party and assistance to the peasants and
workers, give new meaning to the Three People's Principles and thus institute
the new Three People's Principles with their Three Great Policies. Previously,
the Three People's Principles had exerted little influence on the educational
and academic world or with the youth, because they had not raised the issues
of opposition to imperialism or to the feudal social system and feudal culture
and ideology. They were the old Three People's Principles which people regarded
as the time-serving banner of a group of men bent on seizing power, in other
words, on securing official positions, a banner used purely for political
maneuvering. Then came the new Three People's Principles with their Three
Great Policies. The co-operation between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party and the joint efforts of the revolutionary members of the two parties
spread the new Three People's Principles all over China, extending to a section
of the educational and academic world and the mass of student youth. This
was entirely due to the fact that the original Three People's Principles
had developed into the anti-imperialist, anti-feudal and new-democratic Three
People's Principles with their Three Great Policies. Without this development
it would have been impossible to disseminate the ideas of the Three People's
Principles.

During this period, the revolutionary Three People's Principles became the
political basis of the united front of the Kuomintang and the Communist Party
and of all the revolutionary classes, and since "communism is the good friend
of the Three People's Principles", a united front was formed between the
two of them. In terms of social classes, it was a united front of the
proletariat, the peasantry, the urban petty bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie.
Using the Communist Weekly Guide, the Kuomintang's Republican
Daily News of Shanghai and other newspapers in various localities as
their bases of operations, the two parties jointly advocated anti-imperialism,
jointly combated feudal education based upon the worship of Confucius and
upon the study of the Confucian canon and jointly opposed feudal literature
and the classical language and promoted the new literature and the vernacular
style of writing with an anti-imperialist and anti-feudal content. During
the wars in Kwangtung and during the Northern Expedition, they reformed China's
armed forces by the inculcation of anti-imperialist and anti-feudal ideas.
The slogans, "Down with the Corrupt officials" and "Down with the local tyrants
and evil gentry", were raised among the peasant millions, and great peasant
revolutionary struggles were aroused. Thanks to all this and to the assistance
of the Soviet Union, the Northern Expedition was victorious. But no sooner
did the big bourgeoisie climb to power than it put an end to this revolution,
thus creating an entirely new political situation

The third period was the new revolutionary period of 1927-37. As a change
had taken place within the revolutionary camp towards the end of the second
period, with the big bourgeoisie going over to the counter-revolutionary
camp of the imperialist and feudal forces and the national bourgeoisie trailing
after it, only three of the four classes formerly within the revolutionary
camp remained, i.e., the proletariat, the peasantry and the other
sections of the petty bourgeoisie (including the revolutionary intellectuals),
and consequently the Chinese revolution inevitably entered a new period in
which the Chinese Communist Party alone gave leadership to the masses. This
period was one of counter-revolutionary campaigns of "encirclement and
suppression", on the one hand, and of the deepening of the revolution, on
the other. There were two kinds of counter-revolutionary campaigns of
"encirclement and suppression", the military and the cultural. The deepening
of the revolution was of two kinds; both the agrarian and the cultural
revolutions were deepened. At the instigation of the imperialists, the
counter-revolutionary forces of the whole country and of the whole world
were mobilized for both kinds of campaigns of "encirclement and suppression",
which lasted no less than ten years and were unparalleled in their ruthlessness;
hundreds of thousands of Communists and young students were slaughtered and
millions of workers and peasants suffered cruel persecution. The people
responsible for all this apparently had no doubt that communism and the Communist
Party could be "exterminated once and for all". However, the outcome was
different; both kinds of "encirclement and suppression" campaigns failed
miserably. The military campaign resulted in the northern march of the Red
Army to resist the Japanese, and the cultural campaign resulted in the outbreak
of the December 8th Movement of the revolutionary youth in 1935. And the
common result of both was the awakening of the people of the whole country.
These were three positive results. The most amazing thing of all was that
the Kuomintang's cultural "encirclement and suppression" campaign failed
completely in the Kuomintang areas as well, although the Communist Party
was in an utterly defenceless position in all the cultural and educational
institutions there. Why did this happen? Does it not give food for prolonged
and deep thought? It was in the very midst of such campaigns of "encirclement
and suppression" that Lu Hsun, who believed in communism, became the giant
of China's cultural revolution

The negative result of the counter-revolutionary campaigns of "encirclement
and suppression" was the invasion of our country by Japanese imperialism.
This is the chief reason why to this very day the people of the whole country
still bitterly detest those ten years of anti-communism.

In the struggles of this period, the revolutionary side firmly upheld the
people's anti-imperialist and anti-feudal New Democracy and their new Three
People's Principles, while the counter-revolutionary side under the direction
of imperialism, imposed the despotic regime of the coalition of the landlord
class and the big bourgeoisie. That despotic regime butchered Dr. Sun Yat-sen's
Three Great Policies and his new Three People's Principles both politically
and culturally, with catastrophic consequences to the Chinese nation.

The fourth period is that of the present anti-Japanese war. Pursuing its
zigzag course, the Chinese revolution has again arrived at a united front
of the four classes; but the scope of the united front is now much
broader because its upper stratum includes many members of the ruling classes,
its middle stratum includes the national bourgeoisie and the petty bourgeoisie,
and its lower stratum includes the entire proletariat, so that the various
classes and strata of the nation have become members of the alliance resolutely
resisting Japanese imperialism. The first stage of this period lasted until
the fall of Wuhan. During that stage, there was a lively atmosphere in the
country in every field politically there was a trend towards democracy and
culturally there was fairly widespread activity. With the fall of Wuhan the
second stage began, during which the political situation has undergone many
changes, with one section of the big bourgeoisie capitulating to the enemy
and another desiring an early end to the War of Resistance. In the cultural
sphere, this situation has been reflected in the reactionary activities of
Yeh Ching, [20] Chang Chun-mai and others, and
in the suppression of freedom of speech and of the press.

To overcome this crisis, a firm struggle is necessary against all ideas opposed
to resistance, unity and progress, and unless these reactionary ideas are
crushed, there will be no hope of victory. How will this struggle turn out?
This is the big question in the minds of the people of the whole country.
Judging by the domestic and international situation, the Chinese people are
bound to win, however numerous the obstacles on the path of resistance. The
progress achieved during the twenty years since the May 4th Movement exceeds
not only that of the preceding eighty years but virtually surpasses that
achieved in the thousands of years of Chinese history. Can we not visualize
what further progress China will make in another twenty years? The unbridled
violence of all the forces of darkness, whether domestic or foreign, has
brought disaster to our nation; but this very violence indicates that while
the forces of darkness still have some strength left, they are already in
their death throes, and that the people are gradually approaching victory.
This is true of China, of the whole East and of the entire world.

XIV. SOME WRONG IDEAS ABOUT THE NATURE OF CULTURE


Everything new comes from the forge of hard and bitter struggle. This is
also true of the new culture which has followed a zigzag course in the past
twenty years, during which both the good and the bad were tested and proved
in struggle.

The bourgeois die-hards are as hopelessly wrong on the question of culture
as on that of political power. They neither understand the historical
characteristics of this new period in China, nor recognize the new-democratic
culture of the masses. Their starting point is bourgeois despotism, which
in culture becomes the cultural despotism of the bourgeoisie. It seems that
a section (and I refer only to a section) of educated people from the so-called
European-American school [21] who in fact supported
the Kuomintang government's "Communist suppression" campaign on the cultural
front in the past are now supporting its policy of "restricting" and "corroding"
the Communist Party. They do not want the workers and the peasants to hold
up their heads politically or culturally. This bourgeois die-hard road of
cultural despotism leads nowhere; as in the case of political despotism,
the domestic and international pre-conditions are lacking. Therefore this
cultural despotism, too, had better be "folded up".

So far as the orientation of our national culture is concerned, communist
ideology plays the guiding role, and we should work hard both to disseminate
socialism and communism throughout the working class and to educate the peasantry
and other sections of the people in socialism properly and step by step.
However, our national culture as a whole is not yet socialist.

Because of the leadership of the proletariat, the politics, the economy and
the culture of New Democracy all contain an element of socialism, and by
no means a mere casual element but one with a decisive role. However, taken
as a whole, the political, economic and cultural situation so far is
new-democratic and not socialist. For the Chinese revolution in its present
stage is not yet a socialist revolution for the overthrow of capitalism but
a bourgeois-democratic revolution, its central task being mainly that of
combating foreign imperialism and domestic feudalism. In the sphere of national
culture, it is wrong to assume that the existing national culture is, or
should be, socialist in its entirety. That would amount to confusing the
dissemination of communist ideology with the carrying out of an immediate
programme of action, and to confusing the application of the communist standpoint
and method in investigating problems, undertaking research, handling work
and training cadres with the general policy for national education and national
culture in the democratic stage of the Chinese revolution. A national culture
with a socialist content will necessarily be the reflection of a socialist
politics and a socialist economy. There are socialist elements in our politics
and our economy, and hence these socialist elements are reflected in our
national culture; but taking our society as a whole, we do not have a socialist
politics and a socialist economy yet, so that there cannot be a wholly socialist
national culture. Since the present Chinese revolution is part of the world
proletarian-socialist revolution, the new culture of China today is part
of the world proletarian-socialist new culture and is its great ally. While
this part contains vital elements of socialist culture, the national culture
as a whole joins the stream of the world proletarian-socialist new culture
not entirely as a socialist culture, but as the anti-imperialist and anti-feudal
new-democratic culture of the broad masses. And since the Chinese revolution
today cannot do without proletarian leadership, China's new culture cannot
do without the leadership of proletarian culture and ideology, of communist
ideology. At the present stage, however, this kind of leadership means leading
the masses of the people in an anti-imperialist and anti-feudal political
and cultural revolution, and therefore, taken as a whole, the content of
China's new national culture is still not socialist but new-democratic.

Beyond all doubt, now is the time to spread communist ideas more widely and
put more energy into the study of Marxism-Leninism, or otherwise we shall
not only be unable to lead the Chinese revolution forward to the future stage
of socialism, but shall also be unable to guide the present democratic revolution
to victory. However, we must keep the spreading of communist ideas and propaganda
about the Communist social system distinct from the practical application
of the new-democratic programme of action; we must also keep the communist
theory and method of investigating problems, undertaking research, handling
work and training cadres distinct from the new democratic line for national
culture as a whole. It is undoubtedly inappropriate to mix the two up.

It can thus be seen that the content of China's new national culture at the
present stage is neither the cultural despotism of the bourgeoisie nor the
socialism of the proletariat, but the anti-imperialist and anti-feudal New
Democracy of the masses, under the leadership of proletarian-socialist culture
and ideology.

XV. A NATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND MASS CULTURE


New-democratic culture is national. It opposes imperialist oppression and
upholds the dignity and independence of the Chinese nation. It belongs to
our own nation and bears our own national characteristics. It links up with
the socialist and new-democratic cultures of all other nations and they are
related in such a way that they can absorb something from each other and
help each other to develop, together forming a new world culture; but as
a revolutionary national culture it can never link up with any reactionary
imperialist culture of whatever nation. To nourish her own culture China
needs to assimilate a good deal of foreign progressive culture, not enough
of which was done in the past. We should assimilate whatever is useful to
us today not only from the present-day socialist and new-democratic cultures
but also from the earlier cultures of other nations, for example, from the
culture of the various capitalist countries in the Age of Enlightenment.
However, we should not gulp any of this foreign material down uncritically,
but must treat it as we do our food--first chewing it, then submitting it
to the working of the stomach and intestines with their juices and secretions,
and separating it into nutriment to be absorbed and waste matter to be
discarded--before it can nourish us. To advocate "wholesale westernization"
[22] is wrong. China has suffered a great deal from
the mechanical absorption of foreign material. Similarly, in applying Marxism
to China, Chinese communists must fully and properly integrate the universal
truth of Marxism with the concrete practice of the Chinese revolution, or
in other words, the universal truth of Marxism must be combined with specific
national characteristics and acquire a definite national form if it is to
be useful, and in no circumstances can it be applied subjectively as a mere
formula. Marxists who make a fetish of formulas are simply playing the fool
with Marxism and the Chinese revolution, and there is no room for them in
the ranks of the Chinese revolution. Chinese culture should have its own
form, its own national form. National in form and new-democratic in content--such
is our new culture today.

New-democratic culture is scientific. Opposed as it is to all feudal and
superstitious ideas, it stands for seeking truth from facts, for objective
truth and for the unity of theory and practice. On this point, the possibility
exists of a united front against imperialism, feudalism and superstition
between the scientific thought of the Chinese proletariat and those Chinese
bourgeois materialists and natural scientists who are progressive, but in
no case is there a possibility of a united front with any reactionary idealism.
In the field of political action Communists may form an anti-imperialist
and anti-feudal united front with some idealists and even religious people,
but we can never approve of their idealism or religious doctrines. A splendid
old culture was created during the long period of Chinese feudal society.
To study the development of this old culture, to reject its feudal dross
and assimilate its democratic essence is a necessary condition for developing
our new national culture and increasing our national self-confidence, but
we should never swallow anything and everything uncritically. It s imperative
to separate the fine old culture of the people which had a more or less
democratic and revolutionary character from all the decadence of the old
feudal ruling class. China's present new politics and new economy have developed
out of her old politics and old economy, and her present new culture, too,
has developed out of her old culture; therefore, we must respect our own
history and must not lop it off. However, respect for history means giving
it its proper place as a science, respecting its dialectical development,
and not eulogizing the past at the expense of the present or praising every
drop of feudal poison. As far as the masses and the young students are concerned,
the essential thing is to guide them to look forward and not backward.

New-democratic culture belongs to the broad masses and is therefore democratic.
It should serve the toiling masses of workers and peasants who make up more
than 90 per cent of the nation's population d should gradually become their
very own. There is a difference of degree, as well as a close link, between
the knowledge imparted to the revolutionary cadres and the knowledge imparted
to the revolutionary masses, between the raising of cultural standards and
popularization. Revolutionary culture is a powerful revolutionary weapon
for the broad masses of the people. It prepares the ground ideologically
before the revolution comes and is an important, indeed essential, fighting
front in the general revolutionary front during the revolution. People engaged
in revolutionary cultural work are the commanders at various levels on this
cultural front. "Without revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionary
movement"; [23] one can thus see how important
the cultural movement is for the practical revolutionary movement. Both the
cultural and practical movements must be of the masses. Therefore all progressive
cultural workers in the anti-Japanese war must have their own cultural
battalions, that is, the broad masses. A revolutionary cultural worker who
is not close to the people is a commander without an army, whose fire-power
cannot bring the enemy down. To attain this objective, written Chinese must
be reformed, given the requisite conditions, and our spoken language brought
closer to that of the people, for the people, it must be stressed, are the
inexhaustible source of our revolutionary culture.

A national, scientific and mass culture--such is the anti-imperialist and
anti-feudal culture of the people, the culture of New Democracy, the new
culture of the Chinese nation.

Combine the politics, the economy and the culture of New Democracy, and you
have the new-democratic republic, the Republic of China both in name and
in reality, the new China we want to create.

Behold, New China is within sight. Let us all hail her!

Her masts have already risen above the horizon. Let us all cheer in
welcome!

Raise both your hands. New China is ours!

NOTES


1. Chinese Culture was a magazine founded in January
1940 in Yenan; the present article appeared in the first number.

2. See V. I. Lenin, "Once Again on the Trade Unions, the
Present Situation and the Mistakes of Trotsky and Bukharin", Selected
Works, Eng. ed., International Publishers, New York, 1943, Vol. IX,
p. 54.

3. Karl Marx, "Preface to A Contribution to the Critique
of Political Economy", Selected Works of Marx and Engels, Eng. ed.,
FLPH, Moscow, 1958, Vol. I, p. 363

4. Karl Marx, "Theses on Feuerbach", Selected Works
of Marx and Engels, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1958, Vol. II, p. 405.

5. J. V. Stalin, "The October Revolution and the National
Question", Works, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1953, Vol. IV, pp. 169-70.

6. J. V. Stalin, "The National Question Once Again",
Works, Eng. ed., FLPH Moscow, 1954, Vol. VII, pp. 225- 27.

7. V. I. Lenin, "Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism",
Selected Works Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1950, Vol. I, Part 2, p.
566.

8. These anti-Soviet campaigns were instigated by the
Kuomintang government following Chiang Kai-shek's betrayal of the revolution.
On December 13, 1927, the Kuomintang murdered the Soviet vice-consul in Canton
and on the next day its government in Nanking issued a decree breaking off
relations with Russia, withdrawing official recognition from Soviet consuls
in the provinces and ordering Soviet commercial establishments to cease activity.
In August 1929 Chiang Kai-shek, under the instigation of the imperialists,
organized acts of provocation in the Northeast against the Soviet Union,
which resulted in armed clashes.

9. After World War I the British imperialists instigated
their vassal Greece to commit aggression against Turkey, but the Turkish
people, with the help of the Soviet Union, defeated the Greek troops in 1922.
In 1923, Kemal was elected President of Turkey. Stalin said:

A Kemalist revolution is a revolution of the top stratum, a revolution of
the national merchant bourgeoisie, arising in a struggle against the foreign
imperialists, and whose subsequent development is essentially directed against
the peasants and workers, against the very possibility of an agrarian revolution.
("Talk with Students of the Sun Yat-sen University", Works, Eng.
ed., FLPH Moscow, 1954, Vol. IX, p. 261.)

10. The "metaphysics-mongers" were Chang Chun-mai and
his group. After the May 4th movement, Chang openly opposed science and advocated
metaphysics, or what he called "spiritual culture", and thus came to be known
as a "metaphysics-monger". In order to support Chiang Kai-shek and
the Japanese aggressors, he published an "Open Letter to Mr. Mao Tse-tung"
in December 1938 at Chiang Kai-shek's bidding, wildly demanding the abolition
of the Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth Army and the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region.

11. See the manifesto of the Central Committee of the
Chinese Communist Party on the establishment of Kuomintang-Communist
co-operation, issued in September 1937.

12. See Dr. Sun Yat-sen, Lectures on the Principle
of People's Livelihood, 1924, Lecture II.

13. Vitalism was an exposition of Kuomintang
fascism, a hotchpotch ghostwritten by a number of reactionary hacks for Chen
Li-fu, one of the notorious chiefs of Chiang Kai-shek's secret service.

14. The "doctrine of distribution according to labour"
was a high-sounding slogan shamelessly put forward by Yen Hsi-shan, warlord
and representative of the big landlords and big compradors in Shansi Province.

15. "Fight Against Attacks from Both Sides" was the title
of an article written by Wang Ching-wei after his betrayal of the revolution
in 1927.

16. J V. Stalin, "Concerning the National Question in
Yugoslavia", a speech delivered in the Yugoslav Commission of the E.C.C.I.,
March 30, 1925. Stalin said:

... the peasantry constitutes the main army of the national movement, . .
. there is no powerful national movement without the peasant army, nor can
there be. That is what is meant when it is said that, in essence, the
national question is a peasant question. (Works, Eng. ed., FLPH,
Moscow, 1954, Vol. VII, pp. 71-72 )

17. The "principle of going up into the hills" was a dogmatist
gibe against Comrade Mao Tse-tung for his emphasis on rural revolutionary
bases. He makes use of the expression to explain the importance of the role
played by the rural revolutionary bases.

18. The modern school system was the educational system
modelled on that of capitalist countries in Europe and America. The imperial
examination system was the old examination system in feudal China. Towards
the end of the 19th century, enlightened Chinese intellectuals
urged the abolition of the old competitive examination system and the
establishment of modern schools.

19. The June 3rd Movement marked a new stage in the patriotic
movement of May 4. On June 3, 1919, students in Peking held public meetings
and made speeches in defiance of persecution and repression by the army and
police. They went on strike and the strike spread to the workers and merchants
in Shanghai, Nanking, Tientsin, Hangchow, Wuhan and Kiukiang and in the provinces
of Shantung and Anhwei. Thus the May 4th Movement grew into a broad mass
movement in which the proletariat, the urban petty bourgeoisie and the national
bourgeoisie all participated.

20. Yeh Ching was a renegade Communist who became a hired
hack in the Kuomintang secret service.

21. The spokesman of the so-called European-American school
was the counterrevolutionary Hu Shih.

22. Wholesale westernization was the view held by a number
of westernized Chinese bourgeois intellectuals who unconditionally praised
the outmoded individualist bourgeois culture of the West and advocated the
servile imitation of capitalist Europe and America.

23. V. I. Lenin, "What Is to Be Done?", Collected
Works, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1961, Vol. V, p. 369.

  
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Overcome the Danger of Capitulation and Strive for a turn for the Better







OVERCOME THE DANGER OF CAPITULATION AND STRIVE FOR A TURN FOR THE
  BETTER



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

OVERCOME THE DANGER OF CAPITULATION AND STRIVE FOR A TURN FOR THE BETTER


January 28, 1940

[This was an inner-Party directive written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung on
behalf of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party.]
  

Current developments confirm the correctness of the Central Committee's
appraisals. The line of capitulation taken by the big landlord class and
the big bourgeoisie runs sharply counter to the line of armed resistance
taken by the proletariat, the peasantry, the urban petty bourgeoisie and
the middle bourgeoisie, and there is a struggle between the two. Both lines
exist at present, and one or the other can win out in the future. What all
our Party comrades must realize in this connection is that the serious cases
of capitulation, anti-communism and retrogression which have occurred in
various places should not be viewed in isolation. We should realize their
seriousness, combat them resolutely and not be overwhelmed by their impact.
If we lack this spirit and a correct policy for dealing firmly with these
incidents, if we let the Kuomintang die-hards continue their "military and
political restriction of the Communist Party" and are in constant dread at
the thought of the break-up of the united front, then the War of Resistance
will be jeopardized, capitulation and anti-communism will spread throughout
the country, and there will be a real danger of the break-up of the united
front. But it must be made abundantly clear that many objective conditions
favourable to our struggle for continued resistance, unity and progress are
still present both at home and abroad. For example, Japan's policy towards
China remains as tough as ever; it is very difficult to rig up a Far Eastern
Munich conference because there has been no real reconciliation between Japan
on the one hand and Britain, the United States and France on the other despite
some lessening of the contradictions between them, and because the British
and French positions in the East have been weakened by the European war;
and the Soviet Union is actively helping China. These are the international
factors which render it difficult for the Kuomintang to capitulate or compromise,
or to launch a nation-wide anti-Communist war. At home, the Communist Party
and the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies are firmly opposing capitulation
and upholding the policy of resistance and unity; the intermediate classes,
too, are against capitulation; and the capitulators and the die-hards within
the Kuomintang, though in power, are numerically a minority. These are the
domestic factors which render it difficult for the Kuomintang to capitulate
or compromise, or to launch a nation-wide anti-Communist war. In these
circumstances, our Party has a twofold task. On the one hand, it must resolutely
resist the military and political offensives of the capitulators and die-hards.
On the other, it must actively develop the united front of the political
parties, the government organs, the armed forces, the civilian population
and the intellectuals; it must do its utmost to win over the majority of
the Kuomintang, the intermediate classes and sympathizers in the armies fighting
Japan, to deepen the mass movement, to win over the intellectuals, to consolidate
the anti-Japanese base areas, expand the anti-Japanese armed forces and the
organs of anti-Japanese political power, and consolidate our Party and ensure
its progress. If we do both these tasks simultaneously, we shall be able
to overcome the danger of capitulation by the big landlords and the big
bourgeoisie and to bring about a turn for the better in the whole situation.
Therefore, the present general policy of the Party is to strive for a turn
for the better and at the same time to be on guard against any emergencies
(such emergencies, so far, being on a limited and local scale).

Now that Wang Ching-wei has announced his traitorous pact
[1] and Chiang Kai-shek has published his message
to the nation, it is beyond doubt that the agitation for peace will suffer
a setback and that the forces favouring resistance will grow; on the other
hand, the "military and political restriction of the Communist Party" will
continue, there will be more local incidents, and the Kuomintang may stress
so-called "unification against the foreign enemy" in order to attack us.
The reason is that the forces supporting resistance and progress cannot build
up enough strength in the immediate future to overwhelm the forces supporting
capitulation and retrogression. Our policy is to spare no effort in extending
the propaganda campaign against Wang Ching-wei's traitorous pact in all parts
of the country having Communist Party organizations. In his message, Chiang
Kai-shek states that he will carry on the War of Resistance, but he does
not stress the need to strengthen national unity, nor does he mention any
policy for persevering in resistance and progress, without which it would
be impossible to persist in the war. Hence in the campaign against Wang Ching-wei
we should stress the following points: (1) support the national policy of
waging the War of Resistance to the very end and oppose Wang Ching-wei's
traitorous pact; (2) the whole country must unite and overthrow the traitor
Wang Ching-wei and his puppet central government; (3) support
Kuomintang-Communist co-operation and crush Wang Ching-wei's anti-Communist
policy; (4) down with the hidden traitors of the Wang Ching-wei brand,
anti-communism being Wang Ching-wei's plot for splitting the anti-Japanese
united front; (5) strengthen national unity and eliminate internal "friction";
(6) introduce political reforms, unfold the movement for constitutionalism
and institute democracy; (7) lift the ban on political parties and grant
legal status to anti-Japanese parties and groups; (8) guarantee the people
freedom of speech and assembly in order to combat the Japanese and the traitors;
(9) consolidate the anti-Japanese base areas and oppose the disruptive plots
of the Wang Ching-wei brand of traitors; (10) support the troops who are
fighting really well in the war and give adequate supplies to the fronts;
and (11) promote cultural activities which help the cause of resistance,
protect the progressive youth and proscribe all expression of collaborationist
views. The above slogans should be widely publicized. Large numbers of articles,
manifestoes, leaflets and pamphlets should be published and speeches delivered,
and other slogans suitable to local circumstances should be added.

A mass rally to denounce Wang Ching-wei's traitorous pact is scheduled to
be held on February 1 in Yenan. Together with the people of all circles and
with the anti-Japanese members of the Kuomintang, we should organize similar
mass rallies in all areas in the early part or the middle of February in
order to create a nation-wide upsurge against capitulation, against the
collaborators and against "friction".

NOTES


1. Wang Ching-wei signed a traitorous secret pact, called
the "Programme for Readjusting Sino-Japanese Relations", with the Japanese
aggressors at the end of 1939. According to its main provisions:

  (1) Northeastern China was to be ceded to Japan and the "Mongolian Territory"
  (i.e., what was at that time Suiyuan, Chahar and northern Shansi),
  northern China, the lower Yangtse valley and the islands in southern China
  were to be marked off as "zones for close Sino-Japanese collaboration", that
  is, as zones permanently occupied by Japanese troops.
  
  (2) From its central government down to the local governments, the puppet
  regime was to be under the supervision of Japanese advisors and officials.
  
  (3) The puppet troops and police were to be trained by Japanese military
  instructors and their equipment was to be supplied by Japan.
  
  (4) The puppet government's fiscal and economic policies, its industrial
  and agricultural enterprises and its means of communication were to be controlled
  by Japan, and China's natural resources were to be freely exploited by Japan,
  
  (5) All anti-Japanese activities were to be prohibited.
  
    
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Unite all Anti-Japanese Forces and Combat the Anti-Communist Die Hards







UNITE ALL ANTI-JAPANESE FORCES AND COMBAT THE ANTI-COMMUNIST DIE-HARDS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

UNITE ALL ANTI-JAPANESE FORCES AND COMBAT THE ANTI-COMMUNIST DIE-HARDS


February 1, 1940

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung delivered this speech at a mass rally in Yenan to
denounce Wang Ching-wei.]
  

Why are we, the people of all circles in Yenan, meeting here today? We are
here to denounce the traitor Wang Ching-wei, we are here to unite all
anti-Japanese forces and to combat the anti-Communist die-hards.

Time and again we Communists have pointed out that Japanese imperialism is
set in its policy of subjugating China. Whatever cabinet changes there may
be in Japan, she will not change her basic policy of subjugating China and
reducing it to a colony. Frightened out of his wits by this fact, Wang Ching-wei,
the political representative of the pro-Japanese faction of the Chinese big
bourgeoisie, grovels before Japan and concludes a traitorous pact, betraying
China to Japanese imperialism. Moreover, he wants to set up a puppet government
and army in opposition to the anti-Japanese government and army. Of late
he has hardly mentioned opposition to Chiang Kai-shek and is said to have
shifted over to "alliance with Chiang". Anti-communism is the main objective
both of Japan and of Wang Ching-wei. Knowing that the Communist Party is
the most resolute in fighting Japan and that Kuomintang-Communist co-operation
means greater strength for resistance, they are trying their hardest to break
up this co-operation and to separate the two parties, or better still, to
set them to fighting each other. Hence they have used the die-hards within
the Kuomintang to create trouble everywhere. In Hunan, there was the Pingkiang
massacre;[1] in Honan, the Chuchshan
massacre;[2] in Shansi, the old army attacked the
new army;[3] in Hopei, Chang Yin-wu attacked the
Eighth Route Army;[4] in Shantung, Chin Chi-jung
attacked the guerrillas;[5] in eastern Hupeh, Cheng
Ju-huai killed between five and six hundred Communists;
[6] and as for the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border
Region, the die-hards are trying to set up a spy network from within and
enforce a "blockade" from without, and are preparing an armed
attack.[7] In addition, they have arrested a large
number of progressive young people and put them in concentration
camps;[8] they have hired that metaphysics-monger
Chang Chun-mai to make reactionary proposals for the liquidation of the Communist
Party, the abolition of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the
disbandment of the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies; and they have hired
the Trotskyite Yeh Ching and others to write articles abusing the Communist
Party. All this has one purpose only--to disrupt resistance to Japan and
turn the Chinese people into colonial
slaves.[9]

Thus, the Wang Ching-wei clique and the anti-Communist die-hards in the
Kuomintang have been working in collusion, one from without and the other
from within, and have created pandemonium.

This state of affairs has infuriated large numbers of people who think that
the resistance to Japan is now finished and done for and that the
members of the Kuomintang are all scoundrels who ought to be opposed.
We must say that their fury is entirely justified, for how can anybody help
becoming infuriated in the face of such a grave situation? But resistance
to Japan is not finished and done for, nor are all Kuomintang members scoundrels.
Different policies should be adopted towards the different sections of the
Kuomintang. Those conscienceless scoundrels who had the audacity to stab
the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies in the back, to perpetrate the massacres
at Pingkiang and Chuchshan, to disrupt the Border Region and to attack
progressive armies and organizations and progressive individuals--these
scoundrels must not be tolerated but must be dealt counterblows; any concession
to them is out of the question. For they are so utterly devoid of conscience
that they are even creating "friction" and perpetrating massacres and splits
after our national enemy has penetrated deep into our territory. Whatever
they may think, they are actually helping Japan and Wang Ching-wei, and some
of them have been undercover traitors from the very outset. Failure to punish
them would be a mistake; it would be an encouragement to the collaborators
and traitors, it would be disloyalty to the national resistance and to our
motherland, and an invitation to the scoundrels to disrupt the united front.
It would be a violation of the policy of our party. However, the sole purpose
of the policy of dealing blows to the capitulators and the anti-Communist
die-hards is to keep up the resistance to Japan and safeguard the anti-Japanese
united front. Therefore, we should show goodwill towards those Kuomintang
members who are not capitulators or anti-Communist die-hards but are loyal
to the War of Resistance; we should unite with them, respect them and be
willing to continue our long-term co-operation with them so as to put our
country in order. Whoever does otherwise is also violating the policy of
the Party.

The policy of our Party is twofold: on the one hand to unite all the progressive
forces and all people loyal to the cause of resisting Japan, and on the other
to oppose all the heartless scoundrels, the capitulators and the anti-Communist
die-hards. Both these aspects of our policy have a single objective--to bring
about a turn for the better and defeat Japan. The task of the Communist Party
and the people all over the country is to unite all the forces of resistance
and progress, to combat all the forces of capitulation and retrogression,
and to work hard to stop the present deterioration and change the situation
for the better. This is our basic policy. We are optimistic, we shall never
become pessimistic or despairing. We are not afraid of any attacks by the
capitulators or the anti-Communist die-hards. We must smash them, and we
certainly shall. China will surely achieve national liberation; China will
never perish. China will surely achieve progress, the present retrogression
is only a temporary phenomenon.

In our meeting today we also want to make it clear to the people throughout
the country that the unity and progress of the whole nation are essential
to the War of Resistance. Some people emphasize resistance alone and are
reluctant to emphasize unity and progress, or even fail to mention them.
This is wrong. How can the War of Resistance be maintained without genuine
and firm unity, without rapid and solid progress? The anti-Communist die-hards
within the Kuomintang emphasize unification, but their so-called unification
is not genuine but a sham, not a rational but an irrational unification,
not a unification in substance but in form. They howl for unification, but
what they really want is to liquidate the Communist Party, the Eighth Route
and New Fourth Armies and the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, on the
pretext that China cannot be unified so long as these exist. They want to
turn everything over to the Kuomintang and not merely to continue but to
extend their one-party dictatorship. If this were to occur, what unification
could there be? Truth to tell, if the Communist Party, the Eighth Route and
New Fourth Armies and the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region had not stepped
forth and sincerely advocated ending the civil war and uniting for resistance
to Japan, there would have been nobody to initiate the Anti-Japanese National
United Front or to take the lead in the peaceful settlement of the Sian Incident,
and there would have been no possibility at all of resisting Japan. And if
today the Communist Party, the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies, the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the anti-Japanese democratic base
areas did not step forth and sincerely sustain the resistance to Japan and
combat the dangerous tendencies towards capitulation, a split and retrogression,
the situation would indeed be in a terrible mess. The several hundred thousand
troops of the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies are holding two-fifths of
the enemy forces in check by engaging seventeen out of the forty Japanese
divisions.[10] Why should these armies be disbanded?
The Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region is the most progressive region in
the country, it is a democratic anti-Japanese base area. Here there are,
first, no corrupt officials; second, no local tyrants and evil gentry; third,
no gambling; fourth, no prostitutes; fifth, no concubines; sixth, no beggars;
seventh, no narrow self-seeking cliques; eighth, no atmosphere of dejection
and laxity; ninth, no professional friction-mongers; and tenth, no war
profiteers. Why then should the Border Region be abolished? Only people without
any sense of shame dare suggest anything so shameful. What right have these
die-hards to breathe a word against us? No, Comrades! What needs to be done
is not to abolish the Border Region but to get the whole country to follow
its example, not to disband the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies but to
get the whole country to follow their example, not to liquidate the Communist
Party but to get the whole country to follow its example, not to pull progressive
people back to the level of backward people but to get the latter to catch
up with the former. We Communists are the staunchest advocates of unification;
it is we who have initiated and maintained the united front and who have
put forward the slogan for a unified democratic republic. Who else could
have proposed these things? Who else could have put them into effect? Who
else could be content with a monthly allowance of only five
yuan?[11] Who else could have formed such
a clean and incorruptible government? There is unification and unification.
The capitulators have their idea of unification, they want to unify us into
capitulating; the anti-Communist die-hards have their idea of unification,
they want to unify us into splitting and retrogression. Could we ever accept
these ideas of theirs? Can any unification that is not based on resistance,
unity and progress be considered genuine? Or rational? Or real unification?
What a pipe dream! It is to put forward our own idea of unification that
we are meeting here today. Our idea of unification is identical with that
of all the people of China, of every man and woman with a conscience. It
is based on resistance, unity and progress. Only through progress can we
achieve unity; only through unity can we resist Japan; and only through progress,
unity and resistance can the country be unified. This is our idea of unification,
a genuine, rational, real unification. The idea of a sham, irrational and
formal unification is one which would lead to national subjugation and which
is held by persons utterly devoid of conscience. These people want to destroy
the Communist Party, the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies and the anti-Japanese
democratic base areas, and wipe out all the local anti-Japanese forces, in
order to establish unification under the Kuomintang. This is a plot, an attempt
to perpetuate autocratic rule under the guise of unification, to sell the
dog-meat of their one-party dictatorship under the label of the sheep's head
of unification; it is a plot of brazen-faced braggarts who are lost to all
sense of shame. We are meeting here today precisely to punch holes in this
paper tiger of theirs. Let us relentlessly combat these anti-Communist die-hards.

NOTES


1. For the Pingkiang massacre, see "The Reactionaries Must
Be Punished", Note 1, p. 260 of this volume.

2. The Chuehshan massacre occurred on November 11, 1939,
when more than 1,800 Kuomintang secret agents and soldiers attacked the liaison
offices of the New Fourth Army in the town of Chukou, Chuchshan County, Honan.
Over two hundred people were murdered, including New Fourth Army officers
and soldiers who had been Wounded in the anti-Japanese war and members of
their families.

3. The old army refers to the troops under Yen Hsi-shan,
the Kuomintang warlord in Shansi; the new army, known as the Anti-Japanese
Dare-to-Die Corps, was the people's anti-Japanese army of Shansi which grew
up under the influence and leadership of the Communist Party. In December
1939 Chiang Kai-shek and Yen Hsi-shan concentrated six army corps in western
Shansi to attack the corps, but met with a smashing defeat. At the same time,
Yen's troops in southeastern Shansi attacked the anti-Japanese democratic
county governments and mass organizations in the Yangcheng-chincheng area
and murdered a great number of Communists and progressives.

4. Chang Yin-wu, commander of the peace preservation corps
of the Kuomintang brigands in Hopei, sprang a surprise attack on the liaison
offices of the Eighth Route Army in Shenhsien County, Hopei, in June 1939
and slaughtered more than four hundred of its cadres and soldiers.

5. In April 1939, on the instructions of Shen Hung-lieh,
the Kuomintang governor of Shantung, Chin Chi-jung's bandit troops attacked
the Third Guerrilla Detachment of the Shantung Column of the Eighth Route
Army at Poshan, killing four hundred men, including regimental officers.

6. In September 1939, Cheng Ju-huai, a Kuomintang military
commander in eastern Hupeh, attacked the liaison offices of the New Fourth
Army and killed between five and six hundred Communists.

7. From the winter of 1939 to the spring of 1940 the Kuomintang
troops seized the county towns of Chunhua, Hsunyi, Chengning, Ninghsien and
Chenynan in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region.

8. Imitating the German and Italian fascists, the Kuomintang
reactionaries established during the anti-Japanese war many concentration
camps which extended from Lanchow and Sian in the Northwest to Kanchow and
Shangjao in the Southeast. Large numbers of Communists, patriots and progressive
youth were interned in them.

9. After the fall of Wuhan in October 1938, the Kuomintang
intensified its anti-Communist activities. In February 1939 Chiang Kai-shek
secretly issued such documents as "Measures for Dealing with the Communist
Problem" and "Measures for Guarding Against Communist Activities in the
Japanese-Occupied Areas", and stepped up his political repression of the
Communist Party in the Kuomintang-controlled areas and his military attacks
on it in central and northern China. The culmination was the first large-scale
anti-Communist onslaught of December 1939--March 1940.

10. The Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies later engaged
an even larger number of Japanese troops. By 1943 they were fighting 64 per
cent of Japan's forces of aggression and 95 per cent of the puppet troops.

11. Five yuan was the average monthly allowance for all
men serving in the anti-Japanese armed forces and in the anti-Japanese government
offices under Communist leadership.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Ten Demands on the Kuomintang







TEN DEMANDS ON THE KUOMINTANG



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

TEN DEMANDS ON THE KUOMINTANG


February 1, 1940

[This was an open telegram drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung on behalf of
the Yenan mass rally denouncing Wang Ching-wei.]
  

This mass rally against Wang Ching-wei, held in Yenan on February 1, unanimously
resolves, in righteous indignation, to denounce his treason and capitulation
and to wage the War of Resistance Against Japan to the very end. To overcome
the present crisis and ensure victory in the War of Resistance, we hereby
submit ten major points for saving the country, in the hope that the National
Government, all political parties and groups, all officers and men fighting
in the War of Resistance and all our fellow-countrymen will accept them and
act upon them.

1. Let the whole nation denounce the Wang Ching-weis. Now
that the traitor Wang Ching-wei has gathered his gang together, betrayed
his country, attached himself to the enemy and signed traitorous secret pacts,
playing the jackal to the tiger, all our countrymen demand his death. But
this only takes care of the open Wang Ching-weis and leaves out the undercover
ones. The latter are either craftily seizing key posts and swaggering about,
or working obscurely and worming their way into all walks of life. In effect,
the corrupt officials are part of the Wang Ching-wei gang and all the
friction-mongers are its underlings. Unless there is a national campaign
to denounce the Wang Ching-weis, a campaign in town and country and from
top to bottom in which everyone is mobilized, including all political parties,
government organs, armed forces, civilian bodies, the press and the educational
institutions, the Wang Ching-wei gang will never be eradicated but will persist
in its nefarious activities, doing incalculable damage by opening the door
to the enemy from without and by subversion from within. The government should
issue a decree calling on the whole people to repudiate the Wang Ching-weis.
Wherever the decree is not carried out, the officials should be called to
account. The Wang Ching-wei gang must be extirpated. This is the first point
which we urge you to accept and act upon.

2. Strengthen unity. Nowadays some people talk not of unity
but of unification, and the implication is that unification means nothing
short of liquidating the Communist Party, disbanding the Eighth Route and
New Fourth Armies, abolishing the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and
demolishing the anti-Japanese forces everywhere. What this kind of talk ignores
is the fact that the Communist Party, the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies
and the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region are the staunchest advocates of
unification in all China. Was it not they who recommended the peaceful settlement
of the Sian Incident? Is it not they who have initiated the Anti-Japanese
National United Front, proposed a unified democratic republic and worked
really hard for both? Is it not they who are standing at the forefront of
the nation's defences, resisting seventeen enemy divisions, shielding the
Central Plains and the Northwest and defending northern China and the regions
south of the lower Yangtse, and resolutely applying the Three People's Principles
and the Programme of Armed Resistance and National Reconstruction? Yet the
moment Wang Ching-wei openly came out against the Communists and sided with
the Japanese, sorcerers like Chang Chun-mai and Yeh Ching chimed in with
tendentious articles, and the anti-Communist and die-hard cliques joined
in by stirring up "friction". Autocratic rule has been imposed in the name
of unification. The principle of unity has been discarded and the thin end
of the wedge of disruption driven in. This Szuma Chao trick is obvious to
every man in the street.[1] The Communist Party,
the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies and the Border Region stand firmly
for genuine and against sham unification, for rational and against irrational
unification, and for unification in substance and against unification in
form. They advocate unification for resistance and not for capitulation,
for unity and not for division, for progress and not for retrogression.
Unification on the basis of these three--resistance, unity and progress--is
genuine, rational and real unification. To seek unification on any other
basis, whatever intrigues or tricks are used, is like "going south by driving
the chariot north"; with that we beg to disagree. All the local anti-Japanese
forces should be looked after equally well, without discriminating against
some and favouring others; all of them should be trusted, provisioned, supported,
and encouraged with rewards. There should be sincerity and not hypocrisy,
large-mindedness and not pettiness, in dealing with people. If things are
really done in this way, all except those with ulterior motives will unite
and take the road of national unification. It is an unalterable truth that
unification must be based on unity and unity in its turn must be based on
progress, and that only progress can bring unity and only unity can bring
unification. This is the second point which we urge you to accept and act
upon.

3. Put constitutional government into effect.. The long years
of "political tutelage" have yielded nothing. "A thing turns into its opposite
if pushed too far"; hence constitutional government is now on the order of
the day. There is still no freedom of speech, the ban on political parties
has not been lifted, and constitutionalism is violated everywhere. If the
constitution is drawn up on these lines, it will be a mere scrap of official
paper. Such constitutionalism will be no different from one-party dictatorship.
Now that there is a profound national crisis, with the Japanese and Wang
Ching-wei harassing us from without and the traitors disrupting us from within,
our existence as a nation and people will be placed in jeopardy unless there
is a change of policy. The government should immediately lift the ban on
the political parties and encourage freedom of opinion to show that it sincerely
intends to put constitutionalism into practice. Nothing is more urgent for
winning the full confidence of the people and shaping the destiny of the
nation anew. This is the third point which we urge you to accept and act
upon.

4. Put an end to the "friction". Since the "Measures for
Restricting the Activities of Alien Parties" were introduced in March last
year, the clamour for "restricting", "corroding" and "combating" the Communist
Party has reverberated throughout the country, there has been one tragic
incident after another, and blood has flown freely. As if this were not enough,
the additional "Measures for Dealing with the Alien Party Problem" were
introduced in October last year. Then there are the "Directives for Dealing
with the Alien Party Problem" in northwestern, northern and central China.
People have been saying, and quite justifiably, that "political restriction"
of the Communist Party has been succeeded by "military restriction". In fact,
restricting Communism equals anti-communism. And anti-communism is the cunning
and pernicious scheme used by the Japanese and Wang Ching-wei for subjugating
China. That is why the people are suspicious and shocked and are telling
one another about it, and are afraid that the bitter tragedy of a decade
ago is being re-enacted. Matters have gone far enough, with the Pingkiang
Massacre in Hunan, the Chuehshan Massacre in Honan, the attack on the Eighth
Route Army by Chang Yin-wu in Hopei, the attack on the guerrillas by Chin
Chi-jung in Shantung, the ruthless slaughter of between five and six hundred
Communists by Cheng Ju-huai in eastern Hupeh, the large-scale assaults on
the garrison forces of the Eighth Route Army by the Central Army in eastern
Kansu and, more recently, the tragedy in Shansi where the old army attacked
the new army and invaded positions held by the Eighth Route Army. If such
incidents are not immediately prohibited, both sides will be doomed, and
what hope will there be then of victory over Japan? For the sake of unity
in the War of Resistance, the government should order the punishment of all
the perpetrators of these massacres and announce to the whole nation that
no such incident will be allowed to recur. This is the fourth point which
we urge you to accept and act upon.

5. Protect the youth. Concentration camps have recently been
set up near Sian, and people have been horrified to learn that more than
seven hundred progressive young people from the northwestern and central
provinces have already been interned there, subjected to mental and physical
bondage and treated like convicts. What crime have they committed to deserve
such cruelty? Young people are the cream of the nation, and the progressive
ones in particular are our most precious asset in the War of Resistance.
Everyone should enjoy freedom of belief; ideas can never be suppressed by
force of arms. The crime of the ten years of "cultural suppression" is known
to everyone; why should anyone desire to repeat it today? The government
should immediately issue a nation-wide order for the protection of youth,
for the abolition of the concentration camps near Sian and for the strict
prohibition of the outrageous attacks on young people in various places.
This is the fifth point which we urge you to accept and act upon.

6. Support the front. Troops who are fighting in the very
front line and with fine records of service, such as the Eighth Route Army,
the New Fourth Army and certain other units, are receiving the worst treatment;
they are thinly clad, badly fed and kept short of ammunition and medicines.
Yet unscrupulous traitors are allowed to slander them. There is a deafening
din of countless absurd slanders against them. Merit goes unrewarded and
distinguished service uncited, while false charges and malicious plots become
more and more brazen. This fantastic state of affairs dampens the ardour
of our officers and men and wins applause only from the enemy; on
no account must it be allowed to continue. To lift up the hearts of the troops
and so help the war, the government should adequately provision the front-line
troops who have good service records and at the same time strictly prohibit
the treacherous slanders and accusations against them. This is the sixth
point which we urge you to accept and act upon.

7. Proscribe the secret service. People are comparing the
secret service agents to Chou Hsing and Lai Chun-chen
[2] of the Tang Dynasty and Wei Chung-hsien and
Liu Chin [3] of the Ming Dynasty because of their
lawlessness and violence. Ignoring the enemy and concentrating on our own
countrymen, they are committing innumerable murders and insatiably taking
bribes; in fact the secret service is the headquarters of the rumour-mongers
and a breeding ground of treason and evil. Ordinary people everywhere recoil
and turn away in fear from these fiendish brutes of agents. To preserve its
own prestige, the government should immediately proscribe these activities
of the secret service and reorganize it, defining its duties as exclusively
directed against the enemy and the traitors, so that the people's confidence
may be restored and the foundations of the state strengthened. This is the
seventh point which we urge you to accept and act upon.

8. Dismiss corrupt officials. Since the beginning of the
War of Resistance, there have been cases of officials netting up to 100 million
yuan out of the national crisis and taking as many as eight or nine concubines.
Conscription, government bonds, economic controls, famine relief and war
relief, all without exception have become money-making opportunities for
corrupt officials. With such a pack of wolves running wild, no wonder the
country's affairs are in chaos. The people are seething with discontent and
anger, yet none dare expose the ruthlessness of these officials. To save
the country from collapse, drastic and effective steps should immediately
be taken to clear out all corrupt officials. This is the eighth point which
we urge you to accept and act upon.

9. Put the Testament of Dr. Sun Yat-sen into effect. The
Testament says:

  For forty years I have devoted myself to the cause of the national revolution
  with the aim of winning freedom and equality for China. My experiences during
  these forty years have firmly convinced me that to achieve this aim we must
  arouse the masses of the people....


A most remarkable statement indeed, and we the 450 million people of China
are all familiar with it. But the Testament is more often chanted than carried
out. Desecrators of the Testament are rewarded while those who honour it
in their acts are punished. What could be more preposterous? The government
should decree that anyone who dares to violate the Testament and who tramples
on the masses of the people instead of arousing them will be punished for
profaning Dr. Sun Yat-sen's memory. This is the ninth point which we urge
you to accept and act upon.

10. Put the Three People's Principles into effect. The Three
People's Principles are the platform of the Kuomintang. Yet many people,
making anti-communism their first duty, are giving up the war effort and
doing everything possible to suppress and hold back the people as they rise
to resist Japan, which is tantamount to abandoning the Principle of Nationalism;
officials are depriving the people of all democratic rights, which is tantamount
to abandoning the Principle of Democracy; they are ignoring the people's
sufferings, which is tantamount to abandoning the Principle of the People's
Livelihood. Such persons pay only lip-service to the Three People's Principles
and either ridicule those who seriously try to put them into effect as
busy-bodies or severely punish them. Thus, all sorts of fantastic abuses
have sprung up and the government's prestige has reached rock bottom. An
unequivocal order should immediately be issued for the strict carrying out
of the Three People's Principles throughout the country. Those who violate
the order should be severely punished and all who carry it out amply encouraged.
It is only in this way that the Three People's Principles can at long last
be put into effect and the foundations laid for victory in the war. This
is the tenth point which we urge you to accept and act upon.

These ten proposals are essential measures for saving the nation and winning
the war. Now that the enemy is stepping up his aggression against China and
traitor Wang Ching-wei is running wild, we dare not remain silent on what
we feel to be crucial issues. Please accept and act upon these proposals,
and great advantage will ensue to the War of Resistance and the cause of
national liberation. It is with a keen sense of urgency that we state our
views, and we await your considered opinion.

NOTES


1. Szuma Chao was a prime minister of the state of Wei
(220-265) who nursed a secret ambition to ascend the throne. The emperor
once remarked: "Szuma Chao's intention is obvious to every man in the street."

2. Chou Hsing and Lai Chun-chen were notoriously cruel
inquisitors in the Tang Dynasty. They organized a network of spies who wantonly
arrested people they disliked and subjected these people to all kinds of
torture.

3. Liu Chin and Wei Chung-hsien were eunuchs in the Ming
Dynasty. The first was a favourite of Emperor Wu Tsung (in the 16th century),
and the second of Emperor Hsi Tsung (in the 17th century). They made use
of large secret services to persecute and murder those who opposed them.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Introducing The Chinese Worker







INTRODUCING THE CHINESE WORKER



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

INTRODUCING THE CHINESE WORKER


February 7, 1940


The publication of The Chinese
Worker[1] meets a need. Led by its
own political party, the Communist Party of China, the Chinese working class
has waged heroic struggles for the past twenty years and become the most
politically awakened section of the people and the leader of the Chinese
revolution. Rallying the peasantry and all revolutionary people against
imperialism and feudalism, it has fought to establish a new-democratic China
and to drive out Japanese imperialism, and its contribution has been outstanding.
But the Chinese revolution has not yet triumphed and great efforts are still
needed to unite the working class itself and to unite the peasantry and the
other sections of the petty bourgeoisie, the intellectuals, and the entire
revolutionary people. This is a tremendous political and organizational task.
The responsibility for its accomplishment rests on the Communist Party of
China, on the progressive workers and on the entire working class. The ultimate
liberation of the working class and the people as a whole will be achieved
only under socialism, which is the final goal the Chinese proletariat must
struggle to attain. But before we can enter the stage of socialism, we must
pass through the stage of the anti-imperialist and anti-feudal democratic
revolution. The immediate task of the Chinese working class, therefore, is
to strengthen unity in its own ranks and unite the people, to oppose imperialism
and feudalism, and to struggle for a new China, a China of New Democracy.
The Chinese Worker is being published with just this task in view.

Using simple language, The Chinese Worker will explain the hows
and whys of many issues to the workers, report the realities of the working-class
struggle in the War of Resistance and sum up the experience gained, and in
this way it will endeavour to fulfil its task.

The Chinese Worker should become a school for educating the workers
and for training cadres from their midst, and the readers will be its students.
It is necessary to educate many cadres from among the workers, knowledgeable
and capable cadres who do not seek empty fame but are ready for honest work.
It is impossible for the working class to attain liberation without large
numbers of such cadres.

The working class should welcome the help of the revolutionary intellectuals
and never refuse it. For without their help the working class itself cannot
go forward nor can the revolution succeed.

I hope that the journal will be well edited and that it will publish a good
deal of lively writing, carefully avoiding wooden and trite articles which
are flat, insipid and unintelligible.

Once started, a journal must be run conscientiously and well. This is the
responsibility of the readers as well as of the staff. It is very important
for the readers to send in suggestions and write brief letters and articles
indicating what they like and what they dislike, for this is the only way
to make the journal a success.

With these few words I express my hopes; let them serve as an introduction
to The Chinese Worker.

NOTES


1. The Chinese Worker was a monthly founded in
February 1940 in Yenan and published under the auspices of the Trade Union
Commission of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## We Must Stress Unity and Progress







WE MUST STRESS UNITY AND PROGRESS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

WE MUST STRESS UNITY AND PROGRESS


February 10, 1940

[This article was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the New China
News of Yenan on the occasion of its first anniversary.]
  

Resistance, unity and progress--these are the three major principles which
the Communist Party put forward last July 7 on the second anniversary of
the War of Resistance. The three form an organic whole, and not one of them
can be dispensed with. If the stress is solely on resistance to the exclusion
of unity and progress, then such "resistance" will be neither dependable
nor enduring. Without a programme for unity and progress, resistance must
sooner or later turn into capitulation or end in defeat. We Communists hold
that the three must be integrated. For the sake of the War of Resistance,
it is necessary to fight against capitulation, against Wang Ching-wei's
traitorous pact with Japan, against his puppet regime, and against all the
traitors and capitulators concealed in the anti-Japanese ranks. For the sake
of unity, it is necessary to oppose splitting activities and internal "friction",
to oppose the stabbing of the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies and other
progressive anti-Japanese groups in the back, to oppose the disruption of
the anti-Japanese base areas behind the enemy lines and of the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region which is the rear area of the Eighth Route
Army, to oppose the denial of legal status to the Communist Party and the
avalanche of documents for "restricting the activities of alien parties".
For the sake of progress, it is necessary to oppose retrogression and the
shelving of the Three People's Principles and of the Programme of Armed
Resistance and National Reconstruction, to oppose the refusal to carry out
the injunction in Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Testament to "arouse the masses of the
people", to oppose the internment of progressive young people in concentration
camps, to oppose the suppression of what little freedom of speech and of
the press there was in the early days of the War of Resistance, to oppose
the scheme to turn the movement for constitutional government into the private
concern of a few bureaucrats, to oppose the attacks on the new army, the
persecution of the League of Self-Sacrifice and the massacre of progressives
in Shansi,[1] to oppose the activities of the Three
People's Principles Youth League in kidnapping people along the Hsienyang-Yulin
Highway and the Lunghai Railway,[2] to oppose such
shameless practices as taking nine concubines and making fortunes of 100
million yuan out of the national crisis, and to oppose the unbridled brutality
of the corrupt officials and the local tyrants and evil gentry. Without opposing
all these and without unity and progress, "resistance" will be just empty
talk and victory a vain hope. What will be the political orientation of the
New China News in its second year? It will be to stress unity and
progress and oppose all the vicious practices which are detrimental to the
war, so that further successes can be achieved in our cause of resistance
to Japan.

NOTES


1. The League of Self-Sacrifice for National Salvation
in Shansi was a local anti-Japanese mass organization formed in 1936 which
co-operated closely with the Communist Party. It played an important role
in the anti-Japanese fighting there. In December 1939 Yen Hsi-shan, the
Kuomintang warlord-governor of Shansi, openly began to suppress the league
in the western part of the province and brutally killed a great number of
Communists, officers of the league and other progressives.

2. In 1939 the Kuomintang drew a cordon along the
Hsienyang-Yulin Highway and the Lunghai (Kansu-Haichow) Railway by setting
up a number of check-posts in the guise of "hostels" of the Three Peoples
Principles Youth League. Secret agents posted at these hostels, working together
with the Kuomintang troops, arrested progressive young people and intellectuals
entering or leaving the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and interned them
in concentration camps, where they were either cruelly murdered or
compelled to turn informer against the Communist Party.

  
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## New-Democratic Constitutional Government





NEW-DEMOCRATIC CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

NEW-DEMOCRATIC CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT


February 20, 1940

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung delivered this speech before the Yenan Association
for the Promotion of Constitutional Government. Confused by Chiang Kai-shek's
deceptive propaganda at the time, many comrades in the Party thought that
perhaps the Kuomintang really would establish a constitutional government.
Comrade Mao Tse-tung here exposed Chiang Kai-shek's deceit, wrested the
propaganda weapon of "constitutional government" from his hands and turned
it into a weapon for awakening the people to demand freedom and democracy
from Chiang Kai-shek. Thereupon' Chiang Kai-shek immediately packed up this
bag of tricks, and never again throughout the whole War of Resistance Against
Japan did he dare to propagate his so-called constitutional government.]


It is highly significant that representatives of the people of all circles
in Yenan are meeting here today to inaugurate the Association for the Promotion
of Constitutional Government and that everybody has become interested in
constitutionalism. What is the purpose of our meeting? It is to facilitate
the full expression of the popular will, the defeat of Japan and the building
of a new China.

Armed resistance to Japan, which we all support, is already being carried
out, and the question now is only one of persevering in it. But there is
something else, namely, democracy, which is not being carried out. Both are
of paramount importance to China today. To be sure, China lacks many things,
but the main ones are independence and democracy. In the absence of either,
China's affairs will not go well. And while there are two things lacking,
there are also two superfluous ones. What are they? Imperialist oppression
and feudal oppression. It is because of these two superfluous things that
China has become a colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal country. The principal
demands of the nation today are for independence and democracy, and therefore
imperialism and feudalism must be destroyed. They must be destroyed resolutely,
thoroughly, and without the least mercy. Some say that only construction
is needed, not destruction. Well, we should like to ask: Shouldn't Wang Ching-wei
be destroyed? Shouldn't Japanese imperialism be destroyed? Shouldn't the
feudal system be destroyed? Construction is certainly out of the question
unless you destroy these evils. Only by destroying them can China be saved
and construction be set going; otherwise, it will all be an idle dream. Only
by destroying the old and the rotten can we build the new and the sound.
Combine independence and democracy and you have resistance on the basis of
democracy, or democracy in the service of resistance. Without democracy,
resistance will fail. Without democracy, resistance cannot be maintained.
With democracy, we shall certainly win even if we have to go on resisting
for eight or ten years.

What is constitutional government? It is democratic government. I agree with
what our old Comrade Wu [1] has just said. What
kind of democratic government do we need today? New-democratic government,
the constitutional government of New Democracy. Not the old, outmoded,
European-American type of so-called democracy which is bourgeois dictatorship,
nor as yet the Soviet type of democracy which is the dictatorship of the
proletariat.

Democracy of the old type, practiced in other countries, is on its way out
and has become reactionary. Under no circumstances should we accept such
a reactionary thing. The sort of constitutional government which the Chinese
die-hards are talking about is the old type of bourgeois democracy found
abroad. But while they talk about it, they do not really want even that;
they are using such talk to deceive the people. What they really want is
a one-party fascist dictatorship. The Chinese national bourgeoisie, on the
other hand, does want this type of constitutional government and would like
to establish a bourgeois dictatorship in China, but it can never succeed.
For the Chinese people do not want such a government and would not welcome
a one-class dictatorship by the bourgeoisie. China's affairs must be decided
by the vast majority of the Chinese people, and the monopoly of government
by the bourgeoisie alone must be absolutely rejected. Then what about socialist
democracy? Of course, it is very good, and will eventually prevail throughout
the world. But today this type of democracy is not yet practicable in China,
and we must therefore do without it for the time being. Not until certain
conditions are present will it be possible to have socialist democracy. The
kind of democratic government we need today is neither democracy of the old
type nor yet democracy of the socialist type, but New Democracy which is
suited to the conditions of present-day China. The constitutional government
to be promoted is new-democratic constitutional government.

What is new-democratic constitutional government? It is the joint dictatorship
of several revolutionary classes over the traitors and reactionaries. Someone
once said, "If there is food, let everyone share it." I think this can serve
to illustrate New Democracy. Just as everyone should share what food there
is, so there should be no monopoly of power by a single party, group or class.
This idea was well expressed by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in the Manifesto of the First
National Congress of the Kuomintang:

  The so-called democratic system in modern states is usually monopolized by
  the bourgeoisie and has become simply an instrument for oppressing the common
  people. On the other hand, the Kuomintang's Principle of Democracy means
  a democratic system shared by all the common people and not privately owned
  by the few.


Comrades, in studying constitutional government we shall read various books,
but above all, we must study this manifesto, and this passage should be learned
by heart. "Shared by all the common people and not privately owned by the
few"--this is the substance of what we describe as new-democratic constitutional
government, as the joint democratic dictatorship of several revolutionary
classes over the traitors and reactionaries; such is the constitutional
government we need today. And it is the form which a constitutional government
of the anti-Japanese united front should take.

The purpose of our meeting today is to promote or urge the establishment
of constitutional government. Why do we have to "urge" it? If everybody were
marching forward, then nobody would need to be urged. Why do we trouble to
hold this meeting? Because some people, instead of marching forward, are
lying down and refusing to move on. Not only do they refuse to move forward,
they actually want to go back. You call on them to go forward, but they would
rather die than do so; these people are die-hards. They are so stubborn that
we have to hold this meeting to give them an "urging". Where does the term
"urge" come from? Who first applied it in this connection? Not we, but that
great and venerated man, Dr. Sun Yat-sen, who said: For forty years I have
devoted myself to the cause of the national revolution...." Read his Testament
and you will find the following words: "Most recently I have recommended
the convocation of the national assembly . . . and its realization in the
shortest possible time must in particular be urged. This is my heartfelt
charge to you." Comrades, not an ordinary "charge" but a "heartfelt charge".
A "heartfelt charge" is not just the usual kind of charge, so how can it
be lightly ignored? Again, "the shortest possible time"; first, not the longest
time, second, not a relatively long time, and third, not just a short time
but "the shortest possible time". If we want the national assembly to come
into being in the shortest possible time, then we have to "urge" it. Dr.
Sun Yat-sen has been dead for fifteen years, but to this day the national
assembly he recommended has not been convened. Fiddling every day with political
tutelage, certain people have senselessly fiddled away the time, turning
"the shortest possible time" into the longest time, and yet they are for
ever invoking Dr. Sun Yat-sen's name. How Dr. Sun's ghost would rebuke these
unworthy followers of his! It is perfectly clear that without "urging", there
will be no moving forward, "urging" is needed because many are moving back
and many others are not yet awakened.

As some people are not moving forward, we have to urge them. We have to urge
others because they are slow. That is why we are calling many meetings to
urge the establishment of constitutional government. The youth have held
such meetings, and so have the women, the workers, the schools, government
organizations and army units. It is all very lively and very good. And now
we are holding this general meeting for the same purpose, so that all of
us can go into action to urge the speedy enforcement of constitutional government
and the immediate application of Dr. Sun Yat-sen's teachings.

Some say: "You are in Yenan while those people are in various other places.
What is the use of your urging them if they take no notice?" Yes, there is
some use. For things are moving and they will have to take notice. If we
hold more meetings, write more articles, make more speeches and send more
telegrams, they will kind it impossible not to take notice. I think our numerous
meetings in Yenan to promote constitutional government have a twofold purpose.
One is to study the problem and the other is to push people forward. Why
do we have to study? Because supposing they do not go forward and you urge
them, and they then ask why you are pushing, it is necessary to be able to
answer. To do so, we have to make a serious study of the hows and whys of
constitutional government. This is exactly what our old Comrade Wu has been
talking about in some detail. All schools, government organizations and army
units and all sections of the people should study the problem of constitutional
government confronting us

Once we have studied it, we can push people forward. To push them forward
is to urge them on and, as we push in all fields, things will all gradually
move ahead. The many little streams will merge into a great river to wash
away all that is rotten and filthy, and new-democratic constitutional government
will emerge. The effect of such pushing will be very great. What we do in
Yenan is bound to influence the whole country.

Comrades, do you imagine that once the meetings have been held and the telegrams
dispatched, the die-hards will be bowled over, will start moving forward,
will submit to our orders? No, they will not be as docile as that. A great
many of them are graduates of special training schools for die-hards. Die-hards
they are today, and die-hards they will remain tomorrow and even the day
after. What does die-hard mean? "Hard" means to be inflexible and "die" means
to be dead set against progress today, tomorrow and even the day after. Such
are the people we call die-hards. To make them listen to us is no easy matter.

As far as the constitutional governments the world has so far known are
concerned, whether in Britain, France, the United States or the Soviet Union,
a body of basic laws, that is, a constitution, has generally been promulgated
after a successful revolution to give recognition to the actual establishment
of democracy. But China's case is different. In China the revolution has
not yet succeeded and, except in areas like our Border Region, democratic
government is not yet a fact. The fact is that China today is under semi-colonial
and semi-feudal rule, and even if a good constitution were promulgated, it
would inevitably be hindered by the feudal forces and obstructed by the
die-hards, so that it would be impossible to carry it out smoothly. Thus
the present movement for constitutional government has to strive for a democracy
that is not yet achieved, rather than to affirm a democracy that has already
become a fact. This means a major struggle and it is certainly no light or
easy matter.

Those who have all along opposed constitutional government
[2] are now paying it lip-service. Why? Because they
are under pressure from the people, who want to fight Japan, and they have
to temporize a tattle. They are even shouting at the top of their voices,
"We have always stood for constitutional government!" and making a terrific
din. For years we have been hearing the words "constitutional government",
but so far we have seen no trace of it. These people say one thing and do
another and may be called double-dealers in constitutional government. Their
"always stood for" is truly an example of their double-dealing. The die-hards
of today are precisely such double-dealers. Their constitutional government
is a swindle. In the not too distant future you may get a constitution, and
a president into the bargain. But as for democracy and freedom, heaven alone
knows when they will give you that. China has already had a constitution.
Did not Tsao Kun promulgate one? [3] But where
were democracy and freedom to be found? As for presidents, there have been
a number of them. The first, Sun Yat-sen, was good, but he was edged out
by Yuan Shih-kai. The second was Yuan Shih-kai, the third Li Yuan-hung,
[4] the fourth Feng Kuo-chang
[5] and the fifth Hsu Shih-chang,
[6] indeed a great many, but were they any different
from the despotic emperors? Both the constitution and the presidents were
fakes. At the present time the so-called constitutional and democratic
governments of countries like Britain, France and the United States are in
fact man-eating governments. The same is true of Central and South America
where many countries display the republican signboard but in fact have no
trace of democracy. Similarly with China's present-day die-hards. Their talk
of constitutional government is only "selling dog-meat under the label of
a sheep's head". They display the sheep's head of constitutional government
while selling the dog-meat of one-party dictatorship. I am not attacking
them groundlessly; my words are well-founded, because for all their talk
about constitutional government they do not give the people a particle of
freedom.

Comrades, real constitutional government will never come easily; it can only
be obtained through hard struggle. Therefore you must not expect that it
will come immediately after we have held our meetings, sent our telegrams
and written our articles. Nor must you expect that once the People's Political
Council [7] passes a resolution, the National
Government issues a decree, and the national assembly
[8] meets on November 12, promulgates a constitution
and even elects a president, everything will be fine and all will be right
with the world. That is impossible, so don't get confused. This needs to
be explained to the common people so that they will not be confused either.
Things will never be that easy.

Should we then lament the cause as lost? Things are so difficult that it
seems hopeless. But that is not so either. There is still hope for constitutional
government, and great hope at that, and China will certainly become a
new-democratic state. Why? The difficulties arise because of trouble-making
by the die-hards, but they cannot go on being die-hards for ever, and that
is why we still have high hopes. The die-hards of the world may be die-hards
today and remain so tomorrow and even the day after, but not for ever; in
the end they will have to change. Wang Ching-wei, for example, was a die-hard
for a very long time, yet he could not keep on acting the die-hard within
the anti-Japanese ranks and had to go over to the Japanese. Chang Kuo-tao,
to take another example, was also a die-hard for a very long time, but he,
too, took to his heels after we held a number of meetings and struggled
repeatedly against him. Actually, the die-hards may be hard, but they are
not hard unto death, and in the end they change--into something filthy and
contemptible, like dog's dung. Some change for the better and that is also
the result of our repeated struggles against them--they come to see their
mistakes and change for the better. In short, die-hards do change eventually.
They always have many schemes in hand, schemes for profiting at others' expense,
for double-dealing, and so on. But they always get the opposite of what they
want. They invariably start by doing others harm but end by ruining themselves.
We once said that Chamberlain was "lifting a rock only to drop it on his
own toes", and this has now come to pass. Chamberlain had set his heart on
using Hitler as the rock with which to crush the toes of the Soviet people,
but since that September day last year when war broke out between Germany
on the one side and Britain and France on the other, the rock in his hands
has fallen on his own toes. To this day he is still smarting from it. Similar
instances abound in China. Yuan Shih-kai wanted to crush the toes of the
common people but in the event hurt himself, and he died just a few months
after becoming emperor.[9] Tuan Chi-jui, Hsu
Shih-chang, Tsao Kun, Wu Pei-fu and all the rest wanted to repress the people,
but finally they were all overthrown by the people. Whoever tries to profit
at others' expense will come to no good end.

I think that, unless they move forward, the anti-Communist die-hards of today
can be no exception to this rule. On the high-sounding pretext of unification,
they are planning to liquidate the progressive shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border
Region, the progressive Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies, the progressive
Communist Party and mass organizations. They have any number of schemes of
this sort. But I believe the outcome will be not the liquidation of progress
by die-hardism but the liquidation of die-hardism by progress. Indeed, to
escape liquidation the die-hards have no alternative but to move forward.
Hence we have often advised them not to attack the Eighth Route Army, the
Communist Party and the Border Region. If they must, they had better make
a resolution starting as follows: "Determined as we are to liquidate ourselves
and provide the Communist Party with ample opportunity to expand, we, the
die-hards, assume the responsibility for attacking the Communist Party and
the Border Region." The die-hards have had plenty of experience in "suppressing
the Communists", and should they now want to have another go, they are free
to do so. If after eating their fill and having a good sleep, they feel like
doing some "suppression", that is up to them. However, they must be prepared
for the above resolution to go into effect, for it is unalterable. The
"suppression of the Communists" in the past ten years invariably turned out
in conformity with this resolution. Any further "suppression" will also conform
to it. Hence I advise them not to go in for "suppression". For what the whole
nation wants is not "suppression of the Communists" but resistance, unity
and progress. Therefore, anyone who tries to "suppress the Communists" is
bound to fail.

In short, retrogression eventually produces the reverse of what its promoters
intend. There is no exception to this rule either in modern or in ancient
times, in China or elsewhere.

The same is true of constitutional government today. If the die-hards keep
on opposing it, the result will certainly be the reverse of what they intend.
The movement for constitutional government will never follow the course decided
on by the die-hards, but will run counter to their intentions, and it will
inevitably take the course decided on by the people. This is certain, for
the people throughout the country demand it, and so do the current of China's
historical development and the whole trend of world affairs. Who can resist
it? The wheel of history cannot be pushed back. However, the work we have
undertaken requires time and cannot be accomplished overnight; it requires
effort and cannot be done in a slipshod way; it requires the mobilization
of the great masses of the people and cannot be done effectively by a single
pair of hands. It is a very good thing that we are holding this meeting here
today; after our meeting we shall write articles and send telegrams, and
we shall also hold similar meetings in the Wutai Mountains, the Taihang
Mountains, northern China, central China and all over the country. If we
go on doing this and keep it up for several years, that will be just about
right. We must make a good job of it, we must win democracy and freedom,
we must establish new-democratic constitutional government. If this is not
done and the die-hards are allowed to have their way, the nation will perish.
This is the way we must work to avoid national subjugation. For this purpose
everybody must exert himself. If we do so, there is great hope for our cause.
It must further be understood that after all the die-hards are only a minority,
while the majority consists not of die-hards but of people capable of moving
forward. With the majority pitted against the minority, plus the efforts
we exert, the hope will be even greater. That is why I say that, difficult
though the task may be, there is great hope.

NOTES


1. Old Comrade Wu is Comrade Wu Yu-chang, who was then
Chairman of the Yenan Association for the Promotion of Constitutional Government.

2. "Those" refers to the Kuomintang reactionary clique
headed by Chiang Kai-shek.

3. In 1923 Tsao Kun, a big Northern warlord, had himself
elected President of the Republic by bribing 590 members of parliament with
5,000 silver dollars each. He then promulgated a constitution, which came
to be known as the "Tsao Kun Constitution" or the "Constitution of Bribery".

4. Li Yuan-hung was originally commander of a brigade in
the armed forces of the Ching Dynasty. He was compelled by his officers and
men to side with the revolution during the Wuchang Uprising in 1911
and was made military governor of Hupeh Province. He later became Vice-President
and then President of the Republic under the regime of the Northern warlord
clique.

5. Feng Kuo-chang was one of Yuan Shih-kai's underlings.
After Yuan's death, he became the leader of the Chihli (Hopei) group of the
Northern warlord clique. In 1917 he got rid of Li Yuan-hung and became President
himself.

6. Hsu Shih-chang was a politician in the service of the
Northern warlord clique. He was elected President in 1918 by the parliament
controlled by Tuan Chi-jui.

7. The People's Political Council was a mere advisory body
reluctantly set up by the Kuomintang government after the outbreak of the
anti-Japanese war. The members were all "invited" by the Kuomintang government.
Nominally it included the representatives of all anti-Japanese political
parties and groups, but it was actually dominated by the Kuomintang majority.
It had no power to influence the policies or the measures adopted by the
Kuomintang government. As Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang became more
and more reactionary, the number of Kuomintang and other reactionaries on
the council increased while the number of democrats decreased and their freedom
of speech was severely curtailed, until the council increasingly became a
mere tool of Kuomintang reaction. After the Southern Anhwei Incident of 1941,
the Communist members of the council boycotted its meetings several times
in protest against the Kuomintang's reactionary measures.

8. A resolution demanding that the Kuomintang government
convene a national assembly and establish a constitutional government at
a fixed date was passed at the Fourth Session of the People's Political Council
in September 1939, on the proposal of the Communist Party and the democrats
of other parties and groups. In November 1939 the Sixth Plenary Session of
the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang announced that the national
assembly would be convened on November 12, 1940. Though much publicized to
dupe the people, this pledge came to nothing.

9. Yuan Shih-kai proclaimed himself emperor on December
12, 1915, but was forced to give up the title on March 22, 1916.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On the Question of Political Power in the Anti-Japanese Base Areas







ON THE QUESTION OF POLITICAL POWER IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE BASE AREAS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON THE QUESTION OF POLITICAL POWER IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE BASE AREAS


March 6, 1940

[This inner-Party directive was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung on behalf
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.]


1. This is a time when the anti-Communist die-hards of the Kuomintang are
doing all they can to prevent us from setting up organs of anti-Japanese
democratic political power in northern and central China and other places,
while we on our part must set them up, and in the major anti-Japanese base
areas it is already possible for us to do so. Our struggle with the
anti-Communist die-hards over this issue in northern, central and northwestern
China can help to promote the establishment of united front organs of political
power over the whole country and it is being followed attentively by the
whole nation. Therefore, this issue must be handled carefully.

2. The political power we are establishing during the anti-Japanese war is
of a united front character. It is the political power of all those who support
both resistance and democracy; it is the joint democratic dictatorship of
several revolutionary classes over the traitors and reactionaries. It differs
from the counter-revolutionary dictatorship of the landlord class and the
bourgeoisie as well as from the worker-peasant democratic dictatorship of
the Agrarian Revolution period. A clear understanding of the character of
this political power and conscientious efforts to put it into practice will
greatly help to spread democracy through the country. Any deviation, either
to the "Left" or the Right, will create a very bad impression on the whole
nation.

3. The convening of the Hopei Provincial Assembly and the elections to the
Hopei Administrative Council, preparations for which have just been started,
will be of exceptional importance. Equally important will be the establishment
of the new organs of political power in northwestern Shansi, in Shantung,
in areas north of the Huai River, in the counties of Suiteh and Fuhsien,
and in eastern Kansu. We must proceed according to the united front principle
and do our utmost to avoid any Right or "Left" tendencies. At the moment
the "Left" tendency of neglecting to win over the middle bourgeoisie and
the enlightened gentry is the more serious danger.

4. In accordance with the united front principle concerning the organs of
political power, the allocation of places should be one-third for Communists,
one-third for non-Party left progressives, and one-third for the intermediate
sections who are neither left nor right.

5. We must make sure that the Communists play the leading role in the organs
of political power, and therefore the Party members who occupy one-third
of the places must be of high calibre. This will be enough to ensure the
Party's leadership without a larger representation. Leadership is neither
a slogan to be shouted from morning till night nor an arrogant demand for
obedience; it consists rather in using the Party's correct policies and the
example we set by our own work to convince and educate people outside the
Party so that they willingly accept our proposals.

6. The non-Party progressives must be allocated one-third of the places because
they are linked with the broad masses of the petty bourgeoisie. This will
be of tremendous importance in winning the latter over.

7. Our aim in allocating one-third of the places to the intermediate sections
is to win over the middle bourgeoisie and the enlightened gentry. Winning
over these sections is an important step in isolating the die-hards. At the
present time, we must not fail to take the strength of these sections into
account and must be circumspect in our relations with them.

8. Our attitude to the non-Communists must be one of cooperation, whether
or not they have party affiliations and whatever these may be, so long as
they favour resistance to Japan and are willing to co-operate with the Communist
Party.

9. The allocation of places described above represents the genuine policy
of the Party, and we must on no account be half-hearted about it. To execute
this policy, we must educate the Party members who work in the organs of
political power, overcome the narrowness manifested in their reluctance and
uneasiness in co-operating with non-Communists, and encourage a democratic
style of work, that is, consultation with the non-Party people and winning
majority approval before taking action. At the same time, we must do all
we can to encourage the non-Party people to express their views on various
problems and must lend an attentive ear to their suggestions. We must never
think that because we hold military and political power we can force
unconditional compliance with our decisions, and on that account shun the
effort to win the non-Party people over to our views so that they carry them
out gladly and whole-heartedly.

10. The above figures for the allocation of places are not rigid quotas to
be filled mechanically; they are in the nature of a rough proportion which
every locality must apply according to its specific circumstances. At the
lowest level, the ratio may be somewhat modified to prevent the landlords
and evil gentry from sneaking into the organs of political power. Where such
organs have been in existence for some time, as in the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei
border area, the central Hopei area, the Taihang mountain area and the southern
Hopei area, there should be a re-examination of policy in the light of this
principle. And this principle should be observed whenever a new organ of
political power is set up.

11. The united front policy on suffrage should be that every Chinese who
reaches the age of eighteen and is in favour of resistance and democracy
should enjoy the right to elect and to be elected, irrespective of class,
nationality, sex, creed, party affiliation or educational level. The organs
of political power of the anti-Japanese united front must be elected by the
people. Their form of organization should be based on democratic centralism.

12. The fundamental point of departure for all major policy measures in the
united front organs of political power should be opposition to Japanese
imperialism, protection of the people who are resisting Japan, proper adjustment
of the interests of all the anti-Japanese social strata, improvement of the
livelihood of the workers and peasants and suppression of traitors and
reactionaries.

13. The non-Party people who work in our organs of political power should
not be required to live, talk and act like Communists, or otherwise they
may feel dissatisfied or ill at ease.

14. All regional and sub-regional bureaus of the Central Committee, all area
Party committees and all heads of army units are hereby instructed to give
a clear explanation of this directive to Party members, and ensure that it
is fully carried out in the work of our organs of political power.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Current Problems of Tactics in the Anti-Japanese United Front







CURRENT PROBLEMS OF TACTICS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE UNITED FRONT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

CURRENT PROBLEMS OF TACTICS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE UNITED FRONT


March 11, 1940

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrote this outline for the report he made at a meeting
of the Party's senior cadres in Yenan.]
  

1. The present political situation is as follows:

  (a) Japanese imperialism has been dealt a heavy blow by China's War of Resistance
  and is already incapable of launching any more large-scale military offensives,
  so that the relation of forces between the enemy and ourselves has now reached
  the stage of strategic stalemate. But the enemy is still holding fast to
  his basic policy of subjugating China and is pursuing it by such means as
  undermining our anti-Japanese united front, intensifying his "mopping-up"
  campaigns in the rear areas and stepping up his economic aggression.

  (b) Britain and France are finding their positions in the East weakened by
  the war in Europe, while the United States is continuing its policy of "sitting
  on top of the mountain and watching the tigers fight", so that an Eastern
  Munich [1] conference is out of the question for
  the moment.

  (c) The Soviet Union has gained new successes in its foreign policy and is
  maintaining its policy of giving active support to China's War of Resistance.

  (d) The pro-Japanese section of the big bourgeoisie, having completely
  capitulated to Japan, is ready to play the puppet. The pro-European and
  pro-American big bourgeoisie may continue to resist Japan, but its proneness
  to conciliation remains serious. It follows a dual policy. While desiring
  to remain united with the various non-Kuomintang forces to cope with Japan,
  it is doing all it can to suppress them, and especially the Communist Party
  and the other progressive forces. It forms the die-hard section of the
  anti-Japanese united front.

  (e) The intermediate forces, including the middle bourgeoisie, the enlightened
  gentry and the regional power groups, often take a middle position between
  the progressives and the die-hards because of their contradictions with the
  main ruling sections of the big landlords and the big bourgeoisie on the
  one hand, and with the working class and the peasantry on the other. They
  form the middle section of the anti-Japanese united front.

  (f) Recently, the Communist-led progressive forces of the proletariat, the
  peasantry and the urban petty bourgeoisie have grown much stronger and in
  the main have succeeded in creating base areas in which anti-Japanese democratic
  political power has been established. Their influence is very great among
  the workers, peasants and urban petty bourgeoisie throughout the country
  and is also quite considerable among the middle forces. On the battlefield
  the Communists are fighting roughly as many Japanese troops as is the Kuomintang.
  They form the progressive section of the anti-Japanese united front.


This is the present political situation in China. In these circumstances
the possibility still exists of preventing the situation from deteriorating
and of changing it for the better; the Central Committee's resolutions of
February 1 are entirely correct.

2. The basic condition for victory in the War of Resistance is the extension
and consolidation of the anti-Japanese united front. The tactics required
for this purpose are to develop the progressive forces, win over the middle
forces and combat the die-hard forces; these are three inseparable links,
and the means to be used to unite all the anti-Japanese forces is struggle.
In the period of the anti-Japanese united front, struggle is the means to
unity and unity is the aim of struggle. If unity is sought through struggle,
it will live; if unity is sought through yielding, it will perish. This truth
is gradually being grasped by Party comrades. However, there are still many
who do not understand it; some think that struggle will split the united
front or that struggle can be employed without restraint, and others use
wrong tactics towards the middle forces or have mistaken notions about the
die-hard forces. All this must be corrected.

3. Developing the progressive forces means building up the forces of the
proletariat, the peasantry and the urban petty bourgeoisie, boldly expanding
the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies, establishing anti-Japanese democratic
base areas on an extensive scale, building up Communist organizations throughout
the country, developing national mass movements of the workers, peasants,
youth, women and children, winning over the intellectuals in all parts of
the country, and spreading the movement for constitutional government among
the masses as a struggle for democracy. Steady expansion of the progressive
forces is the only way to prevent the situation from deteriorating, to forestall
capitulation and splitting, and to lay a firm and indestructible foundation
for victory in the War of Resistance. But the expansion of the progressive
forces is a serious process of struggle, which must be ruthlessly waged not
only against the Japanese imperialists and the traitors but also against
the die-hards. For the latter are opposed to the growth of the progressive
forces, while the middle section is sceptical. Unless we engage in resolute
struggle against the die-hards and, moreover, get tangible results, we shall
be unable to resist their pressure or dispel the doubts of the middle section.
In that case the progressive forces will have no way of expanding.

4. Winning over the middle forces means winning over the middle bourgeoisie,
the enlightened gentry and the regional power groups. They are three distinct
categories, but as things are, they all belong to the middle forces. The
middle bourgeoisie constitutes the national bourgeoisie as distinct from
the comprador class, i.e., from the big bourgeoisie. Although it
has its class contradictions with the workers and does not approve of the
independence of the working class, it still wants to resist Japan and, moreover,
would like to grasp political power for itself, because it is oppressed by
the Japanese imperialists in the occupied areas and kept down by the big
landlords and big bourgeoisie in the Kuomintang areas. When it comes to resisting
Japan, it is in favour of united resistance; when it comes to winning political
power, it is in favour of the movement for constitutional government and
tries to exploit the contradictions between the progressives and the die-hards
for its own ends. This is a stratum we must win over. Then there are the
enlightened gentry who are the left-wing of the landlord class, that is,
the section with a bourgeois colouration, whose political attitude is roughly
the same as that of the middle bourgeoisie. Although they have class
contradictions with the peasants, they also have their contradictions with
the big landlords and big bourgeoisie. They do not support the die-hards
and they, too, want to exploit the contradictions between us and the die-hards
for their own political ends. On no account should we neglect this section
either, and our policy must be to win them over. As for the regional power
groups, they are of two kinds--the forces which control certain regions as
their own, and the troops of miscellaneous brands which do not. Although
these groups are in contradiction with the progressive forces, they also
have their contradictions with the Kuomintang Central Government because
of the self-seeking policy it pursues at their expense; they, too, want to
exploit the contradictions between us and the die-hards for their own political
ends. Most of the leaders of the regional power groups belong to the big
landlord class and the big bourgeoisie and, therefore, progressive as they
may appear at certain times during the war, they soon turn reactionary again;
nevertheless, because of their contradictions with the Kuomintang central
authorities, the possibility exists of their remaining neutral in our struggle
against the die-hards, provided we pursue a correct policy. Our policy towards
the three categories of middle forces described above is to win them over.
However, this policy differs from that of winning over the peasants and the
urban petty bourgeoisie, and, moreover, it varies for each category of the
middle forces. While the peasants and the urban petty bourgeoisie should
be won over as basic allies, the middle forces should be won over as allies
against imperialism. Among the middle forces, it is possible for the middle
bourgeoisie and the enlightened gentry to join us in the common fight against
Japan and also in the setting up of anti-Japanese democratic political power,
but they fear agrarian revolution. In the struggle against the die-hards,
some may join in to a limited degree, others may observe a benevolent neutrality,
and still others a rather reluctant neutrality. But, apart from joining us
in the war, the regional power groups will at most observe a temporary neutrality
in our struggle against the die-hards; they are unwilling to join us in
establishing democratic political power since they themselves belong to the
big landlord class and the big bourgeoisie. The middle forces tend to vacillate
and are bound to break up, and we should educate and criticize them
appropriately, with special reference to their vacillating attitude.

The winning over of the middle forces is an extremely important task for
us in the period of the anti-Japanese united front, but it can only be
accomplished given certain conditions. These are: (1) that we have ample
strength; (2) that we respect their interests; and (3) that we are resolute
in our struggle against the die-hards and steadily win victories. If these
conditions are lacking, the middle forces will vacillate or even become allies
of the die-hards in the latter's attacks on us, because the die-hards are
also doing their best to win over the middle forces in order to isolate us.
The middle forces carry considerable weight in China and may often be the
decisive factor in our struggle against the die-hards; we must therefore
be prudent in dealing with them.

5. The die-hard forces at the present time are the big landlord class and
the big bourgeoisie. Divided at the moment into the group that has capitulated
to Japan and the group that favours resistance, these classes will gradually
become still further differentiated. Within the big bourgeoisie, the group
favouring resistance is now different from the group that has already
capitulated. It pursues a dual policy. It still stands for unity against
Japan, but at the same time it follows the extremely reactionary policy of
suppressing the progressive forces in preparation for its eventual capitulation.
As it still favours unity against Japan, we can still try and keep it in
the anti-Japanese united front, and the longer the better. It would be wrong
to neglect our policy of winning over this group and co-operating with it
and to regard it as having already capitulated and as being on the verge
of launching an anti-Communist war. But at the same time, we must adopt tactics
of struggle to combat its reactionary policy and carry on a determined
ideological, political and military fight against it, because all over the
country it pursues the reactionary policy of suppressing the progressive
forces, because instead of carrying out the common programme of the revolutionary
Three People's Principles it stubbornly opposes our efforts to do so, and
because it works hard to prevent us from going beyond the limits it has set
for us, i.e.; it tries to confine us to the passive resistance it
itself practices, and, moreover, it tries to assimilate us, failing which
it applies ideological, political and military pressure against us. Such
is our revolutionary dual policy to meet the dual policy of the die-hards,
and such is our policy of seeking unity through struggle. If in the ideological
sphere we can put forward correct revolutionary theory and strike hard at
their counterrevolutionary theory, if in the political sphere we adopt tactics
suited to the times and strike hard at their anti-Communist and anti-progressive
policies, and if in the military sphere we take appropriate measures and
strike back hard at their attacks, then we shall be able to restrict the
effective range of their reactionary policy and compel them to recognize
the status of the progressive forces, and we shall be able to expand the
progressive forces, win over the middle forces and isolate the die-hard forces.
What is more, we shall be able to induce those die-hards who are still willing
to resist Japan to prolong their participation in the anti-Japanese united
front, and shall thus be able to avert a large-scale civil war of the kind
that broke out before. Thus the purpose of our struggle against the die-hards
in the period of the anti-Japanese united front is not only to parry their
attacks in order to protect the progressive forces and enable the latter
to go on growing, it is also to prolong the die-hards' resistance
to Japan and to preserve our co-operation with them in order to avert large-scale
civil war. Without struggle, these progressive forces would be exterminated
by the die-hard forces, the united front would cease to exist, there would
be nothing to hinder the die-hards from capitulating to the enemy, and civil
war would break out. Therefore, struggle against the die-hards is an
indispensable means of uniting all the anti-Japanese forces, achieving a
favourable turn in the situation and averting large-scale civil war. All
our experience confirms this truth.

However, there are several principles which we must observe in our struggle
against the die-hards in the period of the anti-Japanese united front. First,
the principle of self-defence. We will not attack unless we are attacked;
if we are attacked, we will certainly counter-attack. That is to say, we
must never attack others without provocation, but once attacked we must never
fail to return the blow. Herein lies the defensive nature of our struggle.
The military attacks of the die-hards must be smashed--resolutely, thoroughly,
wholly and completely. Second, the principle of victory. We will not fight
unless we are sure of victory; we must never fight without a plan, without
preparation, and without certainty of success. We must know how to exploit
the contradictions among the die-hards and must not take on too many of them
at a single time, but must direct our blows at the most reactionary of them
first. Herein lies the limited nature of the struggle. Third, the principle
of a truce. After repulsing one die-hard attack, we should know when to stop
and bring that particular fight to a close before another attack is made
on us. A truce should be made in the interval. We should then take the initiative
in seeking unity with the die-hards and, if they concur, we should make a
peace agreement with them. On no account should we fight on day after day
without cease, or be carried away by success. Herein lies the temporary nature
of each struggle. Only when the die-hards launch a new attack should we counter
with a new struggle. In other words, the three principles are to fight "on
just grounds", "to our advantage" and "with restraint". By keeping to this
kind of struggle, waged on just grounds, to our advantage and with restraint,
we can develop the progressive forces, win over the middle forces and isolate
the die-hard forces, and we can also make the die-hards think twice before
attacking us, compromising with the enemy or starting large-scale civil war.
Thus a favourable turn in the situation will become possible.

6. The Kuomintang is a heterogeneous party which includes die-hards, middle
elements and progressives; taken as a whole, it must not be equated with
the die-hards. Some people regard the Kuomintang as consisting entirely of
die-hards because its Central Executive Committee has promulgated such
counter-revolutionary friction-mongering decrees as the "Measures for Restricting
the Activities of Alien Parties" and has mobilized every ounce of its strength
for counter-revolutionary friction-mongering in the ideological, political,
and military spheres throughout the country. But this is a mistaken view.
The die-hards in the Kuomintang are still in a position to dictate its policies,
but numerically they are in a minority, while the majority of the membership
(many are members only in name) are not necessarily die-hards. This point
must be clearly recognized if we are to take advantage of the contradictions
within the Kuomintang, follow a policy of differentiating between its different
sections and do our utmost to unite with its middle and progressive sections.

7. On the question of political power in the anti-Japanese base areas, we
must make sure that the political power established there is that of the
Anti-Japanese National United Front. No such political power exists as yet
in the Kuomintang areas. It is the political power of all who support both
resistance and democracy, i.e., the joint democratic dictatorship
of several revolutionary classes over the traitors and reactionaries. It
is different from the dictatorship of the landlord class and the bourgeoisie,
and is also somewhat different from a strictly worker-peasant democratic
dictatorship. Places in the organs of political power should be allocated
as follows: one-third to the Communists, representing the proletariat and
the poor peasantry; one-third to the left progressives, representing the
petty bourgeoisie; and the remaining one-third to the middle and other elements,
representing the middle bourgeoisie and the enlightened gentry. Traitors
and anti-Communist elements are the only people disqualified from participation
in these organs of political power. This general rule for the allocation
of places is necessary, or otherwise it will not be possible to maintain
the principle of united front political power. This allocation of places
represents the genuine policy of our Party and must be carried out
conscientiously; there must be no half-heartedness about it. It provides
a broad rule which has to be applied according to the specific conditions,
and there must be no mechanical filling up of quotas. At the lowest level
the ratio may have to be somewhat modified to prevent domination by the landlords
and evil gentry, but the fundamental spirit of this policy must not be violated.
We should not labour the question of whether the non-Communists in these
organs have party affiliations, or what their party affiliations are. In
areas under the political power of the united front, all political parties,
whether the Kuomintang or any other, must be granted legal status so long
as they co-operate with and do not oppose the Communist Party. On the question
of suffrage, the policy is that every Chinese who reaches the age of eighteen
and is in favour of resistance and democracy should have the right to elect
and to be elected, irrespective of class, nationality, party affiliation,
sex, creed or educational level. The organs of united front political power
should be elected by the people and then apply to the National Government
for confirmation. Their form of organization must be based on democratic
centralism. The fundamental point of departure for all major policy measures
in the united front organs of political power should be opposition to Japanese
imperialism, opposition to confirmed traitors and reactionaries, protection
of the people who are resisting Japan, proper adjustment of the interests
of all the anti-Japanese social strata and improvement of the livelihood
of the workers and peasants. The establishment of this anti-Japanese united
front political power will exert a great influence on the whole country and
serve as a model for united front political power on a national scale; therefore
this policy should be fully understood and resolutely carried out by all
Party comrades.

8. In our struggle to develop the progressive forces, win over the middle
forces and isolate the die-hard forces, we must not overlook the role of
the intellectuals, whom the die-hards are doing their utmost to win over;
therefore it is an important and indeed an essential policy to win over all
progressive intellectuals and bring them under the influence of the Party.

9. In our propaganda we should stress the following programme:

  (a) carry out the Testament of Dr. Sun Yat-sen by arousing the masses for
  united resistance to Japan;

  (b) carry out the Principle of Nationalism by firmly resisting Japanese
  imperialism and striving for complete national liberation and the equality
  of all the nationalities within China;

  (c) carry out the Principle of Democracy by granting the people absolute
  freedom to resist Japan and save the nation, by enabling them to elect
  governments at all levels, and by establishing the revolutionary democratic
  political power of the Anti-Japanese National United Front;

  (d) carry out the Principle of the People's Livelihood by abolishing exorbitant
  taxes and miscellaneous levies, reducing land rent and interest, enforcing
  the eight-hour working day, developing agriculture, industry and commerce,
  and improving the livelihood of the people; and

  (e) carry out Chiang Kai-shek's declaration that "every person, young or
  old, in the north or in the south, must take up the responsibility of resisting
  Japan and defending our homeland".


All these points are in the Kuomintang's own published programme, which is
also the common programme of the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. But
the Kuomintang has failed to carry out any part of this programme other than
resistance to Japan; only the Communist Party and the progressive forces
are able to carry it out. It is a simple enough programme and is widely known,
yet many Communists fail to use it as a weapon for mobilizing the masses
and isolating the die-hards. From now on we should keep attention focussed
on the five points of this programme and popularize them through public notices,
manifestoes, leaflets, articles, speeches, statements, and so on. In the
Kuomintang areas it is still only a propaganda programme, but in the areas
reached by the Eighth Route Army and the New Fourth Army it is already a
programme of action. In acting according to this programme we are
within the law, and when the die-hards oppose our carrying it out,
it is they who are outside the law. In the stage of the bourgeois-democratic
revolution, this programme of the Kuomintang's is basically the
same as ours, but the ideology of the Kuomintang is entirely different
from that of the Communist Party. It is this common programme of the democratic
revolution that we should put into practice, but on no account should we
follow the ideology of the Kuomintang.

NOTES


1. For the Eastern Munich, see "Oppose Capitulationist
Activity", Note 3. P. 255 of this volume.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Freely Expand the Anti-Japanese Forces and Resist the Onslaughts of the Anti-Communist Die-Hards







FREELY EXPAND THE ANTI-JAPANESE FORCES AND RESIST THE ONSLAUGHTS OF
  THE ANTI-COMMUNIST DIE-HARDS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

FREELY EXPAND THE ANTI-JAPANESE FORCES AND RESIST THE ONSLAUGHTS OF THE
  ANTI-COMMUNIST DIE-HARDS


May 4, 1940

[This directive was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung on behalf of the Central
Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and addressed to its Southeast Bureau.
At the time of writing, Comrade Hsiang Ying, member of the Central Committee
and secretary of its Southeast Bureau, held strong Rightist views and was
irresolute in carrying out the line of the Central Committee. He did not
dare fully to arouse the masses to action and to expand the Liberated Areas
and the people's army in the Japanese-occupied areas, did not sufficiently
realize the seriousness of the possibility of reactionary attacks by the
Kuomintang, and was therefore unprepared for them mentally and organizationally.
When the directive reached the Southeast Bureau, Comrade Chen Yi, member
of the Southeast Bureau and commander of the First Detachment of the New
Fourth Army, immediately put it into effect, but Comrade Hsiang Ying was
reluctant to do so. He made no preparations against the attacks of the Kuomintang
reactionaries so that he was in a weak and helpless position when Chiang
Kai-shek staged the Southern Anhwei Incident in January 1941, in which nine
thousand of our troops were annihilated and Comrade Hsiang Ying himself was
killed.]
  

1. In all regions behind the enemy lines and in all the war zones, stress
should be laid not on particularity, but on identity; to do otherwise would
be a gross error. While each region has its individual peculiarities, they
are all identical in that all are confronted by the enemy and all are engaged
in the War of Resistance, whether in northern, central or southern China,
in the areas north or south of the Yangtse River, or in the plains, the mountain
or lake regions, and whether the force involved is the Eighth Route Army,
the New Fourth Army or the South China Guerrilla
Column.[1] It follows that in all cases we can
and should expand. The Central Committee has pointed out this policy of expansion
to you time and again. To expand means to reach out into all enemy-occupied
areas and not to be bound by the Kuomintang's restrictions but to go beyond
the limits allowed by the Kuomintang, not to expect official appointments
from them or depend on the higher-ups for financial support but instead to
expand the armed forces freely and independently, set up base areas
unhesitatingly, independently arouse the masses in those areas to action
and build up united front organs of political power under the leadership
of the Communist Party. In Kiangsu Province, for example, despite the verbal
attacks and the restrictions and oppression by anti-Communist elements such
as Ku Chu-tung, Leng Hsin and Han Teh-chin,[2]
we should gain control of as many districts as possible from Nanking in the
west to the seacoast in the east and from Hangchow in the south to Hsuchow
in the north, and do so as fast as possible and yet steadily and systematically;
and we should independently expand the armed forces, establish organs of
political power, set up fiscal offices to levy taxes for resistance to Japan
and economic agencies to promote agriculture, industry and commerce, and
open up schools of various kinds to train large numbers of cadres. The Central
Committee previously instructed you to enlarge the anti-Japanese armed forces
to 1,000,000 men, with as many rifles, and to set up organs of political
power promptly in the regions behind the enemy lines in Kiangsu and Chekiang
Provinces before the end of this year. What concrete measures have you taken?
Opportunities have been missed before, and if this year they are missed again,
things will become still more difficult.

2. At a time when the anti-Communist die-hards in the Kuomintang are obstinately
persisting in their policy of containing, restricting and combating the Communist
Party in preparation for capitulation to Japan, we must stress struggle and
not unity; to do otherwise would be a gross error. Therefore, whether in
the theoretical, the political, or the military sphere, we should as a matter
of principle firmly resist all the verbal attacks, propaganda, orders and
laws of the anti-Communist die-hards designed to contain, restrict and oppose
the Communist Party, and our attitude towards them should be one of firm
struggle. This struggle must be based on the principle of fighting on just
grounds, to our advantage, and with restraint, that is, on the principles
of self-defence, victory and truce, which means that every concrete struggle
is defensive, limited and temporary in nature. We must take tit-for-tat action
and conduct a determined struggle against all the reactionary verbal attacks,
propaganda, orders and laws of the anti-Communist die-hards. For instance,
when they demanded that our Fourth and Fifth Detachments
[3] be moved to the south, we countered by insisting
that it was absolutely impossible to do so; when they demanded that the units
under Yeh Fei and Chang Yun-yi [4] be moved to
the south, we countered by asking permission for a part of these units to
move to the north; when they charged us with having undermined their conscription
plans, we asked them to enlarge the recruiting area for the New Fourth Army;
when they said we were carrying on wrong propaganda, we asked them to stop
all their anti-Communist propaganda and to rescind all decrees and orders
which cause "friction", and whenever they launch military attacks against
us, we should smash them by counter-attacks. We are on just grounds in carrying
out this tit-for-tat policy. And it is not only the Central Committee of
our Party that should take action whenever we are on just grounds, but every
unit of our army should do so. What Chang Yun-yi did to Li Pin-hsien and
what Li Hsien-nien did to Li Tsung-jen [5] are
both good examples of strong protests from the lower levels to the higher-ups.
This kind of strong attitude towards the die-hards and the policy of struggling
against them on just grounds, to our advantage, and with restraint are the
only way to make the die-hards somewhat afraid of repressing us, to reduce
the scope of their activities in containing, restricting and combating the
Communist Party, to force them to recognize our legal status, and to make
them think twice before causing a split. Therefore, struggle is by far the
most important means of averting the danger of capitulation, of achieving
a turn for the better in the situation and of strengthening Kuomintang-Communist
co-operation. Within our own Party and army, persistence in the struggle
against the die-hards is the only way to heighten our fighting spirit, give
full play to our courage, unite our cadres, increase our strength and consolidate
our army and Party. In our relations with the intermediate sections, persistence
in the struggle against the die-hards is the only way to win over the waverers
and give support to our sympathizers-- there is no other way. Similarly,
struggle is the only policy which can ensure that the whole Party and the
whole army are mentally on the alert against a possible nation-wide emergency
and are prepared for it in their work. Otherwise, the mistake of 1927
[6] will be repeated.

3. In appraising the present situation, we should clearly understand that
while the danger of capitulation has greatly increased, it is still possible
to avert it. The present military clashes are still local and not national.
They are acts of strategic reconnaissance by our opponents and not yet "Communist
suppression" on a large scale; they are steps preparatory to capitulation
and not yet steps immediately preceding capitulation. Our task is persistently
and vigorously to carry out the threefold policy laid down by the Central
Committee, which is the only correct policy, namely, to develop the progressive
forces, win over the middle forces and isolate the die-hard forces, for the
purpose of averting the danger of capitulation and bringing about a turn
for the better in the situation. It would be perilous not to point out and
correct any "Left" or Right deviations in appraising the situation and in
defining our tasks.

4. The battles of self-defence fought by the Fourth and the Fifth Detachments
against the attacks of Han Teh-chin and Li Tsung-jen in eastern Anhwei and
those fought by Li Hsien-nien's column against the die-hards' attacks in
central and eastern Hupeh, the determined struggle carried on by Peng
Hsuch-feng's detachment north of the Huai River, the expansion of Yeh Fei's
forces north of the Yangtse River, and the southward movement of over 20,000
men of the Eighth Route Army to areas north of the Huai River and to eastern
Anhwei and northern Kiangsu [7]--all these were
not only absolutely necessary and correct in themselves, but were indispensable
for making Ku Chu-tung think twice before attacking you in southern Anhwei
and southern Kiangsu. That is to say, the more victories we win and the more
we expand north of the Yangtse River, the more will Ku Chu-tung be afraid
to act rashly south of the Yangtse River, and the easier will it be for you
to play your role in southern Anhwei and southern Kiangsu. Similarly, the
more the Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth Army and the South China Guerrilla
Column expand in northwestern, northern, central and southern China, and
the more the Communist Party grows throughout the country, the greater will
be the possibility of averting the danger of capitulation and bringing about
a turn for the better in the situation, and the easier will it be for our
Party to play its role in all parts of the country. It is wrong to make the
opposite appraisal or adopt the opposite tactics in the belief that the more
our forces expand, the more the die-hards will tend towards capitulation,
that the more concessions we make, the more they will resist Japan, or that
the whole country is on the verge of a split and Kuomintang-Communist
co-operation is no longer possible.

5. The Anti-Japanese National United Front is our policy for the whole country
in the War of Resistance. The establishment of democratic anti-Japanese base
areas in the enemy rear is part of this policy. You should firmly carry out
the Central Committee's decisions on the question of political power.

6. Our policy in the Kuomintang areas is different from that in the war zones
and the areas behind the enemy lines. In the Kuomintang areas our policy
is to have well-selected cadres working underground for a long period, to
accumulate strength and bide our time, and to avoid rashness and exposure.
In conformity with the principle of waging struggles on just grounds, to
our advantage, and with restraint, our tactics in combating the die-hards
are to wage steady and sure struggles and to build up our strength by utilizing
all Kuomintang laws and decrees that can serve our purpose as well as everything
permitted by social custom. If a member of our Party is forced to join the
Kuomintang, let him do so; our members should penetrate the pao chia
[8] and the educational, economic
and military organizations everywhere; they should develop extensive united
front work, i.e., make friends, in the Central Army and among the
troops of miscellaneous brands.[9] In all the
Kuomintang areas the Party's basic policy is likewise to develop the progressive
forces (the Party organizations and the mass movements), to win over the
middle forces (seven categories in all, namely, the national bourgeoisie,
the enlightened gentry, the troops of miscellaneous brands, the intermediate
sections in the Kuomintang, the intermediate sections in the Central Army,
the upper stratum of the petty bourgeoisie, and the small political parties
and groups) and to isolate the die-hard forces, in order to avert the danger
of capitulation and bring about a favourable turn in the situation. At the
same time we should be fully prepared to deal with any emergency on a local
or national scale. Our Party organizations in the Kuomintang areas must be
kept strictly secret. In the Southeast Bureau
[10] and in all the provincial, special, county and
district committees, the whole personnel (from Party secretaries to cooks)
must be strictly scrutinized one by one, and no one open to the slightest
suspicion should be allowed to remain in any of these leading bodies. Great
care must be taken to protect our cadres, and whoever is in danger of being
arrested and killed by the Kuomintang while working in an open or semi-open
capacity should either be sent to some other locality and go underground
or be transferred to the army. In the Japanese-occupied areas (in Shanghai,
Nanking, Wuhu or Wusih, or in any other city, large or small, and also in
the countryside), our policy is basically the same as in the Kuomintang areas.

7. The present tactical directive was decided upon by the Political Bureau
of the Central Committee at its recent meeting, and comrades of the Southeast
Bureau and the military sub-commission are requested to discuss it, relay
it to all cadres in the Party organizations and the army, and firmly carry
it out.

8. Comrade Hsiang Ying is instructed to relay this directive in southern
Anhwei and Comrade Chen Yi to relay it in southern Kiangsu. Discussion and
relaying should be completed within a month of receiving this telegram. Comrade
Hsiang Ying has the over-all responsibility for arranging Party and army
work in the whole area in accordance with the line of the Central Committee
and should report the results to the Central Committee.

NOTES


1. The South China Guerrilla Column was a general name
given to a number of anti-Japanese guerrilla units in southern China led
by the Chinese Communist Party.

2. Ku Chu-tung, Leng Hsin and Han Teh-chin were reactionary
Kuomintang generals stationed in Kiangsu, Chekiang, southern Anhwei, Kiangsi
and other places.

3. The Fourth and Fifth Detachments of the New Fourth Army
were then building up an anti-Japanese base area in the Huai River valley
on the Kiangsu-Anhwei provincial border.

4. The units of the New Fourth Army under Yeh Fei and Chang
Yun-yi were then carrying on anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare and building
up an anti-Japanese base area north of the Yangtse River in central Kiangsu
and eastern Anhwei.

5. During March and April 1940, Li Pin-hsien, the Kuomintang
provincial governor of Anhwei, and Li Tsung-jen, the Kuomintang commander
of the 5th War Zone, both warlords of the Kwangsi clique, launched large-scale
offensives on the New Fourth Army in the Anhwei-Hupeh border area. Comrade
Chang Yun-yi commander of New Fourth Army units north of the Yangtse River,
and Comrade Li Hsien-nien, commander of the Army's Hupeh-Honan Assault Troops,
lodged strong protests and repulsed the offensives.

6. The mistake of 1927 refers to Chen Tu-hsiu's Right
opportunism.

7. In January 1940 the Central Committee of the Chinese
Communist Party dispatched more than 20,000 men of the Eighth Route Army
from northern China to reinforce the New Fourth Army in its anti-Japanese
warfare north of the Huai River and in eastern Anhwei and northern Kiangsu.

8. Pao chia was the administrative system by which
the Kuomintang reactionary clique enforced its fascist rule at the primary
level.

9. Chiang Kai-shek's clique called its own armed forces
the Central Army and those belonging to other cliques troops of miscellaneous
brands. It discriminated against the latter and did not treat them on an
equal footing with the Central Army.

10. The Southeast Bureau directed the work in southeastern
China (including the provinces of Kiangsu, Chekiang, Anhwei, Kiangsi, Hupeh
and Hunan) on behalf of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party
in the period 1938-41.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Unity to the Very End







UNITY TO THE VERY END



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

UNITY TO THE VERY END


July 1940


The third anniversary of the outbreak of the War of Resistance Against Japan
and the nineteenth anniversary of the founding of the Communist Party of
China occur within a few days of each other. In commemorating the anniversary
of the resistance today we Communists feel our responsibility all the more
keenly. To fight for the survival of the Chinese nation is a responsibility
which falls on all the anti-Japanese political parties and groups and the
whole people, but as we see it an even heavier responsibility falls on us
as Communists. The Central Committee of our Party has issued a statement
on the present situation, the essence of which is a call for resistance and
unity to the very end. This statement, we hope, will meet with the approval
of the friendly parties and armies and the whole nation, and Communists in
particular must conscientiously carry out the line it has laid down.

All Communists must realize that only through resistance to the very end
can there be unity to the very end, and vice versa. Therefore, Communists
must set an example in both resistance and unity. Our opposition is directed
solely against the enemy and against the determined capitulators and
anti-Communists; with all others we must unite in earnest. In every place
the determined capitulators and anti-Communists are only a minority. I made
an investigation of one local government and found that out of 1,300 staff
members, only 40 to 50, or less than 4 per cent, were confirmed anti-Communists,
while all the rest wanted unity and resistance. Of course we cannot tolerate
these capitulators and anti-Communists, because that would amount to allowing
them to sabotage resistance and wreck unity; we must resolutely oppose the
capitulators and, in self-defence, firmly repel the attacks of the anti-Communist
elements. Failure to do so would be Right opportunism and would harm unity
and resistance. However, our policy must be one of unity with all those who
are not absolutely set in their capitulation and anti-communism. For some
face both ways, others are acting under compulsion, and still others have
temporarily gone astray; for the sake of continued unity and resistance we
must win over all these people. Failure to do so would be "Left" opportunism
and this, too, would harm unity and resistance. All Communists should realize
that, having initiated the Anti-Japanese National United Front, we must maintain
it. Now that the national crisis is deepening and the world situation is
undergoing a great change, we must shoulder the very heavy responsibility
of saving the Chinese nation. We must defeat Japanese imperialism and build
China into an independent, free and democratic republic, and to do so we
must unite the greatest possible number of people, with or without party
affiliations. Communists should not enter into unprincipled united fronts
and must therefore oppose all such schemes as corroding, restricting, containing
and repressing the Communist Party as well as oppose the Right opportunism
within the Party. But at the same time Communists should not fail to respect
the Party's united front policy and must therefore unite, on the principle
of resistance, with all those who are still willing to resist Japan and must
oppose "Left" opportunism within the Party.

Thus, as far as political power is concerned, we stand for united front organs
of political power; we do not favour one-party dictatorship either by the
Communist Party or by any other party, but we stand for the joint dictatorship
of all political parties and groups, people in all walks of life and all
armed forces, that is, for united front political power. Whenever we establish
organs of anti-Japanese political power in the enemy rear after destroying
the enemy and the puppet regimes there, we should adopt the "three thirds
system" as decided upon by the Central Committee of our Party, so that Communists
take only one-third of the places in all government or people's representative
bodies, while the remaining two-thirds are taken by people who stand for
resistance and democracy whether or not they are members of other parties
or groups. Anybody may take part in the work of the government so long as
he is not in favour of capitulation or is not an anti-Communist. Every political
party or group shall have the right to exist and carry on its activities
under the anti-Japanese political power, so long as it is not in favour of
capitulation and is not anti-Communist.

In regard to the question of the armed forces, our Party's statement has
made it clear that we shall continue to observe the decision "not to extend
our Party organizations to any friendly army". Local Party organizations
which have not strictly observed this decision should immediately put the
matter right. A friendly attitude should be taken towards all armed units
that do not start armed clashes with the Eighth Route or New Fourth Armies.
Friendly relations should be restored even with those troops that have created
"friction", once they stop doing so. This is our united front policy with
regard to the armed forces.

As for our policies on other matters, whether financial, economic, cultural
or educational or anti-espionage, for the sake of resistance we must follow
the united front policy by adjusting the interests of the different classes
and must oppose both Right and "Left" opportunism.

Internationally the imperialist war is becoming world-wide and the extremely
grave political and economic crises to which it has given rise will inevitably
cause revolutions to break out in many countries. We are in a new era of
wars and revolutions. The Soviet Union, which has not been drawn into the
maelstrom of this imperialist war, is the supporter of all the oppressed
people and all the oppressed nations of the world. These factors are favourable
to China's War of Resistance. But at the same time the danger of capitulation
is more serious than ever before because Japanese imperialism is intensifying
its attacks on China in preparation for its aggression against Southeast
Asia, and this will certainly induce some of the vacillating elements to
surrender. The fourth year of the war is going to be a most difficult one.
Our task is to unite all anti-Japanese forces, oppose the capitulators, surmount
all the difficulties and persist in nation-wide resistance. All Communists
must unite with the friendly parties and armies to accomplish this task.
We are confident that, through the united efforts of all members of our Party,
of the friendly parties and armies and the whole people, we shall succeed
in preventing capitulation, in conquering the difficulties, in driving out
the Japanese aggressors and in recovering our lost territories. The prospects
for our War of Resistance are indeed bright.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On Policy







ON POLICY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON POLICY


December 25, 1940

[This inner-Party directive was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung on behalf
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of
China.]
  

In the present high tide of anti-Communist attacks, the policy we adopt is
of decisive importance. But many of our cadres fail to realize that the Party's
present policy must be very different from its policy during the Agrarian
Revolution. It has to be understood that in no circumstances will the Party
change its united front policy for the entire period of the War of Resistance
Against Japan, and that many of the policies adopted during the ten years
of the Agrarian Revolution cannot just be duplicated today. In particular,
many ultra-Left policies of the latter period of the Agrarian Revolution
are not merely totally inapplicable today in the War of Resistance, but were
wrong even then, arising as they did from the failure to understand two
fundamental points--that the Chinese revolution is a bourgeois-democratic
revolution in a semi-colonial country, and that it is a protracted revolution.
For example, there was the thesis that the Kuomintang's fifth "encirclement
and suppression" campaign and our counter-campaign constituted the decisive
battle between counterrevolution and revolution; there was the economic
elimination of the capitalist class (the ultra-Left policies on labour and
taxation) and of the rich peasants (by allotting them poor land); the physical
elimination of the landlords (by not allotting them any land); the attack
on the intellectuals; the "Left" deviation in the suppression of
counterrevolutionaries; the monopolizing by Communists of the organs of political
power; the focusing on communism as the objective in popular education; the
ultra-Left military policy (of attacking the big cities and denying the role
of guerrilla warfare); the putschist policy in the work in the White areas;
and the policy within the Party of attacks on comrades through the abuse
of disciplinary measures. These ultra-Left policies were manifestations of
the error of "Left" opportunism, or exactly the reverse of the Right opportunism
of Chen Tu-hsiu in the latter period of the First Great Revolution. It was
all alliance and no struggle in the latter period of the First Great Revolution,
and all struggle and no alliance (except with the basic sections of the
peasantry) in the latter period of the Agrarian Revolution-- truly striking
demonstrations of the two extremist policies. Both extremist policies caused
great losses to the Party and the revolution.

Today our Anti-Japanese National United Front policy is neither all alliance
and no struggle nor all struggle and no alliance, but a combines alliance
and struggle. Specifically, it means:

(1) All people favouring resistance (that is, all anti-Japanese workers,
peasants, soldiers, students and intellectuals, and businessmen) must unite
in the Anti-Japanese National United Front.

(2) Within the united front our policy must be one of independence and
initiative, i.e., both unity and independence are necessary.

(3) As far as military strategy is concerned, our policy is guerrilla warfare
waged independently and with the initiative in our own hands within the framework
of a united strategy; guerrilla warfare is basic, but no chance of waging
mobile warfare should be lost when the conditions are favourable.

(4) In the struggle against the anti-Communist die-hards, our policy is to
make use of contradictions, win over the many, oppose the few and crush our
enemies one by one, and to wage struggles on just grounds, to our advantage,
and with restraint.

(5) In the enemy-occupied and Kuomintang areas our policy is, on the one
hand, to develop the united front to the greatest possible extent and, on
the other, to have well-selected cadres working underground. With regard
to the forms of organization and struggle, our policy is to have well-selected
cadres working underground for a long period, to accumulate strength and
bide our time.

(6) With regard to the alignment of the various classes within the country,
our basic policy is to develop the progressive forces, win over the middle
forces and isolate the anti-Communist die-hard forces.

(7) With respect to the anti-Communist die-hards, ours is a revolutionary
dual policy of uniting with them, in so far as they are still in favour of
resisting Japan, and of isolating them, in so far as they are determined
to oppose the Communist Party. Moreover, the die-hards have a dual character
with regard to resistance to Japan, and our policy is to unite with them,
in so far as they are still in favour of resistance, and to struggle against
them and isolate them in so far as they vacillate (for instance, when they
collude with the Japanese aggressors and show reluctance in opposing Wang
Ching-wei and other traitors). As their opposition to the Communist Party
has also a dual character, our policy, too, should have a dual character;
in so far as they are still unwilling to break up Kuomintang-Communist
co-operation altogether, it is one of alliance with them, but in so far as
they are high-handed and launch armed attacks on our Party and the people,
it is one of struggling against them and isolating them. We make a distinction
between such people with a dual character and the traitors and pro-Japanese
elements.

(8) Even among the traitors and pro-Japanese elements there are people with
a dual character, towards whom we should likewise employ a revolutionary
dual policy. In so far as they are pro-Japanese, our policy is to struggle
against them and isolate them, but in so far as they vacillate, our policy
is to draw them nearer to us and win them over. We make a distinction between
such ambivalent elements and the out-and-out traitors like Wang Ching-wei,
Wang Yi-tang [1] and Shih
Yu-san.[2]

(9) The pro-Japanese big landlords and big bourgeoisie who are against resistance
must be distinguished from the pro-British and pro-American big landlords
and big bourgeoisie who are for resistance; similarly, the ambivalent big
landlords and big bourgeoisie who are for resistance but vacillate, and who
are for unity but are anti-Communist, must be distinguished from the national
bourgeoisie, the middle and small landlords and the enlightened gentry, the
duality of whose character is less pronounced. We build our policy on these
distinctions. The diverse policies mentioned above all stem from these
distinctions in class relations.

(10) We deal with imperialism in the same way. The Communist Party opposes
all imperialism, but we make a distinction between Japanese imperialism which
is now committing aggression against China and the imperialist powers which
are not doing so now, between German and Italian imperialism which are allies
of Japan and have recognized "Manchukuo" and British and U.S. imperialism
which are opposed to Japan, and between the Britain and the United States
of yesterday which followed a Munich policy in the Far East and undermined
China's resistance to Japan, and the Britain and the United States of today
which have abandoned this policy and are now in favour of China's resistance.
Our tactics are guided by one and the same principle: to make use of
contradictions, win over the many oppose the few and crush our enemies one
by one. Our foreign policy differs from that of the Kuomintang. The Kuomintang
claims, "There is only one enemy and all the rest are friends"; it appears
to treat all countries other than Japan alike, but in fact it is pro-British
and pro-American. On our part we must draw certain distinctions, first between
the Soviet Union and the capitalist countries, second, between Britain and
the United States on the one hand and Germany and Italy on the other, third,
between the people of Britain and the United States and their imperialist
governments, and fourth, between the policy of Britain and the United States
during their Far Eastern Munich period and their policy today. We build our
policy on these distinctions. In direct contrast to the Kuomintang our basic
line is to use all possible foreign help, subject to the principle of independent
prosecution of the war and reliance on our own efforts, and not, as the
Kuomintang does, to abandon this principle by relying entirely on foreign
help or hanging on to one imperialist bloc or another.

To correct the lop-sided views of many Party cadres on the question of tactics
and their consequent vacillations between "Left" and Right, we must help
them to acquire an all-round and integrated understanding of the changes
and developments in the Party's policy, past and present. The ultra-Left
viewpoint is creating trouble and is still the main danger in the Party.
In the Kuomintang areas, there are many people who cannot seriously carry
out the policy of having well-selected cadres working underground for a long
period, of accumulating strength and biding our time, because they underestimate
the gravity of the Kuomintang's anti-Communist policy. At the same time,
there are many others who cannot carry out the policy of expanding the united
front, because they over-simplify matters and consider the entire Kuomintang
to be quite hopeless and are therefore at a loss what to do. A similar state
of affairs exists in the Japanese-occupied areas.

In the Kuomintang areas and the anti-Japanese base areas, the Rightist views
which were once prevalent to a serious extent have now been basically overcome;
those who held such views used to stress alliance to the exclusion of struggle
and overestimate the Kuomintang's inclination to resist Japan, and they therefore
blurred the difference in principle between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party, rejected the policy of independence and initiative within the united
front, appeased the big landlords and big bourgeoisie and the Kuomintang,
and tied their own hands instead of boldly expanding the anti-Japanese
revolutionary forces and conducting resolute struggle against the Kuomintang's
policy of opposing and restricting the Communist Party. But since the winter
of 1939 an ultra-Left tendency has cropped up in many places as a result
of the anti-Communist "friction" engineered by the Kuomintang and of the
struggles we have waged in self-defence. This tendency has been corrected
to some extent but not altogether, and it still finds expression in concrete
policies in many places. It is therefore most necessary for us to examine
and define our concrete policies now.

As the Central Committee has already issued a series of directives on concrete
policies, now only a few points are given here by way of summary.

The organs of political power. The "three thirds system",
under which Communists have only one-third of the places in the organs of
political power and many non-Communists are drawn into participation, must
be carried out resolutely. In areas like northern Kiangsu, where we have
just begun to establish anti-Japanese democratic political power, the proportion
of Communists may be even less than one-third. The representatives of the
petty bourgeoisie, the national bourgeoisie and the enlightened gentry who
are not actively opposed to the Communist Party must be drawn into participation
both in the government and in the people's representative bodies, and those
Kuomintang members who do not oppose the Communist Party must also be allowed
to participate. Even a small number of right-wingers may be allowed to join
the people's representative bodies. On no account should our Party monopolize
everything. We are not destroying the dictatorship of the big comprador
bourgeoisie and the big landlord class in order to replace it with a one-party
dictatorship of the Communist Party.

Labour policy. The livelihood of the workers must be improved
if their enthusiasm in the fight against Japan is to be fully aroused. But
we must strictly guard against being ultra-Leftist; there must not be excessive
increases in wages or excessive reductions in working hours. Under present
conditions, the eight-hour working day cannot be universally introduced in
China and a ten-hour working day should still be permitted in certain branches
of production. In other branches of production the working day should be
axed according to the circumstances. Once a contract between labour and capital
is concluded, the workers must observe labour discipline and the capitalists
must be allowed to make some profit. Otherwise factories will close down,
which will neither help the war nor benefit the workers. Particularly in
the rural areas, the living standards and wages of the workers should not
be raised too high, or it will give rise to complaints from the peasants,
create unemployment among the workers and result in a decline in production.

Land policy. It must be explained to Party members and to
the peasants that this is not the time for a thorough agrarian revolution
and that the series of measures taken during the Agrarian Revolution cannot
be applied today. On the one hand, our present policy should stipulate that
the landlords shall reduce rent and interest, for this serves to arouse the
enthusiasm of the basic peasant masses for resistance to Japan, but the
reductions should not be too great. In general, land rent should be reduced
by 25 per cent, and if the masses demand a greater reduction, the tenant-farmer
may keep up to 60 or 70 per cent of his crop, but not more. The reduction
in interest on loans should not be so great as to render credit transactions
impossible. On the other hand, our policy should stipulate that the peasants
shall pay rent and interest and that the landlords shall retain their ownership
of land and other property. Interest should not be so low as to make it
impossible for the peasants to obtain loans, nor the settlement of old accounts
be such as to enable the peasants to get back their mortgaged land gratis.

Tax policy. Taxes must be levied according to income. Except
for the very poor who should be exempt, all people with an income shall pay
taxes to the state, which means that the burden shall be carried by more
than 80 per cent of the population, including the workers and peasants, and
not be placed entirely on the landlords and the capitalists. Arresting people
and imposing fines on them as a means of financing the army must be forbidden.
We may use the existing Kuomintang system of taxation with appropriate
alterations until we have devised a new and more suitable one.

Anti-espionage policy. We must firmly suppress the confirmed
traitors and anti-Communists, or otherwise we shall not be able to protect
the anti-Japanese revolutionary forces. But there must not be too much killing,
and no innocent person should be incriminated. Vacillating elements and reluctant
followers among the reactionaries should be dealt with leniently. Corporal
punishment must be abolished in trying criminals; the stress must be on the
weight of evidence and confessions should not be taken on trust. Our policy
towards prisoners captured from the Japanese, puppet or anti-communist troops
is to set them all free, except for those who have incurred the bitter hatred
of the masses and must receive capital punishment and whose death sentence
has been approved by the higher authorities. Among the prisoners, those who
were coerced into joining the reactionary forces but who are more or less
inclined towards the revolution should be won over in large numbers to work
for our army. The rest should be released and, if they fight us and are captured
again, should again be set free. We should not insult them, take away their
personal effects or try to exact recantations from them, but without exception
should treat them sincerely and kindly. This should be our policy, however
reactionary they may be. It is a very effective way of isolating the hard
core of reaction. As for renegades, except for those who have committed heinous
crimes, they should be given a chance to turn over a new leaf provided they
discontinue their anti-Communist activities; and if they come back and wish
to rejoin the revolution they may be accepted, but must not be re-admitted
into the Party. The general run of Kuomintang intelligence agents must not
be identified with the Japanese spies and Chinese traitors; the two should
be differentiated and handled accordingly. An end should be put to the state
of confusion in which any governmental or non-governmental organization can
make arrests. To establish revolutionary order in the interests of the war,
it must be stipulated that, with the exception of army units in combat action,
only government judicial or public security agencies shall be empowered to
make arrests.

The rights of the people. It must be laid down that all landlords
and capitalists not opposed to the War of Resistance shall enjoy the same
rights of person and property, the same right to vote and the same freedom
of speech, assembly, association, political conviction and religious belief
as the workers and peasants. The government shall take action only against
saboteurs and those who organize riots in our base areas, and shall protect
all others and not molest them.

Economic policy. We must actively develop industry and
agriculture and promote the circulation of commodities. Capitalists should
be encouraged to come into our anti-Japanese base areas and start enterprises
here if they so desire. Private enterprise should be encouraged and state
enterprise regarded as only one sector of the economy. The purpose in all
this is to achieve self-sufficiency. Care must be taken not to damage any
useful enterprise. Both our tariff and our monetary policies should conform
to our basic line of expanding agriculture, industry and commerce, and not
run counter to it. The essential factor in maintaining the base areas over
a long period is the achievement of self-sufficiency through a conscientious
and meticulous, not a crude and careless, organization of the economy.

Cultural and educational policy. This should centre on promoting
and spreading the knowledge and skills needed for the war and a sense of
national pride among the masses of the people. Bourgeois liberal educators,
men of letters, journalists, scholars and technical experts should be allowed
to come to our base areas and co-operate with us in running schools and
newspapers and doing other work. We should accept into our schools all
intellectuals and students who show enthusiasm for resisting Japan, give
them short-term training, and then assign them to work in the army, the
government, or mass organizations; we should boldly draw them in, give them
work and promote them. We should not be over-cautious or too afraid of
reactionaries sneaking in. Unavoidably, some such elements will creep in,
but there will be time to comb them out in the course of study and work.
Every base area must establish printing shops, publish books and newspapers
and organize distribution and delivery agencies. Every base area must also,
as far as possible, set up big schools for training cadres, and the more
and bigger, the better.

Military policy. There must be maximum expansion of the Eighth
Route and New Fourth Armies, because they are the most reliable armed forces
of the Chinese people in pressing on with the national war of resistance.
We should continue our policy of never attacking the Kuomintang troops unless
attacked and do all we can to make friends with them. In order to help the
building up of our army, no effort should be spared to draw those officers
who are sympathetic to us into the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies, whether
they are members of the Kuomintang or are without party affiliation. Something
must be done now to change the situation where Communists dominate everything
in our armies by sheer numbers. Of course, the "three thirds system" should
not be introduced into our main forces, but so long as the leadership of
the army is kept in the hands of the Party (this is an absolute and inviolable
necessity), we need not be afraid of drawing large numbers of sympathizers
into the work of building up the military and technical departments of our
army. Now that the ideological and organizational foundations of our Party
and our army have been firmly laid, not only is there no danger in drawing
in large numbers of sympathizers (not saboteurs of course) but it is indeed
an indispensable policy, for otherwise it will be impossible to win the sympathy
of the whole country and expand our revolutionary forces.

All these tactical principles for the united front and the concrete policies
formulated in accordance with them must be firmly applied by the whole
Party. At a time when the Japanese invaders are intensifying their aggression
against China and when the big landlords and big bourgeoisie are pursuing
high-handed policies and launching armed attacks against the Communist Party
and the people, the application of the tactical principles and concrete policies
outlined above is the only way to press on with the War of Resistance, broaden
the united front, win the sympathy of the whole people and bring about a
turn for the better in the situation. In rectifying errors, however, we must
proceed step by step, and must not be so hasty as to cause discontent among
the cadres, suspicion among the masses, counter-attacks by the landlords,
or other undesirable-developments.

NOTES


1. Wang Yi-tang was a big bureaucrat in the period of the
Northern warlords and a pro-Japanese traitor. He was recalled from retirement
by Chiang Kai-shek after the Northern China Incident of 1935 to serve in
the Kuomintang government. In 1938, he served as a Japanese puppet in northern
China and was made chairman of the bogus Northern China Political Council.

2. Shih Yu-san was a Kuomintang warlord who frequently
changed sides. He was commander-in-chief of the Kuomintang's 10th Army Group
after the outbreak of the War of Resistance, collaborated with the Japanese
armed forces in southern Hopei and did nothing but attack the Eighth Route
Army, destroy organs of anti-Japanese democratic political power and slaughter
Communists and progressives.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Order and Statement on the Southern Anhwei Incident







ORDER AND STATEMENT ON THE SOUTHERN ANHWEI INCIDENT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ORDER AND STATEMENT ON THE SOUTHERN ANHWEI INCIDENT


January 20, 1941


ORDER OF THE REVOLUTIONARY MILITARY COMMISSION OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE
  OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA

Yenan, January 20, 1941

The New Fourth Army of the National Revolutionary Army has won fame both
at home and abroad by its distinguished service in the War of Resistance.
Commander Yeh Ting has an outstanding record in leading the army against
the enemy. Recently, however, while it was moving northward in accordance
with instructions, this army was treacherously attacked by the pro-Japanese
clique, and Commander Yeh, wounded and exhausted in the fighting, was thrown
into jail. Informed of the whole course of the Southern Anhwei Incident by
telegrams from Chen Yi, the Commander of the First Detachment of the army,
and Chang Yun-yi, the army's Chief of Staff, the Commission expresses its
great wrath and its deep solicitude for our comrades. In addition to the
adoption of measures to deal with the towering crime of the pro-Japanese
clique in sabotaging the War of Resistance, attacking the people's armed
forces and launching civil war, the Commission hereby appoints Chen Yi as
Acting Commander of the New Fourth Army of the National Revolutionary Army,
Chang Yun-yi as Deputy Commander, Lai Chuan-chu as Chief of Staff, and Teng
Tzu-hui as Director of the Political Department. Acting Commander Chen Yi
and his associates are hereby instructed to devote their efforts to strengthening
the army, reinforcing unity within its ranks, ensuring good relations with
the people, carrying out the Three People's Principles, adhering to the Testament
of Dr. Sun Yat-sen, and consolidating and expanding the Anti-Japanese National
United Front in the struggle to defend our people and our country, to carry
the War of Resistance forward to the end and to guard against attacks
by the pro-Japanese clique.

STATEMENT BY THE SPOKESMAN OF THE REVOLUTIONARY MILITARY COMMISSION OF
  THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA TO A CORRESPONDENT
  OF THE HSINHUA NEWS AGENCY

January 22, 1941

The recent anti-Communist Southern Anhwei Incident had been brewing for a
long time. Present developments are but the opening phase of a national
emergency. Since the formation of their triple alliance
[1] with Germany and Italy, the Japanese aggressors
have redoubled their efforts to engineer changes within China so as to find
a quick solution to the Sino-Japanese war. Their purpose is to use the Chinese
themselves to suppress the anti-Japanese movement and consolidate the rear
for Japan's southward drive, so that she will be free to drive south in
co-ordination with Hitler's offensive against Britain. A considerable number
of ringleaders from the pro-Japanese clique have long entrenched themselves
in the party, government and army organizations of the Kuomintang and have
been carrying on agitation day and night. The preparations for their plot
were completed by the end of last year. The attack on the New Fourth Army
units in southern Anhwei and the reactionary Order of January 17
[2] are only the first open signs of this plot.
Incidents of the gravest nature will now be staged one after another. What
are the details of the plot of the Japanese aggressors and the pro-Japanese
clique? They are as follows:

(1) To publish the two telegrams of October 19 and December
8 [3] to Chu Teh, Peng Teh-huai, Yeh Ting and Hsiang
Ying over the signatures of Ho Ying-chin and Pal Chung-hsi, in order to arouse
public opinion.

(2) To start a press campaign on the importance of observing military
discipline and military orders in preparation for launching civil war.

(3) To wipe out the New Fourth Army units in southern Anhwei.

(4) To declare that the New Fourth Army has "mutinied" and cancel its official
designation.

These four steps have already been taken.

(5) To appoint Tang En-po, Li Pin-hsien, Wang Chung-lien and Han Teh-chin
as "Communist suppression" commanders of the various route armies in central
China, with Li Tsung-jen as supreme commander, in order to attack the New
Fourth Army units under Peng Hsuchfeng, Chang Yun-yi and Li Hsien-nien and,
if this comes off, to make further attacks on the Eighth Route Army and the
New Fourth Army units in Shantung and northern Kiangsu, with the Japanese
troops acting in close co-ordination.

This step is now being taken.

(6) To find a pretext to declare that the Eighth Route Army has "mutinied",
cancel its official designation, and order the arrest of Chu Teh and Peng
Teh-huai.

This move is now in preparation.

(7) To close down the liaison offices of the Eighth Route Army in Chungking,
Sian and Kweilin, and arrest Chou En-lai, Yeh Chienying, Tung Pi-wu and Teng
Ying-chao.

This move has begun with the closing down of the liaison office in Kweilin.

(8) To close down the New China Daily.

(9) To launch attacks on the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and seize
Yenan.

(10) To make wholesale arrests of prominent people favouring resistance to
Japan and suppress the anti-Japanese movement in Chungking and in the provinces.

(11) To destroy Communist Party organizations in all provinces and make wholesale
arrests of Communists.

(12) To proclaim "the recovery of lost territories" by the Kuomintang
government upon the withdrawal of Japanese troops from central and southern
China, and at the same time to carry out propaganda on the necessity of
concluding a so-called "peace with honour".

(13) Japan to launch most ferocious attacks on the Eighth Route
Army by bringing up her troops from central and southern China as reinforcements
to the north, and to co-operate with the Kuomintang forces in order to annihilate
the whole Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies.

(14) The Kuomintang to continue last year's state of cease-fire with Japan
on all fronts in order to turn it into one of general truce and peace
negotiations while ceaselessly attacking the Eighth Route Army and the New
Fourth Army.

(15) The Kuomintang government to sign a peace treaty with Japan and join
the triple alliance.

Active preparations are now being made for these moves.

Such in general outline is the treacherous plot of Japan and the pro-Japanese
clique. The Central Committee of the Communist Party of China pointed out
in its Manifesto of July 7, 1939: "Capitulation presents the greatest danger
in the current situation, and anti-communism is the preparatory step to
capitulation." Its Manifesto of July 7, 1940 stated: "The danger of capitulation
has never been so serious and the difficulties in the war have never been
so great as they are today." Chu Teh, Peng Teh-huai, Yeh Ting and Hsiang
Ying pointed this out even more concretely in their telegram of November
9 of last year:

  Certain people at home are engineering a new anti-Communist onslaught in
  an attempt to clear the way for capitulation.... They want to put an end
  to the War of Resistance by what they call Sino-Japanese co-operation in
  "suppressing the Communists". They want to substitute civil war for the War
  of Resistance, capitulation for independence, a split for unity and darkness
  for light. Their activities are sinister and their designs pernicious. People
  are telling each other the news and are horrified. Indeed, the situation
  has never been so critical as it is today.


Thus the Southern Anhwei Incident and the Order of January 17 of the Military
Council in Chungking are merely the beginning of a series of incidents. The
Order of January 17 in particular is full of grave political implications.
The fact that those who issued this counterrevolutionary order dared to do
so openly, risking universal condemnation, shows that they must have determined
upon a complete split and out-and-out capitulation. For without their
wire-pulling masters the political representatives of the flabby class of
big landlords and big bourgeoisie in China cannot move an inch, let alone
embark on an undertaking such as this which has shocked the whole world.
In the present circumstances, it seems very difficult to make those who issued
the order change their minds and it will probably be impossible to do so
without emergency action by the whole nation and strong diplomatic pressure
from abroad. Hence the urgent task of the whole nation now is to watch
developments with the utmost vigilance and prepare itself against any sinister
eventuality that the reactionaries may precipitate; there must not be the
slightest negligence. As for China's future, the matter is quite clear. Even
if the Japanese aggressors and the pro-Japanese clique are able to succeed
in their plots, we Chinese Communists and the people will never allow them
to keep up their tyranny indefinitely; not only are we duty bound to step
forward and take control of the situation, we are also confident of our ability
to do so. However dark the situation, however thorny the road, and whatever
the price that road exacts (the loss of the New Fourth Army units in southern
Anhwei is part of that price), the Japanese aggressors and the pro-Japanese
clique are certainly doomed. The reasons are as follows:

(1) The Communist Party of China can no longer be easily deceived and crushed,
as it was in 1927. It is now a major party standing firmly on its own feet.

(2) Many members of other parties and groups (including the Kuomintang) who
are apprehensive of the disaster of national subjugation certainly have no
wish to capitulate and fight a civil war. Some of them are hoodwinked for
the moment, but they may come to their senses in due course.

(3) The same is true of the troops. Most of them oppose the Communist Party
under compulsion.

(4) The vast majority of the Chinese people have no desire to be colonial
slaves.

(5) The imperialist war is on the eve of a great change. However rampant
they may be for the moment, the parasites who depend on imperialism will
soon find out that their bosses are not reliable. The whole situation will
change when the tree falls and the monkeys scatter.

(6) The outbreak of revolution in many countries is only a question of time,
and it is certain that these revolutions and the Chinese revolution will
support one another in the joint struggle for victory.

(7) The Soviet Union is the strongest force in the world and will definitely
help China fight the War of Resistance to the very end.

For all these reasons we hope that those who are playing with fire will not
get too dizzy. We now serve them with this formal warning: Better be careful.
This fire is not a plaything. Look out for your own skins ! If you calm down
and give the matter some thought, you will have to take the following steps
promptly and in earnest:

(1) Rein in on the brink of the precipice and stop your provocations.

(2) Rescind the reactionary order of January 17 and publicly admit that you
have been completely wrong.

(3) Punish Ho Ying-chin, Ku Chu-tung and Shangkuan Yun-hsiang the chief culprits
in the Southern Anhwei Incident.

(4) Release Yeh Ting and reinstate him as Commander of the New Fourth Army.

(5) Return all the men and arms captured in southern Anhwei to the New Fourth
Army.

(6) Compensate all the officers and men of the New Fourth Army who were wounded
and the families of those who were killed in southern Anhwei.

(7) Withdraw the troops sent to central China for "Communist suppression".

(8) Demolish the blockade line in the
Northwest.[4]

(9) Release all patriotic political prisoners.

(10) Abolish the one-party dictatorship and introduce democratic government.

(11) Carry out the Three People's Principles and observe Dr. Sun Yat-sen's
Testament.

(12) Arrest the ringleaders of the pro-Japanese clique and bring them to
trial in accordance with the law of the land.

There will, of course, be a return to normal if these twelve points are put
into effect, and we Communists and the whole people will certainly not push
matters to extremes. Otherwise, "Chi Sun's troubles, I am afraid, will not
come from Chuanyu but will arise at home"; [5]
in other words, the reactionaries will be lifting a rock only to drop it
on their own toes, and then we will not be able to help them even if we would
like to. We value co-operation, but they ought to set store by it, too. To
be frank, there is a limit to our concessions; the stage of concessions is
over as far as we are concerned. They have inflicted the first gash, and
a very deep one at that. If they still care for their own future, they should
come forward of their own accord and dress the wound. "It is not too late
to mend the fold even after some of the sheep have been lost." It is a matter
of life and death for them, and we feel obliged to give them this final piece
of advice. But if they remain impenitent and keep up their wrongdoing, the
people of China, having reached the end of their forbearance, will dump them
on the muck heap and then it will be too late for repentance. As for the
New Fourth Army, the Revolutionary Military Commission of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China issued an order on January 20, appointing
Chen Yi as Acting Commander, Chang Yun-yi as Deputy Commander, Lai Chuan-chu
as Chief of Staff and Teng Tzu-hui as Director of the Political Department.
With more than 90,000 troops remaining in central China and the southern
part of Kiangsu, the New Fourth Army, though subjected to pincer attacks
by the Japanese aggressors and the anti-Communist troops, will certainly
fight on despite all hardships and will never cease to render loyal service
to the nation. Meanwhile, the units of its brother army, the Eighth Route
Army, will not sit by and watch it suffer these pincer attacks, but will
certainly take steps to give the necessary assistance-- this I can say bluntly.
As for the statement made by the spokesman of the Military Council in Chungking,
the only possible comment is that it is self-contradictory. While the Chungking
Military Council stated in its order that the New Fourth Army had "mutinied",
the spokesman said that its aim was to move into the Nanking-Shanghai-Hangchow
triangle in order to establish a base there. Now, suppose we accept what
he says. Can a move into the Nanking-Shanghai-Hangchow triangle be regarded
as a "mutiny"? That blockhead of a Chungking spokesman did not stop to think.
Against whom would the New Fourth Army be mutinying in that area? Is it not
an area under Japanese occupation? Then why should you prevent the New Fourth
Army from moving into that area and try to wipe it out while it was still
in southern Anhwei? Ah, of course! After all that is what loyal servants
of Japanese imperialism would do. Hence their plan to mass seven divisions
in an annihilation campaign, hence their Order of January 17, and hence their
trial of Yeh Ting. However, I still say that the Chungking spokesman is an
idiot, for without being pressed he has let the cat out of the bag and revealed
the plans of Japanese imperialism to the whole people.

NOTES


1. The triple alliance refers to the tripartite pact between
Germany, Italy and Japan signed in Berlin on September 27, 1940.

2. The counter-revolutionary Order of January 17 for the
disbandment of the New Fourth Army was issued by Chiang Kai-shek in the name
of the Military Council of the National Government.

3. These two notorious telegrams were sent late in 1940
by Chiang Kai-shek when he launched the second anti-Communist onslaught,
and they were signed by Ho Ying-chin and Pai Chung-hsi, Chief and Deputy
Chief of the General Staff of the Military Council of the Kuomintang government.
The telegram of October 19 contained outrageous calumnies against the Eighth
Route Army and the New Fourth Army which were fighting in the enemy-occupied
areas and peremptorily ordered their units operating against the Japanese
south of the Yellow River to be shifted to the north by a specified date.
In the interest of unity for armed resistance, Comrades Chu Teh, Peng Teh-huai,
Yeh Ting and Hsiang Ying, in a joint reply on November 9 consented to shift
the troops in southern Anhwei to the north, at the same time rebutting the
slanders. The telegram of December 8 signed by Ho Ying-chin and Pai Chung-hsi,
which was a reply to the telegram of November 9, represented a further attempt
to turn public opinion against the Communists.

4. The blockade line in the Northwest was built by the
Kuomintang reactionaries around the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region. From
1939 onward they pressed the local people into service and built five lines
of blockhouses, stone walls and trenches. The line started from Ningsia in
the west, ran along the Chingshui River in the south and terminated at the
Yellow River in the east. On the eve of the Southern Anhwei Incident the
Kuomintang troops surrounding the Border Region were increased to more than
200,000.

5. The quotation is from Confucian Analects, Book
XVI, Chapter I. Confucius made this remark when Chi Sun, minister of the
state of Lu, was about to attack Chuanyu, a small neighbouring state.



Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Situation After the Repulse of the Second Anti-Communist Onslaught







THE SITUATION AFTER THE REPULSE OF THE SECOND ANTI-COMMUNIST ONSLAUGHT
  



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE SITUATION AFTER THE REPULSE OF THE SECOND ANTI-COMMUNIST ONSLAUGHT


March 18, 1941

[This inner-party directive was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung on behalf
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.]
  

1. The second anti-Communist onslaught,[1] which
was touched off by the telegram of Ho Ying-chin and Pai Chung-hsi (dated
October 19 last year), reached its climax in the Southern Anhwei Incident
and Chiang Kai-shek's Order of January 17; the rearguard actions are his
anti-Communist speech of March 6 and the anti-Communist resolution of the
People's Political Council.[2] From now on there
may be some temporary easing of the situation. With the world's two major
imperialist blocs on the eve of a decisive struggle, that section of China's
big bourgeoisie which is pro-British and pro-American and which is still
opposed to the Japanese aggressors finds it necessary to seek a slight temporary
relaxation in the present strained relations between the Kuomintang and the
Communist Party. Besides, the Kuomintang cannot keep these relations strained
to the pitch of the past five months, because of the situation within the
Kuomintang (there are contradictions between its central and local authorities,
between the C.C. Clique and the Political Science Group, between the C.C.
Clique and the Fu Hsing Society [3] and between
the die-hards and the intermediate sections, and also contradictions within
the C.C. Clique and the Fu Hsing Society themselves), because of the domestic
situation (the broad masses of the people are opposed to the Kuomintang's
tyranny and sympathize with the Communist Party) and because of our Party's
own policy (of continuing the protest campaign). At the moment, therefore,
Chiang Kai-shek needs a slight temporary easing of the tension.

2. The recent struggle points to a decline in the standing of the Kuomintang
and a rise in that of the Communist Party, and this is the key factor in
certain changes that have occurred in the relative strength of the two parties.
All this has compelled Chiang Kai-shek to reconsider his own position and
attitude. In stressing national defence and preaching that party politics
are out of date, he is posing as a "national leader" who is above domestic
contradictions and feigning impartiality to class and party, his aim being
to preserve the rule of the big landlord class and big bourgeoisie and the
Kuomintang. But this attempt of his will certainly prove futile, if it is
only a subterfuge and means no real change in policy.

3. At the beginning of the recent anti-Communist onslaught, the policy of
conciliation and concession which our Party adopted out of consideration
for the general interest (as indicated in the telegram of November 9 last
year) won the sympathy of the people, and we again won the support of the
whole people when, after the Southern Anhwei Incident, we turned to a vigorous
counter-offensive (as indicated by our two sets of twelve
demands,[4] our refusal to attend the People's
Political Council, and the country-wide protest campaign). This policy of
ours, the policy of waging struggle on just grounds, to our advantage, and
with restraint, was entirely necessary for repulsing the latest anti-Communist
onslaught, and it has already proved fruitful. Until there is a reasonable
settlement of the major points at issue between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party, we must not show any slackening in our campaign of stern protest against
the Southern Anhwei Incident, which was engineered by the pro-Japanese and
anti-Communist cliques in the Kuomintang, and against their political and
military oppression in all its forms, and must intensify our propaganda for
the first twelve demands.

4. The Kuomintang will never relax its policy of oppression of our Party
and other progressives or its anti-Communist propaganda in the areas under
its rule; therefore our Party must heighten its vigilance. The Kuomintang
will continue its attacks on the areas north of the Huai River, in eastern
Anhwei and in central Hupeh, and our armed forces must not hesitate to repulse
them. All base areas must strictly carry out the Central Committee's directive
of December 25 last year, [5] intensify inner-Party
education on tactics and rectify ultra-Left views, so that we can unfalteringly
maintain the anti-Japanese democratic base areas. Throughout the country,
including, of course, all the base areas, we must reject the erroneous estimate
that a final split between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party has either
already occurred or is about to occur, together with the many incorrect views
arising therefrom.

NOTES


1. For a fuller account of the second anti-Communist onslaught,
see "A Comment on the Sessions of the Kuomintang Central Executive Committee
and of the People's Political Council", Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung,
Eng. ed., FLP, Peking, 1965, Vol. III, pp. 137-51.

2. On March 6, 1941, Chiang Kai-shek delivered an
anti-Communist speech at a meeting of the People's Political Council. Harping
on his old theme that the "direction of all military and political affairs"
must be "unified", he declared that the organs of anti-Japanese democratic
political power in the enemy's rear should be abolished and that the people's
armed forces led by the Chinese Communist Party must be "concentrated in
specified areas" according to his "orders and plans". On the same day, the
People's Political Council, which was dominated by the Kuomintang reactionaries,
passed a resolution whitewashing Chiang Kai-shek's anti-Communist and
anti-popular activities and violently attacking the Communist members of
the People's Political Council for their refusal to attend the council's
session in protest against the Southern Anhwei Incident.

3. For the Political Science Group, see "Problems of War
and Strategy", Note 14 p. 234 of this volume. For the C.C. Clique and the
Fu Hsing Society, see "The Situation and Tasks in the Anti-Japanese War After
the Fall of Shanghai and Taiyuan", Note 10, p. 74 of this volume.

4. The first set of "twelve demands", proposed by the Communist
members of the People's Political Council at its session of February 15,
1941, were similar to those listed in the "Order and Statement on the Southern
Anhwei Incident". The second set were put to Chiang Kai-shek on March 2,
1941 by the Communist members of the People's Political Council as a condition
for their attendance of the council's sessions and were as follows:

  (1) Immediately stop the anti-Communist military attacks all over the country.
  
  (2) Immediately stop the nation-wide political persecution of the Chinese
  Communist Party and of all other democratic parties and groups, recognize
  their legal status, and release all their members arrested in Sian, Chungking
  Kweiyang and other places.
  
  (3) Lift the ban on the bookshops which have been closed down in various
  places, and rescind the order for impounding anti-Japanese books and newspapers
  in post offices.
  
  (4) Immediately stop all restrictions on the New China Daily.

  (5) Recognize the legal status of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region.
  
  (6) Recognize the organs of anti-Japanese democratic political power in the
  enemy's rear.
  
  (7) Maintain the status quo in the division of garrison areas in
  central northern and northwestern China.
  
  (8) Let the Communist-led armed forces form another group army in addition
  to the Eighteenth Group Army, making a total of six army corps.
  
  (9) Release all the cadres arrested during the Southern Anhwei Incident and
  provide funds for the relief of the victims' families.
  
  (10) Release all officers and men taken prisoner during the Southern Anhwei
  Incident and return all their arms.
  
  (11) Form a joint committee of all the parties and groups, with one
  representative from each, and appoint the Kuomintang and the Communist Party
  representatives to be its chairman and vice-chairman respectively.
  
  (12) Include Communist representatives in the presidium of the People's Political
  Council.


5. The directive of December 25 is included as the article
"On Policy", pp. 441-49 of this volume.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Conclusions on the Repulse of the Second Anti-Communist Onslaught








CONCLUSIONS ON THE REPULSE OF THE SECOND ANTI-COMMUNIST ONSLAUGHT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

CONCLUSIONS ON THE REPULSE OF THE SECOND ANTI-COMMUNIST ONSLAUGHT


May 8, 1941

[This inner-Party directive was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.]
  

As the Central Committee's directive of March 18, 1941, has stated, the second
anti-Communist onslaught has come to an end. What has followed since is the
continuance of the War of Resistance Against Japan in new circumstances,
international as well as domestic. The additional factors in these new
circumstances are the spread of the imperialist war, the upsurge of the
international revolutionary movement, the neutrality pact between the Soviet
Union and Japan,[1] the defeat of the Kuomintang's
second anti-Communist onslaught and the consequent decline in the political
standing of the Kuomintang and rise in that of the Communist Party, and,
furthermore, the latest preparations by Japan for a new large-scale offensive
against China. It is absolutely necessary for us to study and learn the lessons
of our Party's heroic and victorious struggle against the recent anti-Communist
onslaught, for the purpose of uniting the people throughout the country to
persevere in the War of Resistance and for the purpose of continuing effectively
to overcome the danger of capitulation and the anti-Communist counter-current
of the big landlords and the big bourgeoisie.

1. Of China's two major contradictions, the national contradiction between
China and Japan is still primary and the internal class contradiction in
China is still subordinate. The fact that a national enemy has penetrated
deep into our country is all-decisive. As long as the contradiction between
China and Japan remains acute, even if the entire big landlord class and
big bourgeoisie turn traitor and surrender, they can never bring about another
1927 situation, with a repetition of the April 12th
[2] and the May 21st Incidents
[3] of that year. The first anti-Communist onslaught
[4] was appraised as another May 21st Incident
by some comrades, and the second onslaught as a repetition of the April 12th
and the May 21st Incidents, but objective facts have proved these appraisals
wrong. The mistake of these comrades lies in forgetting that the national
contradiction is the primary one.

2. In the circumstances, the pro-British and pro-American big landlords and
big bourgeoisie, who direct all Kuomintang government policy, remain classes
with a dual character. On the one hand they are opposed to Japan, and on
the other they are opposed to the Communist Party and the broad masses of
the people represented by the Party. And both their resistance to Japan and
their anti-communism bear a dual character. With regard to their resistance
to Japan, while they are opposed to Japan, they are not actively waging war
or actively opposing Wang Ching-wei and the other traitors, and sometimes
they even flirt with Japan's peace emissaries. With regard to their
anti-communism, they are opposed to the Communist Party, having gone so far
as to create the Southern Anhwei Incident and to issue the Order of January
17, but at the same time they do not want a final split and still maintain
their stick-and-carrot policy. These facts have been confirmed once again
in the recent anti-Communist onslaught. Chinese politics, which are extremely
complex, demand our comrades' deepest attention. Since the pro-British and
pro-American big landlords and big bourgeoisie are still resisting Japan
and are still using the stick and carrot in dealing with our Party, the policy
of our Party is to "do unto them as they do unto
Us",[5] stick for stick and carrot for carrot.
Such is the revolutionary dual policy. So long as the big landlords and the
big bourgeoisie do not completely turn traitor, this policy of ours will
not change.

3. A whole range of tactics is needed to combat the Kuomintang's anti-Communist
policy, and there must be absolutely no carelessness or negligence. The enmity
and brutality of the big landlords and the big bourgeoisie represented by
Chiang Kai-shek towards the people's revolutionary forces were not only
demonstrated by the ten years of anti-Communist war, but they have been fully
demonstrated in the midst of the war against Japan by two anti-Communist
onslaughts, and particularly by the Southern Anhwei Incident during the second
anti-Communist onslaught. If a people's revolutionary force is to avoid
extermination by Chiang Kai-shek and to compel him to acknowledge its existence,
it has no alternative but to wage a tit-for-tat struggle against his
counter-revolutionary policies. The defeat resulting from Comrade Hsiang
Ying's opportunism during the recent anti-Communist onslaught should serve
as a grave warning to the whole Party. But the struggle must be waged on
just grounds, to our advantage, and with restraint; if any of the three is
lacking, we shall suffer setbacks.

4. In the struggle against the Kuomintang die-hards, the big comprador
bourgeoisie must be distinguished from the national bourgeoisie, which has
little or no comprador character, and the most reactionary big landlords
must be distinguished from the enlightened gentry and the general run of
landlords. This is the theoretical basis of our Party's endeavour to win
over the intermediate sections and establish organs of political power on
the "three thirds system", and it has been repeatedly stressed by the Central
Committee since March last year. Its correctness was proved afresh during
the recent anti-Communist onslaught. The stand we took before the Southern
Anhwei Incident, as expressed in our November 9
telegram,[6] was entirely necessary for our shift
to the political counter-attack after the incident, otherwise we could not
have won over the intermediate sections. For unless they had been taught
time and again by experience, the intermediate sections would have been unable
to understand why our Party must wage resolute struggles against the Kuomintang
die-hards, why unity can be gained only through struggle and why there can
be no unity whatsoever if struggle is abandoned. Although the leading elements
in the regional power groups belong to the big landlord class and the big
bourgeoisie, generally they should also be regarded and treated as intermediate
sections, since there are contradictions between them and the big landlords
and big bourgeois who control the central government. Yen Hsi-shan who was
most active in the first anti-Communist onslaught took a middle stand in
the second, and although the Kwangsi clique which took a middle stand in
the first onslaught came in on the anti-Communist side in the second, it
is still in contradiction with the Chiang Kai-shek clique and not to be
identified with it. This applies with still greater force to other regional
power groups. Many of our comrades, however, still lump the different landlord
and bourgeois groups together, as though the entire landlord class and
bourgeoisie had turned traitor after the Southern Anhwei Incident, this is
an over-simplification of China's complex politics. Were we to adopt this
view and identify all the landlords and the bourgeoisie with the Kuomintang
die-hards, we would isolate ourselves. It must be realized that Chinese society
is big in the middle and small at both ends [7]
and that the Communist Party cannot solve China's problems unless it wins
over the masses of the intermediate classes and unless it enables them to
play their proper role according to their circumstances.

5. Because some comrades have wavered on the point that the contradiction
between China and Japan is the primary one and hence have wrongly appraised
class relations in China, they have at times wavered on the policy of the
Party. Proceeding from their appraisal of the Southern Antwei Incident as
another April 12th or May 21st Incident, these comrades
now seem to think that the Central Committee's policy directive of December
25 last year is no longer applicable, or at least not altogether applicable.
They believe that we no longer need the kind of state power that includes
all who stand for resistance and democracy but need a so-called state power
of the workers, peasants and urban petty bourgeoisie, and that we no longer
need the united front policy of the period of the War of Resistance but need
a policy of agrarian revolution as during the ten years' civil war. The Party's
correct policy has become blurred in the minds of these comrades, at any
rate for the time being.

6. When these comrades were instructed by the Central Committee of our Party
to be prepared against a possible split by the Kuomintang, that is, against
the worst possible development, they forgot the other possibilities. They
do not understand that while it is absolutely necessary to prepare for the
worst possibility, this does not mean ignoring the favourable possibilities;
on the contrary, such preparation for the worst is precisely a condition
for creating favourable possibilities and turning them into reality. On this
occasion, we were fully prepared against a split by the Kuomintang, and so
the Kuomintang dared not bring about a split lightly.

7. There are even more comrades who fail to understand the unity of the national
struggle and the class struggle, and who fail to understand united front
policy and class policy, and consequently the unity of united front education
and class education. They hold that after the Southern Anhwei Incident special
emphasis should be placed on class education as distinct from united front
education. Even now they do not understand that for the whole period of the
anti-Japanese war the Party has a single integral policy--the national united
front policy (a dual policy) which integrates the two aspects, unity and
struggle--towards all those in the upper and middle strata who are still
resisting Japan, whether they belong to the big landlord class and big
bourgeoisie or the intermediate classes. This dual policy should be applied
even to the puppet troops, the traitors and the pro-Japanese elements, except
for those who are absolutely unrepentant, whom we must resolutely crush.
The education which our Party conducts among its own members and the people
in general likewise embraces both these aspects, that is, it teaches the
proletariat and the peasantry and other sections of the petty bourgeoisie
how to unite, in different ways, with the different strata of the bourgeoisie
and the landlord class for resistance to Japan, and at the same time how
to conduct struggles against them in varying degrees according to the varying
degrees in which they compromise, vacillate and are anti-Communist. United
front policy is class policy and the two are inseparable; whoever is unclear
on this will be unclear on many other problems.

8. Other comrades do not understand that the social character of the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the anti-Japanese base areas in northern
and central China is already new-democratic. The main criterion in judging
whether an area is new-democratic in character is whether representatives
of the broad masses of the people participate in the political power there
and whether this political power is led by the Communist Party. Therefore,
united front political power under Communist leadership is the chief mark
of a new-democratic society. Some people think that New Democracy can be
considered as accomplished only if there is an agrarian revolution like that
of the ten years' civil war, but they are wrong. At present the political
system in the base areas is a political system of the united front of all
the people who are for resistance and democracy, the economy is one from
which the elements of semi-colonialism and semi-feudalism have been basically
eliminated, and the culture is an anti-imperialist and anti-feudal culture
of the broad masses of the people. Therefore, whether viewed politically,
economically or culturally, both the anti-Japanese base areas which have
only enforced the reduction of rent and interest and the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region which has gone through a thorough agrarian revolution are
new-democratic in character. When the example of the anti-Japanese base areas
is extended throughout the country, then the whole of China will become a
new-democratic republic.

NOTES


1. The neutrality pact between the Soviet Union and Japan,
concluded on April , 1941, ensured peace on the eastern border of the Soviet
Union, thus crushing the plot for a joint German, Italian and Japanese attack
on the Soviet Union. It marked a major victory for the Soviet Union's peaceful
foreign policy.

2. The April 12th Incident was the counter-revolutionary
coup d'etat staged by Chiang Kai-shek in Shanghai on April 12, 1927, during
which a great number of Communists and revolutionary workers, peasants and
students and intellectuals were massacred.

3. Instigated by Chiang Kai-shek and Wang Ching-wei, the
counter-revolutionary Kuomintang army commanders in Hunan, including Hsu
Keh-hsiang and Ho Chien, ordered a raid on the provincial headquarters of
the trade unions, the peasant associations and other revolutionary organizations
in Changsha on May 21, 1927, Communists and revolutionary workers and peasants
were arrested and killed en masse. This signalized the open collaboration
of the two counter-revolutionary Kuomintang cliques, the Wuhan clique headed
by Wang Ching-wei and the Nanking clique headed by Chiang Kai-shek.

4. The first anti-Communist onslaught during the anti-Japanese
war was conducted by Chiang Kai-shek in the winter of 1939 and the spring
of 1940.

5. The quotation is from the commentary by Chu Hsi
(1130--1200), a philosopher of the Sung Dynasty, on the Confucian
Doctrine of the Mean, Chapter 13.

6. The telegram of November 9, 1940 was sent by Chu Teh
and Peng Teh-huai, Commander-in-Chief and Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the
Eighteenth Group Army (Eighth Route Army), and Yeh Ting and Hsiang Ying,
Commander and Deputy Commander of the New Fourth Army, in reply to the telegram
of the Kuomintang generals Ho Ying-chin and Pai Chung-hsi, dated October
19, 1940. Exposing the plot by the Kuomintang reactionaries to attack the
Communist Party and capitulate to Japan, they denounced Ho Ying-chin's and
Pai Chung-hsi's absurd proposal that the New Fourth Army and the Eighth Route
Army should shift from the south to the north of the Yellow River. However,
in a spirit of conciliation and compromise for the sake of maintaining unity
against Japan, they agreed to shift their forces from the south to the north
of the Yangtse River, while demanding the solution of a number of major
outstanding issues between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. The telegram
won the sympathy of the intermediate sections and served to isolate Chiang
Kai-shek.

7. Comrade Mao Tse-tung's remark about Chinese society
means that the Chinese industrial proletariat which led the revolution formed
only a minority of China's population, as did also the reactionary big landlords
and big bourgeoisie.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

