# Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Volume VI

==========

## Table of contents









Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Vol. VI





 Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Vol.  VI




Publisher's Note

A Study of Physical Education (April 1917)

An Explanation of Physical Education
The Place of Physical Education in our Life
Previous Abuses of Physical Education and My Method
  for Remedying them
The Utility of Physical Education
The Reasons for Disliking Exercise
The Methods of Exercise Should be Few
The Points to Which we must Pay Attention When
  we Exercise


To Hakuro Toten (Miyazaki Toten)  (Apri1
1917)

To the Glory of the Hans: Toward A New Golden Age  (July &
August 1919)


The Great Union of the Popular Masses

Miss Chao's Suicide  (November 16, 1919)


Communism and Dictatorship   (November
1920. January 1921)

The Role of the Merchants in the National Revolution
 (July 11, 1923)

The Chinese Government and the Foreigners
 (August 29, 1923)

The Bitter Sufferings of the Peasants in Kiangsu and Chekiang, and Their Movements of Resistance  (November 25,
1926)

The Second Anniversary of An Wu-ching's Martyrdom
 (1929)

Oppose Book Worship  (May 1930)

  I.   No Investigation no Right to Speak

  II.  To Investigate A Problem is to Solve it

  III. Oppose Book Worship

  IV. Without Investigating the Actual Situation,
  there is Bound to be an Idealist Appraisal of Class Forces and an Idealist
  Guidance in Work, Resulting Either in opportunism or in Putschism

  V. The Aim of Social and Economic Investigation
  is to Arrive at a Correct Appraisal of Class Forces and Then to Formulate
  Correct Tactics for The Struggle

  VI. Victory in China's Revolutionary Struggle will
  Depend on the Chinese Comrades Understanding of Chinese Conditions

  VII. The Technique of
  Investigation


Decree Regarding Marriage  (January 28,
1931)

A Letter from the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army to Our Brothers the Soldiers of the White Army on the Subject of the Forced Occupation of Manchuria by Japanese Imperialism   (September 25, 1931)
Red Army to Our Brothers the Soldiers of the White Army on the Subject of the Forced Occupation of Manchuria by Japanese Imperialism   (October 6, 1932) 



The League of Nations is a League of Robbers! 
 (October 6, 1932)

Preliminary Conclusions of the Land Investigation Campaign  (August 29, 1933)

The Great Victory
Some Places Have Given up the Leadership of the
  Land Investigation Campaign
In Certain Place the Party has Surrendered to the
  Landlords and Rich Peasants
The Tendency to Encroach upon the Middle Peasants
  is The Most Serious Danger
Closed-Door-Ism of the Poor Peasant Corps and it's
  Negligence of the Leadership Role of the Hired Hands are Wrong.
The Incorrect Idea About the Question of Rich
  Peasants
The Department of the Worker's and Peasant' s
  Inspection has not Assumed it's Own Responsibility and Committed some
  Mistakes
On the Art of Leadership in the Land Investigation
  Struggle
Develop A Two-Front Struggle to Overcome The Mistakes
  and win a Thorough Victory in the Land Investigation Campaign


The Land Investigation Campaign is the Central Important Task in the Vast (Soviet) Areas  (August 31, 1933)

Report to the 2nd National Congress of Workers and Peasants Representatives  (January 23, 1934)

The Present Situation and Development of Soviet
  Movement
The Anti-Imperialist Movement
The Imperialist-Kuomintang Offensive
  Repulsed
Fundamental Policies of the Soviet


Proclamation on the Northward March of the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army to Fight Japan  (July, 15 1934)

To Lin Piao  (1936)

We Are Not Going to Turn the Country over to Moscow!
 (July 23, 1936)

To Hsu T'eh-li  (February 1937)

Letter to the Spanish People  (May 15,
1937)

Letter to Comrade Browder  (July 24,
1937)

Inscription for the Founding of the North Shensi Public School  (1937)

Speech at the Meeting Celebrating the Completion of the Building of the Anti-Japanese Military and Political University
 (1937)

On Lu Hsun  (1937)

Basic Tactics (1937)

Chapter I 
     Introductory Remarks

Chapter II    
  Tactics

Chapter III   
  The Aim of The War

Chapter IV   
  Organisation

Chapter V    
  Tasks

Chapter VI   
  Operations

Chapter VII  
  Surprise Attacks

Chapter VIII
   Espionage

Chapter IX   
  Ambushes

Chapter X     
  Surprise Attacks on The Enemy's Foraging Units

Chapter XI   
  Surprise Attacks on the Enemy's Transport Units
 
Chapter XII
  The Correspondence Network of a Guerrilla Unit and the Destruction of
  Communications Facilities in the Rear
 
Chapter XIII 
  Regular Hiding Places and Precautions to be Taken When we Halt

Chapter XIV  
  Training

Chapter XV    
  Political Work


On Guerilla Warfare  (1937)

What is Guerrilla Warfare
The Relation of Guerrilla Hostilities to Regular
  Operations
Guerrilla Warfare in History
Can Victory be Attained by Guerrilla
  Operations
Organization for Guerrilla Warfare
The Political Problems of Guerrilla
  Warfare
The Strategy of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan
  


Dialectical Materialism  (April - June,
1938)

Chapter I  
  Idealism and Materialism
Chapter II 
  Dialectical Materialism


We Are for Roosevelt and Against Chamberlain 
 (January 20, 1939)

To Be Attacked by the Enemy is Not a Bad Thing but a Good Thing  (May 26, 1939)

  On the Third Anniversary of the Founding of the Chinese People's Anti-Japanese
  Military and Political College


The Second Imperialist War  (September
14, 1939)

Youth Needs Experience  (October 5,
1939)

Economic and Financial Problems in the Anti-Japanese War
  (December 1942)  

A Basic Summary of our Past Work
On the Development of Agriculture
On the Development of Animal Husbandry
On the Development of Handicrafts
On the Development of Cooperatives
On the Development of the Salt Industry
On the Development of Self-Supporting
  Industry
On the Development of the Productive Under-Takings
  of the Troops
On the Development of the Productive Under-Takings
  of Official Organisations and Schools
On Grain Work


The Comintern has Long Ceased to Meddle in Our Internal Affairs   (May 26, 1943)

Letter to the Yenan Peking Opera Theatre After Seeing "Driven to Join the Lianshan Mountain Rebels"  (January 9,
1944)

Mao's Interview with an American Journalist, Gunther Stien  (1944)

Salute the April 8th Martyrs
 (1946)
 

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org
 

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung





==========

## Publisher's Note






PUBLISHER'S NOTE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  PUBLISHER'S NOTE


An authentic compilation of Mao's Collected works is long over due. Especially
now, its need is all the more great and urgent. But there is very little
hope of such a publication being brought out officially by the CPC. However,
several writings of Mao, not covered by the CPC's official publication i.e.,
Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung Volumes 1 to 5 -are available elsewhere.
All these lie scattered in a number of english editions by western scholars
and in some remote research journals etc. We do realise that even if all
these are put together it will not be the collected - works nor will even
be a good substitute. Yet we hope their presentation at one place,
chronologically arranged, will certainly facilitate easy and ready reference,
further stimulating the study of Mao's works. Hence this venture.

Many more works might have certainly remained in Chinese and even some available
in English may have remained out of our reach. To come to the works included
in this volume, we have neither the means nor the competence to vouch safe
about their authenticity and completeness. We appeal to the readers to bear
these inevitable limitations in mind while, using this book. Due to these
and other reasons if any errors crept into this publication, we earnestly
hope to rectify them in future editions. We fondly hope that much more additional
material could come to light enabling us to substantially improve on this.

As far as possible all these writings are arranged strictly chronologically. Except indicating the primary source quoted in the originals, no attempt
is made to annotate or edit the texts in any respect or in any manner.

We mention our sincere thanks and acknowledgements to all the pioneers who
translated, edited and published these works in different forms earlier.
We whole heartedly extend our thanks to all these comrades-- the respected
scholars and loving friends -- whose unstinted co-operation and painstaking
efforts contributed in a big way to the success of this venture.

We feel very happy that this volume could be brought out despite many odds.
We hope to bring out the other volumes also soon. We fondly hope our effort
will be well rewarded by the warm and enthusiastic response of our esteemed
readers.

PUBLISHERS.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## A Study of Physical Education








A STUDY OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  A STUDY OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION


April 1917
[Extracted from an essay published in April 1917 (in Hsin ching-nein)
] 
  

Our nation is wanting in strength. The military spirit has not been encouraged;
The physical condition of the population deteriorates daily. This is an extremely
disturbing phenomenon. The promoters of physical education have not grasped
the essence of the problem, and therefore, their efforts, though prolonged,
have not been effective. If this state continues, our weakness will increase
further. To attain our goals and to make our influence felt are external
matters, results. The development of our physical strength is an internal
matter, a cause. If our bodies are not strong we will be afraid as soon as
we see enemy soldiers, and then how can we attain our goals and make ourselves
respected? Strength depends on drill, and drill depends on self-awareness.
The advocates of physical education have not failed to devise various methods.
If their efforts have nevertheless remained fruitless, it is because external
forces are insufficient to move the heart....

If we wish to make physical education effective, we must influence people's
subjective attitudes and stimulate them to become conscious of physical
education. If one becomes conscious of the problem, a programme for physical
education will come easily, and we will attain our goals and make our influence
felt as a matter of course..

1. AN EXPLANATION OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION.


Physical education helps to maintain life. East and West differ in their
interpretations of it. Chuang Tzu followed the example of the cook, Confucius
drew on the lesson of the archer and the charioteer. In Germany, Physical
education has gained the greatest popularity. Fencing has spread all over
the country. Japan has bushido. Moreover, recently, following the
traditions of our country, judo has developed there to an admirable degree.
When we examine these examples, we see that they all begin with the study
of physiology.

2. THE PLACE OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION IN OUR LIFE


Physical education complements education in virtue and knowledge. Moreover,
both virtue and knowledge reside in the body. Without the body there would
be neither virtue nor knowledge. Those who understand this are rare. People
stress either knowledge or morality. Knowledge is certainly valuable, for
it distinguishes man from animals. But wherein is knowledge contained? Morality,
too, is valuable; it is the basis of the social order and of equality between
ourselves and others. But where does virtue reside? It is the body that
contains knowledge and houses virtue. It contains knowledge like a chariot
and houses morality like a chamber. The body is the chariot that contains
knowledge, the chamber that houses virtue. Children enter primary school
when they reach the proper age. In primary school, particular attention should
be paid to the development of the body; progress in knowledge and moral training
are of secondary importance. Nourishment and care should be primary, teaching
and discipline complementary. At present, most people do not know this, and
the result is that children become ill, or even die young, because of studying.
In middle and higher schools, stress should be placed equally on all three
aspects of education. At present, most people overemphasize knowledge. During
the years of middle school, the development of the body is not yet completed.
Since today the factors favouring physical development are few, and those
deterring it numerous, won't physical development tend to cease? In the
educational system of our country, required courses are as thick as the hairs
on a cow . Even an adult with a tough, strong body could not stand it let
alone those who have not reached adulthood, or those who are weak. Speculating
on the intentions of the educators, one is led to wonder whether they
did not design such an unwieldy curriculum in order to exhaust the students,
to trample on their bodies and ruin their lives.... How stupid! The only
calamity that can befall a man is not to have a body. What else is there
to worry about? If one seeks to improve one's body other things will follow
automatically. For the improvement of the body, nothing is more effective
than physical education. Physical education really occupies the first
place in our lives. When the body is strong, then one can advance speedily
in Knowledge and morality, and reap far-reaching advantages. It should
be regarded as an important part of our study. Learning has its essential
and its accessory parts, and affairs have their end and their beginning.
To know what is first and what is last will bring one closer to the proper
way. [From 'The Great Learning', one of the four Confucian classics]. This
is exactly what I intend to say.

3. PREVIOUS ABUSES OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND MY METHOD FOR REMIDYING
  THEM


The three forms of education are equally important; students hitherto have
paid much attention to moral and intellectual education but have neglected
physical education. The unfortunate consequence has been that they bend their
backs and bow their heads; they have 'white and slender hands' [from
Nineteen old Poems, a famous collection of poems of the Han dynasty
]; when they climb a hill they are short of breath, and when they walk in
water they get cramps in their feet. That is why Yen Tzu had a short life,
and Chia I died young. As for Wang Po and Lu Chao-lin, the one died young,
and the other became a paralytic. All these were men of high attainments
in morality and knowledge. But there comes a day when the body cannot be
preserved. and then morality and wisdom are destroyed along with it. Only
the men of the North are able 'to lie under arms and meet death without regret'.
[From The Doctrine of the Mean, one of the Confucian classics]. In
the regions of Yen and Chao there were many heroes, and martyrs and warriors
often came from Liangchow. At the beginning of the Ch'ing dynasty, Yen Hsi-chai
and Li Kangchu practiced both the literary and military arts. Yen Hsi-chai
travelled over a thousand li (about 0.5 km.) to the north of the Great
Wall to learn the art of fencing. He contended with brave soldiers and won.
Hence he said: 'If one lacks either the literary or the military arts, is
this the true way?'... As far as we, students are concerned,
the installation of a school and the instruction given by its
teachers are only the external and objective aspect. We also have the internal,
the subjective aspect. When one's decision is made in his heart, then
all parts of the body obey its orders. Fortune and misfortune are of our
own seeking. 'I wish to be virtuous, and lo, virtue is at hand.' [From the
Confucian Analects.] How much more this is true of physical
education! If we do not have the will to act, then even though the exterior
and the objective are perfect, they still cannot benefit us. Hence, when
we speak of physical education, we should begin with individual initiative.

4. THE UTILITY OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION


Because man is an animal, movement is most important for him. And because
he is a rational animal, his movements must have a reason. But why is movement
deserving of esteem? Why is rational movement deserving of esteem? To say
that movement helps in earning a living is trivial. To say that movement
protects the nation is lofty. Yet neither is the basic reason. The object
of movement is simply to preserve our life and gladden our hearts. Chu Hsi
stresses respect, and Lu Chiu-yuan stresses tranquillity. Tranquillity is
tranquil, and respect is not action; it is merely tranquil. Lao Tzu said
that immobility was the ultimate goal; the Buddha sought quiet and methods
of contemplation. The art of contemplation is esteemed by the disciples of
Chu and Lu. Recently there have been those who, following these masters,
have spoken of methods of contemplation, boasted about the effectiveness
of their methods, and expressed contempt for those who exercise, thereby
ruining their own bodies. This is perhaps one way, but I would not venture
to imitate it. In my humble opinion, there is only movement in heaven
and on earth....

One often hears it said that the mind and the body cannot both be perfect
at the same time, that those who use their minds are deficient in physical
health and those with a robust body are generally deficient in mental capacities.
This kind of talk is also absurd and applies only to those who are weak in
will and feeble in action, which is generally not the case of superior men.
Confucius died at the age of seventy-two, and I have not heard that his body
was not healthy. The Buddha travelled continually, preaching his doctrine,
and he died at an old age. Jesus had the misfortune to die unjustly. As for
Mohammed, he subjugated the world holding the Koran in his left hand and
a sword in his right. All these men were called sages and are among the greatest
thinkers...

Physical education not only strengthens the body but also enhances our knowledge.
There is a saying: Civilize the mind and make savage the body. This is an
apt saying. In order to civilize the mind one must first make savage the
body. If the body is made savage, then the civilized mind will follow.
Knowledge consists in knowing the things in the world, and in discerning
their laws. In this matter we must rely on our body, because direct observation
depends on the ears and eyes, and reflection depends on the brain. The ears
and eyes, as well as the brain, may be considered parts of the body. When
the body is perfect, then knowledge is also perfect. Hence one can say
that knowledge is acquired indirectly through physical education. Physical
strength is required to undertake the study of the numerous modern sciences,
whether in school or through independent study. He who is equal to this is
the man with a strong body; he who is not equal to it is the man with a weak
body. The division between the strong and the weak determines the area of
responsibilities each can assume.

Physical education not only enhances knowledge. it also harmonizes the
sentiments. The power of the sentiments is extremely great. The ancients
endeavoured to discipline them with reason. Hence they asked. 'Is the master
[i.e.. reason] always alert?' They also said: 'One should discipline the
heart with reason.' But reason proceeds from the heart. and the heart resides
in the body. We often observe that the weak are enslaved by their sentiments
and are incapable of mastering them. Those whose senses are imperfect or
whose limbs are defective are often enslaved by excessive passion, and reason
is incapable of saving them. Hence it may be called an invariable law that
when the body is perfect and healthy, the sentiments are also correct ….

Physical education not only harmonizes the emotions, it also strengthens
the will. The great utility of physical education lies precisely in this.
The principal aim of physical education is military heroism. Such objects
of military heroism as courage, dauntlessness, audacity, and perseverance
are all matters of will. Let me explain this with an. example. To wash our
feet in ice water makes us acquire courage and dauntlessness, as well as
audacity. In general, any form of exercise, if pursued continuously. will
help to train us in perseverance. Long-distance running is particularly good
training in perseverance. 'My strength uprooted mountains. my energy dominated
the world' [from a poem attributed to Hsiang Yu] — this is courage.
'If I don't behead the Lou Lan, I swear I will not return'— this is
dauntlessness. To replace the family with the nation — this is audacity.
' [Yu] was away from his home for eight years, and though he thrice passed
the door of it, he did not enter' [ reference to Mencius ] — this is
perseverance. All these can be accomplished merely on the basis of daily
physical education. The will is the antecedent of a man's career.

Those whose bodies are small and frail are flippant in their behaviour. Those
whose skin is flabby are soft and dull in will. Thus does the body influence
the mind. The purpose of physical education is to strengthen: the muscles
and the bones; as a result, knowledge is enhanced, the sentiments are harmonized,
and the will is strengthened. The muscles and the bones belong to our body;
knowledge sentiments, and will belong to our heart. When both the body and
the heart are at ease, one may speak of perfect harmony. Hence, physical
education is nothing else but the nourishing of our lives and the gladdening
of our hearts.

5. THE REASONS FOR DISLIKING EXERCISE


Exercise is the most important part of physical education. Nowadays students
generally dislike exercise. There are four reasons for this: (1) They do
not have self-awareness. If a thing is to be put into practice, one must
first take pleasure in it. One must understand in detail the whys and the
wherefores. To know in detail the whys and the wherefores is self-awareness.
People generally do not know the interrelation between exercise and themselves
— or they may know it in general terms but not intimately.... (2) They
cannot change their long-established habits. Our country has always stressed
literary accomplishment. People blush to wear short clothes. [The mode of
dress of the swordsmen of King Wen of Chao, according to a chapter of the
Taoist classic Chuang Tzu.] Hence there is the common saying,
'A good man does not become a soldier'.... (3) Exercise has not been propagated
forcefully... (4) Students feel that exercise is shameful. According to my
humble observation, this is really their major reason for disliking exercise.
Flowing garments, a slow gait, a grave, calm gaze — these constitute
a fine deportment, respected by society. Why should one suddenly extend an
arm or expose a leg, stretch and bend down? Is this not strange? Hence there
are those who know well that their body needs exercise and, moreover, wish
very much to do so, but they cannot. There are those who can exercise only
with a group, not by themselves, and those who can exercise in privacy but
not in public. In short, all this is due to feelings of shame. All four of
these are reasons for disliking exercise. The first and the fourth are
subjective, and changing them depends on ourselves; the second and third
are objective, and changing them depends on others: 'What the superior man
seeks is in himself '[Analects], that which depends on others
is of lesser importance.

6. THE METHODS OF EXERCISE SHOULD BE FEW


Tseng Wen-cheng washed his feet before going to bed and walked a thousand
steps after meals, benefiting greatly from this method. There was an
eighty-year-old man who was stiI1 healthy. On being asked how he maintained
his health, he replied, ' I don't eat hearty meals, that's all.' Nowadays
the methods of exercise are very diverse, more than I can count. But although
there may be several score or even several hundred, 'A branch in the forest
is sufficient for the bird to lodge in, and if it drinks at the river it
does not drink more than what its stomach can hold. ' [From Chuang Tzu]
We have only this body and only these senses, bones, viscera, and veins.
Even though there are several hundred methods of exercise all of them are
aimed at improving the circulation of the blood. If one method can accomplish
this, the result of a hundred methods is the same as that of one. Therefore
the other ninety-nine methods can be dispensed with. 'Our eyes can see only
one thing at a time; our ears can hear only one sound at a time.' [From Hsun
Tzu, a Confucian 'realist']. To employ a hundred different methods to train
the muscles and the bones only disturbs them....

7. THE POINTS TO WHICH WE MUST PAY ATTENTION WHEN WE EXERCISE.


We should have perseverance in all things. Exercise is no exception. Suppose
there are two men who exercise. One practices and then stops, the other is
unremitting in his practice. There will certainly be a difference in the
results. First of all, perseverance in exercise creates interest. In general,
that which is at rest cannot set itself in motion; there must be something
to move it. And this something can only be interest....

Interest arises from unremitting daily exercise. The best way is to exercise
twice a day — on getting up and before going to bed — in the nude;
the next best way is to wear light clothes. Too much clothing impedes movement.
If one does this daily, the idea of exercise is continually present and never
interrupted. Today's exercise is a continuation of yesterday's exercise and
thus leads to tomorrow's exercise. The individual exercise periods need not
be long; thirty minutes are sufficient. In this way, a certain interest will
naturally arise. Secondly, perseverance in exercise can create pleasure.
Exercise over a long time can produce great results and give rise to a feeling
of personal value. As a result, we will be able to study with joy, and every
day will see some progress in our virtue. Our heart is filled with boundless
joy because we have persevered and obtained a result. Pleasure and
interest are distinct. Interest is the origin of exercise, and pleasure
its consequence. Interest arises from the action, and pleasure from
the result. The two are naturally different.

Perseverance without concentration of mind can hardly produce results.
If we look at flowers from a galloping horse, even though we may look daily,
it is like not having seen them at all. If one person's heart follows a swan
in the sky, he cannot compete with the person who has meanwhile been studying
carefully. Hence one should concentrate all one's effort on exercise.
During exercise, the mind should be on the exercise. Idle and confused thoughts
should all be put aside…..

The superior man's deportment is cultivated and agreeable, but one cannot
say this about exercise. Exercise should be savage and rude. To be able to
leap on horseback and to shoot at the same time; to go from battle to battle;
to shake the mountains by one' s cries, and the colours of the sky by one's
roars of anger; to have the strength to uproot mountains like Hsiang Yu and
the audacity to pierce the mark like Yu Chi — all this is savage and
rude and has nothing to do with delicacy. In order to progress in exercise,
one must be savage. If one is savage, one will have great vigour and strong
muscles and bones. The method of exercise should be rude; then one can apply
oneself seriously and it will be easy to exercise. These two things are
especially important for beginners.

There are three things to which we must pay attention in exercise: (1)
perseverance, (2) concentration of all our strength, and (3) that it be savage
and rude. There are many other things that require attention. Here I have
merely indicated the most important ones.....


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## To Hakuro Toten (Miyazaki Toten)








TO HAKURO TOTEN (Miazaki Toten)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  TO HAKURO TOTEN (Miazaki
  Toten)[1]


April 1917



Dear Mr. Hakuro Toten,

We have long admired your integrity but regret not having had the privilege
of your acquaintance. Even at this great distance your reputation is enough
to inspire us.

Sir, you gave moral support to Huang[2] [when he
was alive] and now mourn him with your tears. He is to be buried, and you
have come across a myriad leagues of waves to bid him farewell at his grave.
Your lofty friendship reaches as high as the sun and moon; your sincerity
moves gods and spirits. Both are rare in this world, in the past as well
today.

Chih-fan and Tse-tung are schoolboys in Hunan who have acquired some knowledge
of the classics and have disciplined their aspirations. We long to have an
opportunity to meet you, to learn deportment and receive instructions from
you. We shall feel extremely honoured if our request is granted.

Students at the First Teachers' Training College,

Hunan
 

signed Hasiao Chin-fan

Mao Tse-tung

  NOTES


 

1. (1870-1922) a Meiji shishi (extremist patriot) and supporter
of the revolutionary activities of Sun Yet-sen and his comrades.

2. Huang Hsing (1874-1916), a revolutionary leader and
supporter of Sun Yet-sen, who was buried on 15 April 1917.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## To the Glory of the Hans: Toward A New Golden Age








TO THE GLORY OF THE HANS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  TO THE GLORY OF THE HANS


July & August 1919
This article and the following one were extracted from the manifesto
written by comrade Mao for the first issue of his magazine, Hsiang-chiang
p'inq-lun, in July 1919, and from his article 'The great union of the popular
masses’, published in nos. 2-4 of the same periodical, July and august
1919.] 
  

  TOWARD A NEW GOLDEN AGE.


….. What is the greatest question in the world? The greatest question
is that of getting food to eat. What is the greatest force? The greatest
force is that of the union of the popular masses. What should we not fear?
We should not fear heaven. We should not fear ghosts. We should not fear
the dead. We should not fear the bureaucrats. We should not fear the militarists.
We should not fear the capitalists....

The time has come! The great tide in the world is rolling ever more impetuously!
.... He who conforms to it shall survive, he who resists it shall perish...

As a result of the world war and the bitterness of their lives, the popular
masses in many countries have suddenly undertaken all sorts of action. In
Russia, they have overthrown the aristocrats and driven out the rich... The
army of the red flag swarms over the East and the West, sweeping away numerous
enemies... The whole world has been shaken by it.... Within the area enclosed
by the Great Wall and the China Sea, the May 4th Movement has arisen. Its
banner has advanced southward, across the Yellow River to the Yangtze. From
Canton to Hankow, many real-life dramas have been performed; from Lake Tungt'ing
to the Min River the tide is rising. Heaven and earth are aroused, the traitors
and the wicked are put to flight. Ha! We know it! We are awakened! The world
is ours, the nation is ours, society is ours. If we do not speak, who will
speak? If we do not act, who will act? If we do not rise up and fight, who
will rise up and fight? . . . .

It is not that basically we have no strength; the source of our impotence
lies in our lack of practice. For thousands of years the Chinese people of
several hundred millions have all led a life of slaves. Only one person —
the 'emperor'— was not a slave, or rather one could say that even he
was the slave of 'heaven'. When the emperor was in control of everything,
we were given no opportunity for practice.

We must act energetically to carry out the great union of the popular masses,
which will not brook a moment's delay. . . our Chinese people possesses great
intrinsic energy. The more profound the oppression, the greater its resistance;
that which has accumulated for a long time will surely burst forth quickly.
The great union of the Chinese people must be achieved Gentlemen! We must
all exert ourselves, we must all advance with the utmost strength. Our golden
age, our age of brightness and splendour lies ahead!

 


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Great Union of the Popular Masses








THE GREAT UNION OF THE POPULAR MASSES



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE GREAT UNION OF THE POPULAR MASSES



 

The decadence of the state, the sufferings of humanity, and the darkness
of society have all reached an extreme. To be sure, among the methods of
improvement and reform, education, industrialization, strenuous efforts,
creation, destruction (of that which is bad and outmoded), and construction
are all right, but there is a method more fundamental than these, which is
that of the great union of the popular masses.

If we study history, we find that all the movements that have occurred in
the course of history, of whatever type may be, have all without exception
resulted from the union of a certain number of people. A greater movement
naturally requires a greater union, and the greatest movement requires the
greatest union. All such unions are more likely to appear in a time of reform
and resistance….

That which decides between victory and defeat is the solidity or weakness
of the union and whether the ideology that serves as its basis is new or
old, true or false....

[The aristocrats and capitalists and other powerful people in society have
carried their oppression to an extreme ] .... and consequently the decadence
of the state, the sufferings of humanity, and the darkness of society have
also reached an extreme. It is then that reform and resistance arise, and
that the great union of the popular masses is achieved.

When the great union of the popular masses of France opposed the great union
of the adherents of the monarchy and the victory of ‘political reform’
had been attained, many countries followed the French example and undertook
all sorts of 'political reforms'. After last year's struggle in Russia, which
pitted the great union of the popular masses against the great union of the
aristocracy and the great union of the capitalists and led to the victory
of 'social reform', many countries — Hungary, Austria, Czechoslovakia,
Germany — have followed Russia's example and have undertaken all sorts
of social reforms. Although this victory is not complete.... it may certainly
become so, and one can also imagine that it will spread throughout the whole
world.

Why is the great union of the popular masses so terribly effective? Because
the popular masses in any country are much more numerous than the aristocracy,
the capitalists, and the other holders of power in society....

We should know that our brothers of other lands have often employed this
method in pursuing their interests. We must arise and imitate them, we must
carry out our great union.... As soon as we arise and let out a shout, the
traitors will get up and tremble and flee for their lives.

If we wish to achieve a great union, in order to resist the powerful people
whom we face, who harm their fellow men, and in order to pursue our own
interests. we must necessarily have many small unions to serve as its
foundation.... Because our circumstances and professions are different, there
are also certain differences, large or small. in the sphere of our common
interests.... Hence, the method (union ) for seeking our common interests
also displays certain differences, large or small. .

We are peasants, and so we want to unite with others who cultivate the land
like we do, in order to pursue our various interests. The interests of us
who cultivate the land can only be protected by ourselves! .... How do the
landlords treat us? Are the rents and taxes heavy or light? Are our houses
satisfactory or not? Are our bellies full or not? Is there enough land? Are
there those in the village who have no land to cultivate? We must constantly
seek answers to all these questions. . . We are workers, we wish to unite
with others who work like ourselves in order to pursue the various interests
of us workers.... We cannot fail to seek a solution to such questions concerning
us workers as the level of our wages, the length of the working day, and
the equal or unequal sharing of dividends..

We are students, we are already living in the twentieth century and yet they
still compel us to observe the old ceremonies and the old methods. The country
is about to perish, and yet they still paste up posters forbidding us to
love our country.... We want our own union... We are women, we are sunk even
deeper in a sea of bitterness, we want to carry out our union....



Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Miss Chao's Suicide







MISS CHAO'S SUICIDE 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  MISS CHAO'S SUICIDE


November 16, 1919 

[Extracted from several articles published in the 'Changsha Ta-kung-pao'
beginning on 16 November 1919.]
  

A person's suicide is entirely determined by circumstances. Was Miss Chao's
original idea to seek death? On the contrary, it was to seek life. If Miss
Chao ended up by seeking death instead, it is because circumstances drove
her to this. The circumstances in which Miss Chao found herself were the
following: (1) Chinese society; (2) the Chao family of Nanyang Street in
Changsha; (3) the Wu family of Kantzuyuan Street in Changsha, the family
of the husband she did not want. These three factors constituted three iron
nets, composing a kind of triangular cage. Once caught in these three nets,
it was in vain that she sought life in every way possible. There was no way
for her to go on living; the contrary of life is death, and Miss Chao thus
felt compelled to die. . . . If, among these three factors, there had been
one that was not an iron net, or if one of these nets had opened, Miss Chao
would certainly not have died. (1) If Miss Chao's parents had not had recourse
to compulsion but had yielded before Miss Chao's free will, Miss Chao would
certainly not have died; (2) if Miss Chao's parents had not resorted to
compulsion but had permitted Miss Chao to explain her point of view to the
family of her future husband, and to explain the reasons for her refusal,
and if in the end the family of her future husband had accepted her point
of view and respected her individual freedom, Miss Chao would certainly not
have died; (3) even if her parents and the family of her future husband had
refused to accept her free will, if in society there had been a powerful
group of public opinion to support her, if there were an entirely new world
where the fact of running away from one's parents' home and finding refuge
elsewhere were considered honourable and not dishonourable, in this case,
too, Miss Chao would certainly not have died. If Miss Chao is dead today,
it is because she was solidly enclosed by the three iron nets (society, her
own family, the family of her future husband); she sought life in vain and
finally was led to seek death. . . .

Yesterday's incident was important. It happened because of the shameful system
of arranged marriages, because of the darkness of the social system, the
negation of the individual will, and the absence of the freedom to choose
one's own mate. It is to be hoped that interested persons will comment on
all aspects of this affair, and that they will defend the honour of a girl
who died a martyr's death for the cause of the freedom to choose her own
love. . . .

The family of the parents and the family of the future husband are both bound
up with society; they are both parts of society. We must understand that
the family of the parents and the family of the future husband have committed
a crime, but the source of this crime lies in society. It is true that the
two families themselves carried out this crime; but a great part of the
culpability was transmitted to them by society. Moreover, if society were
good even if the families had wanted to carry out this crime they would not
have had the opportunity to do so. . . .

Since there are factors in our society that have Miss Chao, this society
is an extremely dangerous thing. It was capable of causing the death of Miss
Chao; it could also cause the death of Miss Ch'ieh, Miss Sun, or Miss Li.
It is capable of killing men as well as women. All of us, the potential victims,
must be on our guard before this dangerous thing that could inflict a fatal
blow on us. We should protest loudly, warn the other human being who are
not yet dead and condemn the countless evils of our society. . . .

If we conduct a campaign in favour of marriage reform, it is first of all
the superstitions about marriage that must be demolished, above all the belief
that marriages are predestined by fate. Once these beliefs are demolished,
the pretext behind which the arrangement of marriages by parents hides itself
will disappear at the same time and then the concept of incompatibility of
husband and wife' will immediately appear in society. And with the appearance
of the concept of incompatibility of husband and wife, the army of the family
revolution will arise in countless numbers, and the great wave of the freedom
of marriage and of the freedom to love will sweep over China. . . .

My attitude toward suicide is to reject it. . . . First of all, man's goal
is to seek life, and he should not go against the grain of his natural tendency
and seek death. . . . Secondly, although suicide results from the fact that
society deprives people of all hope. . . . We should struggle against society
in order to regain the hope that we have lost. . . . We should die fighting.
. . . Thirdly, if people show respect for those who have courageously put
an end to their own lives, that does not at all mean that they respect suicide
as such, but rather that they respect the courageous spirit of resistance
to brute force, which inspires the person who commits suicide . . . .

It is so much better to be killed in fighting than to take one' s own life!
The goal of struggle is not 'to be killed by others' but 'to aspire toward
the emergence of a true personality.' If a person does not attain this despite
all his efforts, if he fights to the death and sacrifices himself, then he
will be the most courageous of all on earth, and his tragedy will make a
great impression on men's minds! . . . .



Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Communism and Dictatorship 








COMMUNISM AND DICTATORSHIP



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  COMMUNISM AND DICTATORSHIP


November 1920. January 1921

[Extracted from. two letters to Ts’ai Ho-sen, in November 1920 and
January 1921.] 
  

In his lecture at Changsha, Russell .... took a position in favour of communism
but against the dictatorship of the workers and peasants. He said that one
should employ the method of education to change the consciousness of the
propertied classes, and that in this way it would not be necessary to limit
freedom or to have recourse to war and bloody revolution.... My objections
to Russell's view point can be stated in a few words: 'This is all very well
as a theory, but it is unfeasible in practice' .... Education requires money,
people and instruments. In today's world money is entirely in the hands of
the capitalists. Those who have charge of education are all either capitalists
or wives of capitalists. In today's world the schools and the press, the
two most important instruments of education are entirely under capitalist
control. In short, education in today's world is capitalist education. If
we teach capitalism to children, these children, when they grow up will in
turn teach capitalism to a second generation of children. Education thus
remains in the hands of the capitalists. Then the capitalists have 'parliaments'
to pass laws protecting the capitalists and handicapping the proletariat;
they have 'governments' to apply these laws and to enforce the advantages
and the prohibitions that they contain; they have 'armies' and 'police' to
defend the well-being of the capitalists and to repress the demands of the
proletariat; they have 'banks' to serve as repositories in the circulation
of their wealth ; they have ' factories', which are the instruments by which
they monopolize the production of goods. Thus, if the communists do not seize
political power, they will not be able to find any refuge in this world;
how, under such circumstances, could they take charge of education? Thus,
the capitalists will continue to control education and to praise their capitalism
to the skies, so that the number of coverts to the proletariat's communist
propaganda will diminish from day to day. Consequently, I believe that the
method of education is unfeasible.... What I have just said constitutes the
first argument. The second argument is that, based on the principle of mental
habits and on my observation of human history, I am of the opinion that one
absolutely cannot expect the capitalists to become converted to communism....
If one wishes to use the power of education to transform them, then since
one cannot obtain control of the whole or even an important part of the two
instruments of education — schools and the press — even if one
has a mouth and a tongue and one or two schools and newspapers as means of
propaganda.... this is really not enough to change the mentality of the adherents
of capitalism even slightly; how then can one hope that the latter will repent
and turn toward the good? So much from a psychological standpoint. From a
historical standpoint.... one observes that no despot imperialist and militarist
throughout history has ever been known to leave the stage of history of his
own free will without being overthrown by the people. Napoleon I proclaimed
himself emperor and failed; then there was Napoleon III. Yuan Shih-K'ai failed;
then, also there was Tuan Ch'i-jui.... From what I have just said based on
both psychological and a historical standpoint, it can be seen that capitalism
cannot be overthrown by the force of a few feeble efforts in the domain of
education. This is the second argument. There is yet a third argument, most
assuredly a very important argument, even more important in reality. If we
use peaceful means to attain the goal of communism, when will we finally
achieve it? Let us assume that a century will be required, a century marked
by the unceasing groans of the proletariat. What position shall we adopt
in the face of this situation? The proletariat is many times more numerous
than the bourgeoisie; if we assume that the proletariat constitutes two-thirds
of humanity, then one billion of the earth's one billion five hundred million
inhabitants are proletarians (I fear that the figure is even higher), who
during this century will be cruelly exploited by the remaining third of
capitalists. How can we bear this? Furthermore, since the proletariat has
already become conscious of the fact that it too should possess wealth, and
of the fact that its sufferings are unnecessary, the proletarians are
discontented, and a demand for communism has arisen and has already become
a fact. This fact confronts us, we cannot make it disappear; when we become
conscious of it we wish to act. This is why, in my opinion, the Russian
revolution, as well as the radical communists in every country, will daily
grow more powerful and numerous and more tightly organized. This is the natural
result. This is the third argument..... 

There is a further point pertaining to my doubts about anarchism. My argument
pertains not merely to the impossibility of a society without power or
organization. I should like to mention only the difficulties in the way of
the establishment of such form of society and of its final attainment....
For all the reasons just stated, my present viewpoint on absolute liberalism,
anarchism, and even democracy is that these things are fine in theory, but
not feasible in practice....

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Role of the Merchants in the National Revolution








THE ROLE OF THE MERCHANTS IN NATIONAL REVOLUTION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE ROLE OF THE MERCHANTS IN THE NATIONAL REVOLUTION

July 11, 1923

 

[Extracted from the article 'the Peking coup d'etat and the Merchants',
published in Hsiang-tao, nos. 31-2 (11 July, 1923).] 
  

The present coup d'etat has roused the merchants, who have persistently
ignored politics, and has led them suddenly to look up and pay attention
to politics. This is most welcome news! .... The Shanghai Chamber of Commerce....
has published a declaration to the whole nation. The declaration says: 'We
venture to proclaim with sincerity to the Chinese and the foreigners that
from the fourteenth day of this month our people do not recognize any action
of Ts'ao K'un and Kao Ling-wei, following their usurpation of political power...
as qualified to represent the country….’

At the same time the Chamber of Commerce resolved not to recognize the national
assembly, which 'cannot represent the people' s will', and resolved , moreover,
to organize a democratic committee as the organ for dealing positively with
the affairs of the nation. This action... may be regarded as the first gesture
of the merchants to intervene in politics and as a manifestation of the fact
that the merchants, who remained silent for three years, now speak in awesome
tones .

The present political problem in China is none other than the problem of
the national revolution [kuomin ko-ming]. To use the strength of the
people to overthrow the militarists and foreign imperialism, with which the
former are in collusion to accomplish their treasonable acts, is the historic
mission of the Chinese people. This revolution is the task of the people
as a whole. The merchants, workers, peasants, students, and teachers should
all come forward to take on the responsibility for a portion of the revolutionary
work; but because of historical necessity and current tendencies, the work
for which the merchants should be responsible in the national revolution
is both more urgent and more important than the work that the rest of the
people should take upon themselves. We know that the politics of semicolonial
China is characterized by the fact that the militarists and the foreign powers
have banded together to impose a twofold oppression on the people of the
whole country. The people of the whole country naturally suffer profoundly
under this kind of twofold oppression. Nevertheless, the merchants are the
ones who feel these sufferings most acutely and most urgently. Everybody
knows that the likin and customs duties are matters
of life and death for the merchants. The pressing demands for the merchants
to 'abolish the likin and raise the tariffs' are the expression of
their most immediate interest. But abolishing the likin and raising
the tariffs is not something that can be easily done, because abolishing
the likin hurts the interests of the militarists and raising the tariffs
hurts the interest of foreign imperialism. If the likin were abolished
completely the militarists would grow thinner day by day, and the merchants
fatter. In that case, the merchants would need only to shout in order to
overthrow the militarists. But the clever militarists definitely will not
do such a foolish thing as to lift a stone in this way and crush their own
feet. And if one were to increase considerably the tariffs on foreign goods
or even go so far as to abolish the tariffs fixed by the treaties and replace
them by protective tariffs freely set by the Chinese themselves, thus removing
the fetters encumbering the Chinese merchants, the industry and commerce
of the country would develop rapidly and foreign goods would no longer be
able to gain a foothold in China. The cunning foreign imperialists are even
less likely to do such a foolish thing.... The positions of the foreign powers
and the militarists on the one hand and the merchants on the other are truly
incompatible..

The merchants have hitherto 'loved peace' and have never imagined the political
transformation necessitated a revolution which could not be accomplished
by a few telegrams in favour of 'the reduction of the number of soldiers,
the application of the constitution, and financial reforms'. Still less did
they imagine that revolution necessitated their personal participation, and
that only by calling for the organization of all the people and creating
a mass movement could a revolutionary force be brought into existence. They
even went so far as to think that political reform did not require a political
party and to call the revolutionary efforts of the Kuomintang superfluous.
It is impossible to compare these juvenile and timid attitudes with the present
situation without being convulsed with laughter.... Judging from the actions
of the Shanghai merchants in response to the coup d'etat, we know
that they have already changed their attitudes, cast away their pacifism,
adopted revolutionary methods, drummed up the courage to shoulder responsibility
for the affairs of the nation,. and progressed rapidly .....

The Shanghai merchants have arisen and begun to act. We hope that the merchants
outside of Shanghai will all rise up and act together. The present situation
is extremely pressing, as though the fire were already singeing our eyebrows,
and does not permit us to fall idly asleep once more. At present, we must
unite the whole nation in order to carry out the revolution. Factionalism
among the merchants cannot be tolerated. They must know that foreign powers
and the militarists are the common enemies of all the merchants, as well
as of the whole nation. Moreover, the advantages obtained after a successful
revolution will be common advantages. It is essential to unite and struggle
.so as to overthrow the common enemy and assure the common interest.... The
broader the organization of merchants, the greater will be their influence,
the greater will be their ability to lead the people of the whole country,
and the more rapid the success of the revolution!

In conclusion, we have the following warnings for the merchants of the whole
country: (1) The great cause of revolution is no easy matter, even less so
in China, a country under the twofold pressure of the foreign powers and
the militarists. The only solution is to call upon the merchants, the workers,
the peasants, the students, and the teachers of the whole country, as well
as all the others who constitute our nation and who suffer under a common
oppression, and to establish a closely knit united front. It is only then
that this revolution will succeed., .. We must no longer neglect the lesson
to be learned from previous experience, when the Association of Merchants
and Teachers refused participation of the workers. (2) Now that the merchants
have already courageously taken the first step in the revolution, they must
take the second step.... endeavour to move forward, and never stop until
they have attained their goal. Above all, they must never stop on meeting
a slight obstruction, or set out on the false path of making an agreement
with the foreign powers and the militarists. Everyone must believe that the
only way to save both himself and the nation is through the national revolution.
Many revolutionary causes throughout history may serve as our reference and
our guide. Circumstances call upon us to perform a historic task. We can
no longer be negligent! To open a new era through revolutionary methods,
and to build a new nation — such is the historic mission of the Chinese
people. We must never forget it!

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Chinese Government and the Foreigners








THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT AND THE FOREIGNERS

August 29, 1923
Extracted from. the article ‘The cigarette tax' , published in
Hsiang-tao, no.38, 29 August 1923. ] 
  

We often say: 'The Chinese Government is the counting-house of our foreign
masters' . Perhaps there are some who don't believe this. We also say: 'The
false show of friendship by foreigners (especially Englishmen and Americans)
is merely a pretense of "amity" in order that they may squeeze out more of
the fat and blood of the Chinese people'. Perhaps there are some who don't
believe this either. Ever since the prohibition against the export of cotton
was repealed owing to the opposition of the foreigners, it has been impossible
not to believe what we have just said to some extent. Now that the foreigners
have put pressure on the government to abolish the cigarette tax in Chekiang
and other provinces, it is impossible not to believe it a little more. .
.

Of the cigarettes produced by English and American companies, a small portion
is imported from England, America, and Japan, and a large portion is manufactured
by English and American merchants using Chinese tobacco and Chinese labour
in factories set up in Shanghai, Hankow, and elsewhere in China. When the
manufactured cigarettes leave the factory, small tax is paid, in accordance
with 'treaties' . They are then transported in bulk to the various provinces,
and China is not allowed again to tax them 'freely’ . In Chekiang Province
alone, the sale of cigarettes amounts to 'over ten million yuan a
year' . There is no accurate total figure for the annual sale of cigarettes
in the whole nation; estimating on the basis of sales in Chekiang alone,
it must be above 200 million yuan. This is really 'frightening to
hear' ! I ask my 400 million brethren to ponder awhile: What does the 'amity'
of the foreigners really mean?

The 'Council of Ministers' of the Chinese Government is really both accommodating
and agreeable. If one of our foreign masters farts, it is a lovely perfume.
If our foreign masters want to export cotton, the Council of Ministers thereupon
abolishes the prohibition of the export of cotton; If our foreign masters
want to bring in cigarettes, the Council of Ministers thereupon 'instructs
the several provinces by telegram to stop levying taxes on cigarettes'. Again,
I ask my 400 million brethren to ponder a little. Isn't it true that the
Chinese Government is the counting-house of our foreign masters?


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Bitter Sufferings of the Peasants in Kiangsu and Chekiang, and Their Movements of Resistance








THE BITTER SUFFERINGS OF THE PEASANTS IN KIANGSU AND CHEKIANG, AND
  THEIR MOVEMENT OF RESISTANCE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE BITTER SUFFERINGS OF THE PEASANTS IN KIANGSU AND CHEKIANG, AND THEIR
  MOVEMENT OF RESISTANCE


November 25, 1926
[Extracted from an article of the same title published in Hsiang-tao,
no. 179, 25 November 1926. ] 
  

If one takes the boat from Wuhsi, the first place at which one arrives is
the market town of Kushan. It is situated between the three hsien
of Chiangyin, Shangshu, and Wuhsi. In these three hsien there are
many big land-lords who oppress the farmers very severely. Last autumn, a
certain Kushan student who had studied in Japan, by the name of Chow Shui-p'ing,
returned to this village. (Chou had first graduated from Wuhsi provincial
Teachers' College). He could not bear the sight (of such oppression), and
encouraged the tenant farmers to organize into a body called the 'Tenant
Farmers' Cooperative Self-help Society'. Chou moved from village to village
speaking with tears in his eyes of the sufferings of the peasants. A large
number of Kushan peasants followed him, and those in the neighbouring areas
of Chiangyin, Shangshu, and Wuhsi hsien were all inflamed. They rose
like clouds and opposed the rich but heartless big landlords, and with one
voice demanded the reduction of rent. But before the peasants had completely
united themselves, the bad landlords had already united themselves and the
gentry and landlords of the three hsien Chiangyin, Shangshu, and Wuhsi
acted simultaneously. Letters and telegrams fell like snowflakes on Sun
Ch'uan-fang; Sun Ch'uan-fang of course obeyed the order of the landlords.
Last November, he dissolved the 'Tenant Farmers' Cooperative Self-help Society'
and arrested Chou Shui-ping, who was executed in January of this year. It
seemed that the movement for rent reduction had been suppressed for a time.
But when Chou Shui-p'ing's coffin was returned to Kushan to be exhibited
in his house, the farmers went up to the coffin daily in crowds and kowtowed
before it, saying, 'Mr. Chou died for us, we will avenge his death.' This
year there was a big drought, and the harvest was poor; the farmers again
thought of rising up to demand rent reduction. This shows that they are not
in the least afraid to die. They know that a united struggle to reduce the
exploitation of the avaricious and cruel landlords is their only way out. 

Tz'u Hsi is located in Chekiang, east of Ningpo. In recent months there occurred
a great insurrection in the Shanpei area of this hsien. The peasants
of this Shanpei area are violent by nature, and frequently indulge in armed
combat. On top of this, in recent years the officials and police have been
unreasonably oppressive and the bad landlords have stepped up their exploitation.
So the accumulated exasperation of the peasants was already deep. By chance
the climate this year was unstable, and as a result the rice and cotton crops
failed, but the landlords refused to make any reduction whatever in their
harsh rents. The peasants' insurrection against famine thereupon exploded.
Once the farmers’ insurrection broke out, all the elements declasses
joined them very courageously. In the morning of 13 September, there
assembled more than 2,000 people who went to the police station to report
the famine, and clashed with the police. They burned down the police station,
and distributed the arms of the police among themselves. Then they turned
to go to the houses of the village gentry landlords to 'eat up powerful
families'. After eating them up, and out of anger at the evils of the village
gentry landlords, they destroyed the landlords’ screens, paintings,
and sculptured ancient doors and windows. They did this every day; they did
not listen much to others' exhortation but let off their steam in this manner.
The day after (each such outburst ), the landlord in question ran to the
city to report, and soldiers and police came down to the village and turned
every thing upside down, but the leaders of the peasants had already mostly
escaped. There was widespread propaganda about 'Violation of the Law' and
'Crimes', the farmers became fearful, and thus the movement was suppressed.
The reason for the failure of this movement is that the masses did not fully
organize themselves, and did not have leadership, so that the movement barely
got started and then failed.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Second Anniversary of An Wu-ching's Martyrdom








THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF AN WU-CHING'S MARTYRDOM



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF 
  AN WU-CHING'S MARTYRDOM


1929



Young communists and non-communists who have brought new blood and new spirit
to the revolutionary ranks are precious people. Without them the ranks can
never be expanded and the revolution can never be won. However, their weakness
lies in a lack of experience, and experience comes only from personal
participation in revolutionary struggles. The inexperienced can become
experienced if they begin from the lowest level and work steadily without
a grain of dishonesty for several years.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Oppose Book Worship








OPPOSE BOOK WORSHIP



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  OPPOSE BOOK WORSHIP


May 1930


I. NO INVESTIGATION, NO RIGHT TO SPEAK


Unless you have investigated a problem, you will be deprived of the right
to speak on it. Isn't that too harsh? Not in the least. When you have not
probed into a problem, into the present facts and its past history, and know
nothing of its essentials, whatever you say about it will undoubtedly be
nonsense. Talking nonsense solves no problems, as everyone knows, so why
is it unjust to deprive you of the right to speak? Quite a few comrades always
keep their eyes shut and talk nonsense, and for a Communist that is disgraceful.
How can a Communist keep his eyes shut and talk nonsense? 

It won't do!

It won't do!

You must investigate!

You must not talk nonsense!

II. TO INVESTIGATE A PROBLEM IS TO SOLVE IT


You can't solve a problem? Well, get down and investigate the present facts
and its past history! When you have investigated the problem thoroughly,
you will know how to solve it. Conclusions invariably come after investigation,
and not before. Only a blockhead cudgels his brains on his own, or together
with a group, to "find solution" or "evolve an idea" without making any
investigation. It must be stressed that this cannot possibly lead to any
effective solution or any good idea. In other words, he is bound to arrive
at a wrong solution and a wrong idea.

There are not a few comrades doing inspection work, as well as guerrilla
leaders and cadres newly in office, who like to make political pronouncements
the moment they arrive at a place and who strut about, criticizing this and
condemning that when they have only seen the surface of things or minor details.
Such purely subjective nonsensical talk is indeed detestable. These people
are bound to make a mess of things, lose the confidence of the masses and
prove incapable of solving any problem at all.

When they come across difficult problems, quite a number of people in leading
positions simply heave a sigh without being able to solve them. They lose
patience and ask to be transferred on the ground that they "have not the
ability and cannot do the job"; These are cowards' words. Just get moving
on your two legs, go the rounds of every section placed under your charge
and "inquire into everything''[1] as Confucius
did, and then you will be able to solve the problems, however little is your
ability; for although your head may be empty before you go out of doors,
it will be empty no longer when you return but will contain all sorts of
material necessary for the solution of the problems, and that is how problems
are solved. Must you go out of doors? Not necessarily. You can call a
fact-finding meeting of people familiar with the situation in order to get
at the source of what you call a difficult problem and come to know how it
stands now, and then it will be easy to solve your difficult problem.

Investigation may be likened to the long months of pregnancy, and solving
a problem to the day of birth. To investigate a problem is, indeed, to solve
it.

III. OPPOSE BOOK WORSHIP


Whatever is written in a book is right — such is still the mentality
of culturally backward Chinese peasants. Strangely enough, within the Communist
Party there are also people who always say in a discussion, "Show me where
it's written in the book." When we say that a directive of a higher organ
of leadership is correct, that is not just because it comes from "a higher
organ of leadership" but because its contents conform with both the objective
and subjective circumstances of the struggle and meet its requirements. It
is quite wrong to take a formalistic attitude and blindly carry out directives
without discussing and examining them in the light of actual conditions simply
because they come from a higher organ. It is the mischief done by this formalism
which explains why the line and tactics of the Party do not take deeper root
among the masses. To carry out a directive of a higher organ blindly, and
seemingly without any disagreement, is not really to carry it out but is
the most artful way of opposing or sabotaging it.

The method of studying the social sciences exclusively from the book is likewise
extremely dangerous and may even lead one onto the road of counter-revolution.
Clear proof of this is provided by the fact that whole batches of Chinese
Communists who confined themselves to books in their study of the social
sciences have turned into counter-revolutionaries. When we say Marxism is
correct, it is certainly not because Marx was a "prophet" but because his
theory has been proved correct in our practice and in our struggle. We need
Marxism in our struggle. In our acceptance of his theory no such formalisation
of mystical notion as that of "prophecy" ever enters our minds. Many who
have read Marxist books have become renegades from the revolution, whereas
illiterate workers often grasp Marxism very well. Of course we should study
Marxist books, but this study must be integrated with our country's actual
conditions. We need books, but we must overcome book worship, which is divorced
from the actual situation.

How can we overcome book worship? The only way is to investigate the actual
situation.

 

IV. WITHOUT INVESTIGATING THE ACTUAL SITUATION, THERE IS BOUND
  TO BE AN IDEALIST APPRAISAL OF CLASS FORCES AND AN IDEALIST GUIDANCE IN WORK,
  RESULTING EITHER IN OPPORTUNISM OR IN PUTSCHISM


 

Do you doubt this conclusion? Facts will force you to accept it. Just try
and appraise the political situation or guide the struggle without making
any investigation, and you will see whether or not such appraisal or guidance
is groundless and idealist and whether or not it will lead to opportunist
or putschist errors. Certainly it will. This is not because of failure to
make careful plans before taking action but because of failure to study the
specific social situation carefully before making the plans, as often happens
in our Red Army guerrilla units. Officers of the Li
Kuei[2] type do not discriminate when they punish
the men for offenses. As a result, the offenders feel they have been unfairly
treated, many disputes ensue, and the leaders lose all prestige. Does this
not happen frequently in the Red Army? 

We must wipe out idealism and guard against all opportunist and putschist
errors before we can succeed in winning over the masses and defeating the
enemy. The only way to wipe out idealism is to make the effort and investigate
the actual situation.

V. THE AIM OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC INVESTIGATION IS TO ARRIVE
  AT A CORRECT APPRAISAL OF CLASS FORCES AND THEN TO FORMULATE CORRECT TACTICS
  FOR THE STRUGGLE


This is our answer to the question: Why do we have to investigate social
and economic conditions? Accordingly, the object of our investigation is
all the social classes and not fragmentary social phenomena. Of late, the
comrades in the Fourth Army of the Red Army have generally given attention
to the work of investigation, [3] but the method
many of them employ is wrong. The results of their investigation are therefore
as trivial as a grocer's accounts, or resemble the many strange tales a country
bumpkin hears when he comes to town, or are like a distant view of a populous
city from a mountain top. This kind of investigation is of little use and
cannot achieve our main purpose. Our main purpose is to learn the political
and economic situation of the various social classes. The outcome of our
investigation should be a picture of the present situation of each class
and the ups and downs of its development. For example, when we investigate
the composition of the peasantry, not only must we know the number of
owner-peasants, semi-owner peasants and tenant-peasants, who are differentiated
according to tenancy relationships, but more especially we must know the
number of rich peasants, middle peasants and poor peasants, who are
differentiated according to class or stratum. When we investigate the composition
of the merchants, not only must we know the number in each trade, such as
grain, clothing, medicinal herbs, etc., but more especially we must know
the number of small merchants, middle merchants and big merchants. We should
investigate not only the state of each trade, but more especially the class
relations within it. We should investigate the relationships not only between
the different trades but more especially between the different classes. Our
chief method of investigation must be to dissect the different social classes,
the ultimate purpose being to understand their interrelations, to arrive
at a correct appraisal of class forces and then to formulate the correct
tactics for the struggle, defining which classes constitute the main force
in the revolutionary struggle, which classes are to be won over as allies
and which classes are to be overthrown. This is our sole purpose.

What are the social classes requiring investigation?

They are:

  The industrial proletariat
  
  The handicraft workers
  
  The farm labourers
  
  The poor peasants
  
  The urban poor
  
  The lumpen-Proletariat
  
  The master handicraftsmen
  
  The small merchants
 
  The middle peasants
  
  The rich peasants
  
  The landlords
  
  The commercial bourgeoisie
  
  The industrial bourgeoisie


In our investigation we should give attention to the state of all these classes
or strata. Only the industrial proletariat and industrial bourgeoisie are
absent in the areas where we are now working, and we constantly come across
all the others. Our tactics of struggle are tactics in relation to all these
classes and strata.

Another serious shortcoming in our past investigations has been the undue
stress on the countryside to the neglect of the towns, so that many comrades
have always been vague about our tactics towards the urban poor and the
commercial bourgeoisie. The development of the struggle has enabled us to
leave the mountains for the plains.[4] We have
descended physically, but we are still up in the mountains mentally. We must
understand the towns as well as the countryside, or we shall be unable to
meet the needs of the revolutionary struggle.

VI. VICTORY IN CHINA'S REVOLUTIONARY STRUGGLE WILL DEPEND ON
  THE CHINESE COMRADES' UNDERSTANDING OF CHINESE CONDITIONS


The aim of our struggle is to attain socialism via the stage of democracy.
In this task, the first step is to complete the democratic revolution by
winning the majority of the working class and arousing the peasant masses
and the urban poor for the overthrow of the landlord class, imperialism and
the Kuomintang regime. The next step is to carry out the socialist revolution,
which will follow on the development of this struggle. The fulfilment of
this great revolutionary task is no simple or easy job and will depend entirely
on correct and firm tactics on the part of the proletarian party. If its
tactics of struggle are wrong, or irresolute and wavering, the revolution
will certainly suffer temporary defeat. It must be borne in mind that the
bourgeois parties, too, constantly discuss their tactics of struggle. They
are considering how to spread reformist influences among the working class
so as to mislead it and turn it away from Communist Party leadership, how
to get the rich peasants to put down the uprisings of the poor peasants and
how to organize gangsters to suppress the revolutionary struggles. In a situation
when the class struggle grows increasingly acute and is waged at close quarters,
the proletariat has to depend for its victory entirely on the correct and
firm tactics of struggle of its own party, the Communist Party. A Communist
Party's correct and unswerving tactics of struggle can in no circumstance
be created by a few people sitting in an office; they emerge in the course
of mass struggle, that is, through actual experience. Therefore, we must
at all times study social conditions and make practical investigations. Those
comrades who are inflexible, conservative, formalistic and groundlessly
optimistic think that the present tactics of struggle are perfect, that the
"book of documents"[5] of the Party's Sixth National
Congress guarantees lasting victory, and that one can always be victorious
merely by adhering to the established methods. These ideas are absolutely
wrong and have nothing in common with the idea that Communists should create
favourable new situations through struggle; they represent a purely conservative
line. Unless it is completely discarded, this line will cause great losses
to the revolution and do harm to these comrades themselves. There are obviously
some comrades in our Red Army who are content to leave things as they are,
who do not seek to understand anything thoroughly and are groundlessly
optimistic, and they spread the fallacy that "this is proletarian". They
eat their fill and sit dozing in their offices all day long without ever
moving a step and going out among the masses to investigate. Whenever they
open their mouths, their platitudes make people sick. To awaken these comrades
we must raise our voices and cry out to them: 

Change your conservative ideas without delay!

Replace them by progressive and militant Communist ideas!

Get into the struggle!

Go among the masses and investigate the facts!


VII. THE TECHNIQUE OF INVESTlGATION


1. Hold fact-finding meetings and undertake investigation through discussions.

This is the only way to get near the truth, the only way to draw conclusions.
It is easy to commit mistakes if you do not hold fact-finding meetings for
investigation through discussions but simply rely on one individual relating
his own experience. You cannot possibly draw more or less correct conclusions
at such meetings if you put questions casually instead of raising key-questions
for discussion.

2. What kind of people should attend the fact-finding meetings?

They should be people well acquainted with social and economic conditions.
As far as age is concerned, older people are best, because they are rich
in experience and not only know what is going on but understand the causes
and effects. Young people with experience of struggle should also be included,
because they have progressive ideas and sharp eyes. As far as occupation
is concerned, there should be workers, peasants, merchants, intellectuals,
and occasionally soldiers, and sometimes even vagrants. Naturally, when a
particular subject is being looked into, those who have nothing to do with
it need not be present. For example, workers, peasants and students need
not attend when commerce is the subject of investigation.

3. Which is better, a large fact-finding meeting or a small one?

That depends on the investigator's ability to conduct a meeting. If he is
good at it, a meeting of as many as a dozen or even twenty or more people
can be called. A large meeting has its advantages; from the answers you get
fairly accurate statistics (e. g., in finding out the percentage of poor
peasants in the total peasant population) and fairly correct conclusions
(e.g., in finding out whether equal or differentiated land redistribution
is better ). Of course, it has its disadvantages too; unless you are skillful
in conducting meetings, you will find it difficult to keep order. So the
number of people attending a meeting depends on the competence of the
investigator. However, the minimum is three, or otherwise the information
obtained will be too limited to correspond to the real situation.

4. Prepare a detailed outline for the investigation.

A detailed outline should be prepared beforehand, and the investigator should
ask questions according to the outline, with those present at the meeting
giving their answers. Any points which are unclear or doubtful should be
put up for discussion. The detailed outline should include main subjects
and sub-headings and also detailed items. For instance, taking commerce as
a main subject, it can have such sub-headings as cloth, grain, other necessities
and medicinal herbs; again, under cloth, there can be such detailed items
as calico, homespun and silk and satin.

5. Personal participation.

Everyone with responsibility for giving leadership — from the chairman
of the township government to the chairman of the central government, from
the detachment leader to the commander-in-chief, from the secretary of a
Party branch to the general secretary — must personally undertake
investigation into the specific social and economic conditions and not merely
rely on reading reports. For investigation and reading reports are two entirely
different things.

6. Probe deeply. 

Anyone new to investigation work should make one or two thorough investigations
in order to gain full knowledge of a particular place (say, a village or
a town) of a particular problem (say, the problem of grain or currency).
Deep probing into a particular place or problem will make future investigation
of other places or problems easier.

7. Make your own notes.

The investigator should not only preside at fact-finding meetings and give
proper guidance to those present but should also make his own notes and record
the results himself. To have others do it for him is no good.


NOTES

1. See Confucian Analects, Book III, "Pa Yi": "When Confucius
entered the Ancestral Temple he inquired into everything." 

2. Li Kuei was a hero in the well-known Chinese novel shui
Hu Chuan' (Heroes of the Marshes) which describes the peasant war that occurred
towards the end of the Northern Sung Dynasty (960-1127). He was simple, outspoken
and very loyal to the revolutionary cause of the peasants, but crude and
tactless. 

3. Comrade Mao Tse-tung has always laid great stress on
investigation, regarding social investigation as the most important task
and the basis for defining policy in the work of leadership. The work of
investigation was gradually developed in the Fourth Army of the Red Army
on Comrade Mao Tsetung's initiative. He stipulated that social investigation
should be a regular part of the work, and the Political Department of the
Red Army prepared detailed forms covering such items as the state of the
mass struggle, the condition of the reactionaries, the economic life of the
people and the amount of land owned by each class in the rural areas. Wherever
the Red Army went, it first made itself familiar with the class situation
in the locality and then formulated slogans suited to the needs of the
masses. 

4. Here 'the mountains' are the Chingkang mountain area
along the borders of Kiangsi and Hunan Provinces; the 'plains’ are those
in southern Kiangsi and western Fukien. In January 1929, comrade Mao Tse-tung
led the main force of the Fourth Army of the Red Army down from the Chingkang
Mountains to southern Kiangsi and western Fukien in order to set up two large
revolutionary base areas. 

5. The "Book of documents" consisted of the resolutions
adopted at the Sixth National Congress of the Communist Party of China in
July 1928, including the political resolution and the resolutions on the
peasant question, the land question, the organization of political power,
etc. Early in 1929 the Front Committee of the Fourth Army of the Red Army
published these resolutions in book form for distribution to the Party
organizations in the Red Army and to the local Party organizations.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Decree Regarding Marriage






DECREE REGARDING MARRIAGE





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  DECREE REGARDING MARRIAGE


January 28, 1931

[This is the full text of a decree of the First session of the
Central
executive committee of the Chinese Soviet Republic, entitled
‘Provisional
Marriage Regulations’.]
  

Under feudal domination, marriage is a barbaric and inhuman Institution.
The oppression and suffering borne by women is far greater than that of
man.
Only the victory of the workers' and peasants' revolution, followed by
the
first step toward the economic emancipation of men and women, brings
with
it a change in the marriage relationship and makes it free. In the
Soviet
districts, marriages now are contracted on a free basis. Free choice
must
be the basic principle of every marriage. The whole feudal system of
marriage,
including the power of parents to arrange marriage for their children,
to
exercise compulsion, and all purchase and sale in marriage contracts
shall
henceforth be abolished.

Although women have obtained freedom from the feudal yoke, they are
still
labouring under tremendous physical handicaps (for example the binding
of
the feet) and have not obtained complete economic independence.
Therefore
on questions concerning divorce, it becomes necessary to protect the
interests
of women and place the greater part of the obligations and
responsibilities
entailed by divorce upon men.

Children are the masters of the new society. Under the old system little
attention was paid to children. Consequently special regulations have
been
established concerning the protection of children.

These present regulations are hereby made public and shall enter into
force
as of 1 December 1931.


MAO TSE-TUNG

Chairman of the Central Executive Committee

HSIANG YING

CHANG KUO-TA'O Vice-Chairmen 28 Jan. 1931


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## A Letter from the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army to Our Brothers the Soldiers of the White Army on the Subject of the Forced Occupation of Manchuria by Japanese Imperialism 






A LETTER  THE CHINESE WORKER'S AND PEASANT'S RED ARMY TO
   OUR BROTHERS
  THE SOLDIERS OF THE WHITE ARMY ON THE SUBJECT OF THE FORCED OCCUPATlON
  OF MANCHURIA BY JAPANESE IMPERIALISM





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  A LETTER  THE CHINESE WORKER'S AND PEASANT'S RED ARMY TO OUR
  BROTHERS
  THE SOLDIERS OF THE WHITE ARMY ON THE SUBJECT OF THE FORCED OCCUPATlON
  OF
  MANCHURIA BY JAPANESE IMPERIALISM


September 25, 1931
[This is the full text of a proclamation disseminated in
1931]
  
 

Soldiers, Our Brothers!

Do not the Kuomintang militarists frequently tell you that it is your
responsibility to 'defend the country and protect the people' ? But
look,
at present Japanese imperialist troops have already occupied all the
most
important cities of Manchuria. They have massacred the toiling masses of
workers and peasants in Manchuria and our soldiers with guns, cannons,
and
bombs , and already regard Manchuria as their colony. May I ask: How are
the Kuomintang militarists carrying out their responsibility to
‘defend
the country and protect the people'? What do they tell you now? 

Confronted by such violent behaviour on the part of Japanese
imperialism,
the Kuomintang militarists tell you ‘we must not resist’, they
tell you ‘reasonable people should submit to violence’; they
ask
you to stretch out your neck and let the Japanese imperialist robbers
butcher
you; they ask you to submit peacefully and to become ‘men without a
country', slaves of Japanese imperialism. From this you can see that the
Kuomintang militarists can only toady and capitulate to imperialism, can
only act as the running dogs of imperialism. They cannot 'defend the
country'
nor can they 'protect the people' .

And yet, for the sake of enlarging their own spheres of influence, and
of
exploiting and butchering the Chinese people on a still larger scale,
the
Kuomintang militarists have, year after year, carried on a confused
military
struggle among themselves. And in the name of these wars among
militarists,
they bravely urge you to go to the battlefield to kill your own
brothers,
to destroy the lives and property of the people; they levy vexing and
irregular
taxes, impress men into coolie service and requisition horses; they suck
the last drop of blood of the toiling masses; they butcher the
revolutionary
workers and peasants; they force people to grow opium to poison the
masses;
they have created calamities (floods, drought, and famine) without
precedent
throughout China; in exploiting and butchering the masses they have
shown
great resolution and courage!

Especially when the masses of workers and peasants of our soviet area
arose
on their own initiative and drove out all the imperialists, overthrew
the
rule of the Kuomintang, confiscated all the land of the landlord class,
enforced
the eight-hour day, created the Workers and Peasants' Red Army and
established
the Soviet Government of the workers, peasants, and soldiers, all the
militarists
of the Kuomintang were mortally offended and manifested their resolution
and courage. Once, twice, three times, they attacked us with the aid of
the
imperialists; they used airplanes, bombs, poison gas, cannons, and
machine
guns to butcher the people of the soviet area. If we do not destroy them
root and branch, they will definitely not leave us alone, although their
attacks have all been defeated through strenuous effort by us and by
masses.
They are also extraordinarily brave in attacking the people’s
soviet
political power and the people's Red Army.

Soldiers, our brothers! You have had enough of the deception and
oppression
of such militarists. Think for a moment. Why do you risk your lives on
behalf
of these militarists? Can you say you do so in order to live and feed
your
families? In reality you yourselves often do not receive a copper of
pay.
You yourselves have neither enough to eat nor warm clothing. How can you
feed a family? Your superior officers treat you like cattle, like cannon
fodder; they want you to risk your lives to massacre your own worker and
peasant brothers so that they can rise in rank and enrich themselves.

Soldiers, our brothers! You must think of another way out. There is a
way
out for you -- revolution! You now have guns and cannons in your hands.
First
kill your reactionary superior officers then unite with the workers,
peasants,
and all the toiling masses of your area to overthrow the fucking
Kuomintang
Government [Kuomintang ti tao cheng-fu]; confiscate the land of
the
landlord class and distribute it among the poor peasants, confiscate the
food and the houses of the wealthy and distribute them among the poor;
let
the workers do only eight hours of work a day; then, organize yourselves
to run your own affairs. In this way, you will have created a government
of the workers, peasants, and soldiers, that is, a Soviet Government.
You
will have become the armed force of the workers and peasants — the
workers'
and peasants' Red Army. If there is a Soviet Government and a Red Army
near
your garrison area, then when you have either taken as prisoners or
killed
your reactionary superior officers, present yourself there to join the
Red
Army. Only the Soviet Government and only the Red Army can protect the
interests
of the workers, peasants, and soldiers, overthrow the Kuomintang,
overthrow
imperialism, and really defend the people.

Soldiers, our brothers! Turn your guns in the opposite direction and
fight
to overthrow imperialism and the Kuomintang, which exploit, oppress, and
butcher the Chinese labouring masses; fight to establish the Soviet
Government
and the Red Army of the workers, peasants, and soldiers! We your
brothers,
the hundreds of thousands of soldiers of the Red Army, truly welcome you
to our ranks.

Down with imperialism and the Kuomintang!

Establish the Workers', Peasants', and Soldiers' Soviet Government!

Long live the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army!

Long live the victory of the Chinese Soviet Revolution!


Commander in Chief of the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army and
Commander
of the First Army:

CHU TE

Chief of the Central Political Department of the Chinese Workers' and
Peasants'
Red Army:

MAO TSE-TUNG

Commander of the Second Army of the Chinese Workers' and Peasants’
Red
Army:
HO LUNG

Commander of the Third Army of the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red
Army:

P'ENG TE-HUAI


General of the Third Army of the Chinese Workers’ and Peasants' Red
Army:

HUANG KUNG- LUEH

25 September 1931


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The League of Nations is a League of Robbers! 







THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS IS  A  LEAGUE  OF  ROBBERS!



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS IS A LEAGUE OF ROBBERS! 


October 6, 1932

[Extracted from. a telegram of the Chinese Soviet Government. Dated 6
October 1932]
  

Workers, peasants, and soldiers of all China! Exploited masses of the
whole
country!

The Provisional Central Government of the Chinese Soviet Republic long
ago
told the popular masses of the whole country that the League of Nations
is
a League of Robbers by which the various imperialisms are dismembering
China.
The principal task of the Lytton Commission of Enquiry sent to China by
the
League was to prepare the dismemberment of China and the repression of
all
the revolutionary movements that have raised the flag of the Chinese
Soviets.

Now the Commission of Enquiry of the league of imperialist robbers
—
the Lytton Commission — has already published its report regarding
the
dismemberment of China. This report is an admirable document shown to
the
Chinese popular masses by the imperialists regarding the dismemberment
they
propose to inflict on China, and yet the Kuomintang, which is selling
out
and dishonouring the country, as well as the government which is the
emanation
of the Kuomintang, have accepted it completely ! ....

The Lytton Report is the bill of sale by which imperialism reduced the
Chinese
people to slavery! The Soviet Government calls on the popular masses of
the
whole country to participate in an armed uprising under the direction of
the Soviet Government, to wage a national revolutionary war in order to
tear
to shreds the Lytton Report, and to oppose all the new projects of the
imperialists for dismembering China, repressing the Chinese revolution,
and
attacking the Soviet regions and the Soviet union. Let us hurl out of
China,
Japanese imperialism and all other imperialisms in order to obtain the
complete
liberation and independence of the Chinese people! Let us defend the
Soviet
Union with arms in our hands, let us establish a close alliance between
the
toiling masses of China and of the Soviet Union.

The Soviet Government proclaims to the workers, peasants, and soldiers
of
the whole country, and to all the exploited popular masses, that if we
really
want to wage national revolutionary war and oppose the dismemberment of
China
by the imperialists, we must first overthrow the reactionary domination
of
the Kuomintang, these scavengers who pick up the scraps of the
imperialist
dismemberment of China, and who are repressing the national war! ....


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Preliminary Conclusions of the Land Investigation Campaign








PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS OF THE LAND INVESTIGATION CAMPAIGN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS OF THE LAND INVESTIGATION CAMPAIGN


August 29, 1933

[This is a translation from. the document in Tou-cheng (Struggle), No.
24, August 29, 1933.] 
  

1. THE GREAT VICTORY


 

Under the call of the party and the Central [Soviet] Government the land
investigation campaign has been unleashed widely. If we assume that the land
investigation campaign in the past was merely in the initial stage, then
the land investigation of eight counties during June has achieved
more than what has been accomplished over the half year since winter. Generally
speaking, in the eight counties that have held meetings, the land investigation
campaign has advanced to a new phase having become a broad mass movement.
Achievement in two counties, Juichin and Posheng are the greatest, and they
have searched out two thousand and several hundred households of landlords
and rich peasants, while the counties, Shengli, Yutu, Which'ang, Tingtung,
Ch’angting, Shihch'eng and Nighua, all have achieved initial results.
In all the districts and hsiang that have achieved results in the
land investigation a broad mass struggle has been unleashed. Many stalemate
situations which prevailed in the past in the soviet work and in the party
work have now become active. Many undesirable elements in the Soviets have
been washed out, and the counter-revolutionary elements who were hidden in
the countryside have been dealt with severe punishments. In a word, the feudal
remnant forces have suffered disastrous defeat before the broad masses. On
this basis various activities are ever more unfolded. In the regions where
some results were achieved in the land investigation, the expansion of the
Red Army and local armed forces, the promotion of economic construction bonds,
and the growth of cooperatives, as well as the programs of culture building
like clubs, evening classed, and primary schools, all have gained extremely
great achievements and all the work is being carried through ever more smoothly.
Based on the activeness of the masses, large numbers of activists have joined
the party on their own, and are drawn into the soviet’s work. The best
example is Jentien District of Juichin. With the assistance of the Central
Government Work Corps the land investigation campaign in Jentien has spurred
the masses of the entire district who have in fifty-five days, thoroughly
stamped out the feudal remnants, searched out some three hundred landlord
and rich peasant families, twelve counter-revolutionaries, for execution
and suppressed counter-revolutionary activities; they have arrested among
the soviet war personnel, the class heretics who have sneaked into the [district]
soviet. The entire district has searched out a land of 22,000
mou (mou - 0.0614 ha) and some 20,000 toiling
masses in the district have each acquired in average an additional land of
one mou and two mou and were distributed countless belongings
of the haoshen and landlords. Relying on the unprecedented height
of mass activism, they have expanded the Red Army [detachments] in fifty-five
days by some 700 people, who have joined the Juichin Model Division, without
a single person deserting. They have saved grains, to sell to the Red Army,
which amounted to some 1900 tan. No other district of the whole county
can match it. At the instance of various hsiang the entire district
assumed the promotional sale of economic construction bonds worth 40,000
yuan. Landlord fines and rich peasant taxes which were collected totalled
7,500 yuan and those that can be continually raised will be 10,000
yuan. Cooperatives have grown rapidly and the institutions of culture
and education such as clubs, study classes, evening classes also have increased.
The number of party members has expanded and the leadership of the party
has been strengthened. The labour union work, too, has moved forward. The
entire district has transformed, to breath a fresh spirit. From one of the
backward district of Juichin, it has altered its status in fifty-five days
and became a first rate district comparable to Wuyang. We now want to ask:
Why has Jentien District achieved such a great result? That we should point
out: because of their understanding of the import of the task of land
investigation and because of their formula of mobilization, their class line
and their mass work, which have been resolutely carried out according to
the correct directives of the Central Bureau [of the Soviet Areas ] and the
Central Government, they have performed a genuine Bolshevik work. In the
way of appreciating the task, they were aware that the land investigation
campaign and the revolutionary war are closely linked together. Hence, they
have carried through this task in earnest, firmly grasped the leadership
of the land investigation campaign, and developed the local work systematically.
In the way of the mobilization formula, they firmly grasped -the work of
the most and relatively backward seven hsiang among the eleven
hsiang of the entire district. In these seven hsiang Soviets
they mobilized the labour unions, poor peasant corps and other mass organizations
through which they went out to mobilize the broad masses. In the way of the
class line they resolutely executed the tactic of relying on the hired hands
and poor peasant in alliance with the middle peasants, thus broadly developing
the poor peasant corps. They explained that land investigation is not land
distribution and that class examination is not to examine the class of the
middle and poor peasants and hired hands. The work of "class talk" has been
done very sufficiently. When the landlords and rich peasants of Wofeng
hsiang intimidated the middle peasants and drove a section of them
into panic, our comrades paid a visit to several middle peasants and talked
to them individually. After they had relayed [the talk] to other middle peasants,
the middle peasants of Wofeng hsiang began to quiet down immediately.
Actively supported by the land investigation policy of the [hsiang]
Soviet they [the middle peasants] have moved into a joint attack on the
landlords and rich peasants, from whom they have endured extortions previously,
along with the poor peasants and hired hands. Comrades in Jent'ien District
have once incorrectly classified the status of several peasant families but
they have promptly corrected the mistake. As for directing the mass work,
they first of all conducted widespread propaganda. What they held was not
a district-wide or hsiang-wide meeting but a village or residence
meeting. Thus they got access to the broader masses for whom they have repeatedly
conducted propaganda and agitation. Therefore, the masses of the entire district
have come to understand clearly that the landlord investigation and class
examination are their own responsibility and that they are for their own
interests. They then went on to investigate class status, they spurred many
people to go out to investigate, gathering data in detail on each status
was decided first through the analysis of the land investigation committee,
which was then referred to the poor peasant corps for discussion and
confirmation. It was further sent to the District Soviet for approval. Again,
it was sent back to the concerned village to hold a meeting for further
explanation and approval by a show of hands, and then the confiscation was
executed. In distributing the property as well as the land, all the working
personnel understood that they ought to be exemplary, not to take things
but to distribute them entirely among the masses, allocation more to the
village directly involved in the confiscation, and less to other villages.
Thus they obtained complete satisfaction from the masses. The land was also
promptly distributed. While the land elsewhere was distributed only after
a prolonged delay, there was no such a phenomenon in Jent’ien District.
Hence, it promptly spurred the masses. Their method of first breaking into
large and backward villages, was also correct. They had no fear of these
large villages, nor did they employ barbarous methods to deal with them.
What they did with regard to the large villages was to concentrate fire power
on them, making more and more propaganda beginning with local activists,
to unit and educate them, and through them they reached out to other masses.
With great patience they went on to carry through the village, the work of
this nature. In appearance it looked tedious but in practice it was fast.
In a period of fifty-five days they have spurred without exception all the
large backward villages of Jent’ien District and in a very short time
stamped out backwardness of these villages. They could not break into a village
of Pok’ang hsiang. There were previously two "big
tigers" who were restive all the time. They took a different method. First
they captured these two rascals and convicted them in circuit court held
in the locality. With the masses’ enthusiastic support they were executed
by a firing squad. Thereupon the mass struggle became intensive like a violent
fire. They held ten mass tribunals and three circuit courts. All these followed
the extremely broad mass line with many residents of the
hsiang attending and other hsiang 
sending representatives from each village - a small hsiang
 sending a score of people or so, a large hsiang
forty to fifty people. Therefore, every public trial and the result
of a tribunal were all at once relayed to the hsiang 
and all villages of the entire district. It enabled them not only to punish
or execute individuals who deserved it, but also to think immediately that
the same dealing will have to be accorded to similar evil doers in their
own locality. The land investigation campaign in Jent’ien District can
truly be regarded as a model for all the Soviet Areas! The work in Chiupao
District of Juichin has achieved an extremely great result. They first firmly
grasped three hsiang to work on. They called members
of the land investigation committee of each hsiang to
attend a three-day training session in the District Soviet, where the
mobilization formula, the class line, and the method of winning the masses
were clearly discussed. They initiated a measure for the problem of confiscation
and distribution. Their measure has been that, in confiscation a landlord
household, they called upon the masses of the village and the household to
go together to a mass meeting where a confiscation and distribution committee
was selected. Under the surveillance of the masses they proceeded to the
confiscation, piling up the confiscated items on the terrace. Again with
the masses’ consent, they immediately distributed them to the masses
who deserved. Edible items also called for disposal, that is, letting the
people have a hearty eating together, slaughtering hogs and cooking rice.
This measure in Chiupao District has scored the maximum effectiveness. Since
their confiscation and distribution committee was not a standing organization
but a provisional one, it has greatly enhanced intimate relations with the
masses (with regard to the confiscation and distribution of land, it was
still assumed by the regular land committee). It did not require all the
items to be carried to the hsiang soviet nor did it have to concentrate
on a certain number of households only before taking up the distribution
in others. It has thus avoided the shortcoming of being procrastinated and
things being stolen away in the meanwhile. Like the class line and the work
method in Chiupao District they were also generally correct. Therefore, they
could spur the broad masses to commence the class examination on their own.
They have carried it through in such a way that not a single landlord or
rich peasant came to the hsiang Soviet or District Soviet
to dispute his status; it was completely different from the land investigation
of the past. In the past there were after all many landlords and rich peasants
who had been classified, came to the Soviet for nuisance, arguing that they
had been incorrectly classified. Not only the persons themselves but also
even a hsiang representative and the man in charge of
the poor peasant corps came on their behalf of testify. This time, naturally,
not only did they make no nuisance, but they could not do so even if they
wanted to. Not a single person of the clans and relatives came to their
assistance. There was no possibility for them to make fuss as their power
was shorn off. This even proves that Chiupao District has been extremely
thorough in spurring the masses. Otherwise, it was impossible to carry it
through to this extent. 

All these glorious exemplary instances (the instances of this type are still
many elsewhere) have given a Bolshevik reply to the call of the party and
the Central Government and have proven the absolute correctness of the directives
of the Central Bureau and the Central Government. Whenever these directives
were completely carried through, great victory was at once won. Whoever betrayed
or ignored these directives, however, he committed mistakes in his work,
achieved little or no result. Let me prove it again with facts.


2. SOME PLACES HAVE GIVEN UP THE LEADERSHIP OF THE LAND
  INVESTIGATION CAMPAIGN


In the combat task of the land investigation campaign, after the Central
Bureau issued the resolution on the land investigation, after the Central
Government decreed the land investigation, and after the Eight-County Conference
on Land Investigation was convened, the land investigation campaign in various
counties has not spread to all the places. For instance, the result of the
land investigation in the entire province of Fukien was comparable only to
that of one county alone i.e. Posheng. The result even in each of the counties
Shengli, Yutu, Huich’ang, and Shihch'eng was comparable only to that
of one or two best districts of Juichin [County]. Many land investigation
committees in various districts, as well as a few counties, have not firmly
grasped the work of a [district-wide or] county-wide land investigation
(Huich'ang, Yutu, Shihch’eng, and Ninghua). In many districts and
hsiang land investigation committees, district and
hsiang[soviet] chairmen did not assume leadership on the plea of being
preoccupied elsewhere and left the land investigation unattended. As for
the Party's leadership in the land investigation, in places where achievements
were made in land investigation it has been clearly demonstrated that the
party's leadership role has been resolute. The majority of the rank and file
of the party has engaged in numerous combat programs with Bolshevik bravery
under the leadership of the branch and district committees. In places where
little or no achievement was made, however, it has been demonstrated that
the party organs have ignored the land investigation campaign. For instance,
after the Central Bureau's resolution on the land investigation was issued,
the Huich’ang County Committee has not even once discussed the land
investigation work for nearly two months. Not until the end of July did it
hold a meeting to discuss the land investigation. The Hsiahsiao District
Committee of Juichin [County] has entirely left the land investigation campaign
unattended over a period of time. Ward committees of Juichin City, though
held a meeting once, did not push forward the suburban branches to head the
leadership of land investigation, while each branch did not hold any meeting
on the land investigation campaign. At other places like Yutu, Shengli,
Shihch’eng, and Ninghua, the county committees and many district committees
have not likewise exerted real efforts at paying attention to the land
investigation work. The party and the Central Government stated that : "The
land investigation campaign has become a struggle to spur the masses and
deeply penetrate the rural classes and a powerful method to thoroughly resolve
the land question and purge the feudal and semi-feudal [forces]" (the Central
Bureau’s Resolution); that "the land investigation campaign is the task,
which the soviets in various places cannot allow to relax for a moment" (the
Central Government's Decree ); and that "the land investigation campaign
is a most Principal link' of the present work" (Conclusion of the Eight-County
Conference). Nevertheless many of our comrades stated that they.... "were
very busy and have no time to attend to the land investigation campaign."
The Party Resolution stated: "To handle the land investigation campaign with
a perfunctory attitude of bureaucratism and formalism is most harmful."
Notwithstanding, these comrades handled the land investigation campaign with
the style of bureaucratism.


3. IN CERTAIN PLACES THE PARTY HAS SURRENDERED TO THE LANDLORDS
  AND RICH PEASANTS


In places where the land investigation campaign has been unleashed, there
are yet many individual but serious mistakes. That is to say, in these local
Party organs and soviets there appeared frequently some individual comrades
who have manifested their opportunistic vacillations in the land investigation
campaign which is a violent class struggle. Mainly, when the land investigation
campaign was undergoing violent development they could not forsake clannish
and parochial relations and covered up the landlords and rich peasants of
the same clan and the same village, or they made an incorrect analysis of
class status by classifying a landlord as a rich peasant and a rich peasant,
a middle peasant Some comrades working in the tribunal department have accepted,
out of their extreme inadvertence, slanderous charges against those who were
active in the land investigation, made by the landlords and rich peasants
in the false name of the masses. On the other hand, we had some comrades
in the security bureau as well as the tribunal department who could not keep
up with the masses in pushing forward the struggle for class examination
and in suppressing the counterrevolutionaries vigorously. Even when the masses
made a request for arrest and execution by a firing squad of the landlords
and rich peasants who had resisted the land investigation, some of them did
not honor their request. For instance, the tribunal department of Juichin
made many mistakes like this.


4. THE TENDENCY TO ENCROACH UPON THE MIDDLE PEASANTS IS THE
  MOST SERIOUS DANGER


The tendency of "left" opportunism occurred again in very many places during
the land investigation of July. What should be pointed out emphatically here
is the tendency to encroach upon the middle peasants, though it was clearly
stated in the Central Bureau's Resolution that: "Special attention must be
focused on the alliance with the middle peasants who will be the broadest
basic masses in rural soviets after the revolution. All our treatments and
policies must win their approval and support. Every decision of the poor
peasant corps and the soviet must have the support of the middle peasantry,
secured through a village or residence meeting. All the voices of the middle
peasant masses must be heard with care, and any attempt to encroach upon
the interests of the middle peasantry must be severely dealt with". In the
summary of the Eight-County Conference it was pointed out that: "The aim
of the land investigation is to examine classes and not to redistribute the
land", "alliance with the middle peasantry should start with non-encroachment
of the interests of the middle peasants", "in the beginning of the land
investigation we should make widespread propaganda to the effect that the
soviet policy is to ally with the middle peasantry, not to encroach upon
them. In the process of land investigation we should carefully determine
the uncertain elements between the middle peasants and the rich peasants
as not to misplace them." But these directives were not heeded by comrades
in many places. The land investigation in the confines of Juichin, once under
way, has proceeded to examine the middle peasants, house by house and
mou by mou so much so that it drove them to panic. In the end
they rushed to the soviet to ask for reclassification of their status into
poor peasants. They argued that: "To be a middle peasant is very dangerous,
for one would become a rich peasant if stretched. Change to a poor peasant,
for it is a bit far way from becoming a rich peasant." Does not such a despairing
voice merit our attention? Comrades in Yangku hsiang of Huangpo District
have told the masses: "Class examination is not for examining others, but
only to examine the middle and rich peasant and landlord classes". Comrades
in T'aching District have investigated so exhaustively by putting up markings,
that it has caused the same panic among the middle peasants. In the Conclusion
of the Eight-County Conference it was already stated that such an idea as
to assume that the land investigation is one of putting up markings is not
correct." However, these comrades did not pay heed to it at all. This method
of such an exhaustive investigation by markings has appeared in every county.
this is an extraordinarily serious situation. They have mixed up the land
investigation for the land distribution. But if this method is to be employed
in the land investigations campaign it would confound the objective of the
struggle in the villages. In the past we pointed out that: " Land investigation
and land distribution must be strictly distinguished. Such a distinction
is to be made not only for consolidating the land ownership of peasants so
as not to cause panic out of the ill-defined land distribution, but also
for victory in the struggle for class Examination. We must concentrate all
our energy, particularly in alliance with the middle peasants, to cope with
the resistance of the landlords and rich peasants. In such an event we should
not allow any dispute to take place within the ranks of peasants themselves"
(Conclusion of the Eight-County Conference). Such a tactic is a most important
part of the whole strategy in our leadership of the struggle of land
investigation. Nevertheless it was what many comrades had still neglected.
Such a negligence cannot be tolerated again, even for a moment. Those who
have been admonished but still deliberately continue these mistakes, must
be meted out with severe punishments by the higher soviet of the locality.
We need to wage thorough struggle within the party and youth league against
the idea and action of any party or youth league members who encroach upon
the interests of the middle peasants and violate the strategy of alliance
with the middle peasants. In places where mistakes are already committed
by confiscating, for example, the property and land of the middle peasant,
the soviet personnel should publicly admit their mistakes to the middle peasants
in the locality and should redeem them forthwith. That Hsiangkuo County
reinstituted many lands of the middle peasants last year, thus to win their
satisfaction, is a very valuable lesson.

 

5. CLOSED-DOOR-ISM OF THE POOR PEASANT CORPS AND ITS NEGLIGENCE
  OF THE LEADERSHIP ROLE OF THE HIRED HANDS ARE WRONG


"Poor peasant masses are the pillars of the party and the proletariat in
the countryside and are the resolute supporters of a thoroughgoing execution
of the land revolution" "To rely on the poor peasants" is one of our important
policies in the land investigation and in all the struggles for land, the
poor peasant corps is the organization that plays an extremely important
role [here]. The Eight-County Poor Peasant Corps Representatives' Conference
has already pointed out that the past tendency of closed doorism of the poor
peasant corps was wrong, and that the system of introduction should be discarded,
and that the door should be kept wide-open to the poor peasants and workers
so that they, male and female, old and young, can all apply and join. In
many places, however, the old method is still being followed and remains
unchanged; without introduction one still cannot join the poor peasant corps.
Worse still, when non-member poor peasant masses in T'aching District of
Juichin had rushed to attend a poor peasant corps meeting, the man-in-charge
of the corps simply refused to admit them. In Chuchajen District Of Posheng,
the poor peasant corps did not admit even a single person during the month
of July. In all the districts and hsiang where the land investigation
has gained results, the poor peasant corps has developed broadly and in places
where the land investigation has gained no or little result, the phenomenon
there is that the poor peasant corps is in the state of closed doorism. Likewise,
the great leadership role of the hired hands in the land investigation campaign
was not appreciated by many comrades. The Party Resolution stated: "The masses
of the hired hands, who are brothers of the urban proletariat in the countryside,
are the vanguard of the land revolution. Hence, the working personnel in
the soviets must maintain close contact with the [ rural] labour unions through
which activism of the masses of the [ rural ] workers can be developed and
organized in order to make them the vanguard of the land investigation campaign.
" Our Comrades who have carried work according to this directive are still
few in number. The principal method here is to have the rural workers join
up the poor peasant corps and set up within it individual small groups of
workers. Through these workers' small groups [hsio-tsu] we should
go out to unite poor peasant activists, develop the poor peasant corps, and
promote advancement of the land investigation campaign. The experience in
Shanho hsiang of Huangpo District is valuable. When our comrades there
twice failed to convene a poor peasant corps meeting, they held a joint meeting
of the rank-and-file members of the agricultural labour union and the handicraft
labour union and spurred a few dozen workers to arise actively so that they
each bring a poor peasant to join the poor peasant corps. On the following
day the poor peasant corps again convened a meeting to which all attended
as anticipated, and thus unleashed the land investigation campaign. This
experience in Shanho hsiang should be employed in all the villages.
The high-level leadership organs of the labour unions here should provide
the low-level labour unions with positive leadership so as to regard the
task of land investigation as one of the important tasks of the unions.


6. THE INCORRECT IDEA ABOUT THE QUESTION OF RICH PEASANTS


 

Our entire strategy in the agrarian struggle is to depend on the poor peasants,
to resolutely ally with the middle peasants, to enable the poor peasants
to play the vanguard role, and to unite all the revolutionary forces in order
to eliminate the landlord class and combat the rich peasants. Concerning
the question of rich peasants the party has already correctly stated: "We
must clearly distinguish the landlord from the rich peasant. In the unrelenting
struggle to eliminate the landlord remnants we must under no circumstances
allow any attempt to eliminate the rich peasantry. " During the land
investigation of July, we have not yet found a theory openly advocating the
elimination of the rich peasants but we found the phenomenon in many places
in which a rich peasant element was treated as a landlord thereby confiscating
all his family property. The origin of this mistake is due to the elimination
of labour power of the rich peasant. When we stated that "those who possess
no labour power or only incidental labour power and exploit rent for land
are landlords," in some places those who employed a considerable number of
labouring elements in production, which was [thus] considered a kind of "
incidental labour power," were construed as landlords. In some places the
rich peasants who concurrently practiced usurious exploitation were regarded
as "usurers", such rich peasants were treated in accordance with the measures
of "eliminating usurers." In some places, old accounts were settled by going
back to some years prior to the [1925-271 Revolution; someone who had employed
regular farmhand five to six years or even a dozen years or so before the
Revolution were also regarded as rich peasants; or well-to-do middle peasants
who had employed regular farmhand merely for one or two years and have since
never done so were also thrown into the rich peasant category. Even more
serious was the case in the past in a certain place of Hsiangkuo County.
The method there differentiated the landlords from the rich peasants by the
type and extent of exploitation. Those who practiced three kinds of exploitation
were called landlords, two kinds rich peasants. For instance, if one has
hired regular farmhand, collected rent, and also extended loans, he was in-short
classified as a landlord regardless of how many people there were [then]
in that family who could work. There was also the question of "reactionary
rich peasants " which turned out to be considerable absurdity in many places.
In Wuyang District there was a rich peasant family who was also a merchant
having seven people to feed. In the past a member of the family who had joined
the A-B Corps was killed two years ago. Because of this, comrades there,
two years later, insisted that they must confiscate the entire [family] property.
In many other places many a similar incident took place. Many of' the masses
demanded punitive measures against those rich peasants who, prior to the
Uprising, had taken part in, not very serious, counter-revolutionary activity,
like participating in the type of "collecting thirty percent rent in grain"(as
in Juichin), and have not since taken part in any counter-revolutionary activity
over the post-Uprising years; and some of our comrades wanted, of necessity,
to confiscate their property. Correctly speaking, our measure of dealing
with the [ rich peasant ] elements of this type should be different in tactics
in the consolidated region and in the non-consolidated region and in the
non-consolidated border region. In the border region, unquestionably we employ
a strict method of suppressing all the counter-revolutionary elements including
the rich peasants; in the Central Area it should be determined according
to situations. Those who have committed a serious counter-revolutionary action
prior to the Uprising or those who are still engaged in counter-revolutionary
activity should of course be subjected to resolute confiscation. Others should
not be subjected to confiscation. Except the person in a certain family and
the elements who are directly involved with him in counter-revolutionary
activity, other people should not be subjected to confiscation. Such will
be the correct treatment.

 

7. THE DEPARTMENT OF THE WORKERS' AND PEASANTS' INSPECTION HAS
  NOT ASSUMED ITS OWN RESPONSIBILITY AND COMMITTED SOME MISTAKES


 

Many of our comrades in the department of the workers' and peasants' inspection
do not understand that the duration of the land investigation campaign is
the best opportunity to commence a thorough struggle, to combat bureaucratism,
corruption and passive sabotage, and to drive class heretics out of the soviet
[organs]. Our work on these elements has been extraordinarily inadequate.
Many of our comrades in the department of the workers' and peasants' inspection
have demonstrated, in the face of this violent class struggle, their passivism
and vacillations, and their bureaucratism and formalism. In some extreme
cases, for instance, the chief of the section of the workers' and peasants'
inspection of the Municipal Soviet of Juichin and the chief of the tribunal
section of the Municipal Soviet of Paopi committed an exceedingly serious
crime of corruption [embezzlement of some 1,000 yuan of public funds).
The chief of the section of the workers' and peasants' inspection of Tut'ou
District neither criticized nor arrested the chairman of the District Soviet
who has abandoned and neglected the land investigation campaign. In some
places the prosecution drive of the department of workers' and peasants'
inspection has again gone into another wrong direction by treating the question
of love as decadent and the taking of things of landlords as corrupt. They
proceeded to prosecute these elements even on public trial. In some places
they dismissed those who committed trivial mistakes in their duties, and
they did not initiate self-criticism systematically to commence a thorough
struggle. They spared themselves with this arduous work and substituted a
simplified punitism for it. Needless to say, those among the working personnel
of the soviets who committed chronic and serious ,mistakes should be washed
out resolutely, but to dismiss from duties those, whose mistakes did not
reach this extent is an excess. As to the question of class heretics, it
generally concerns only one’s class origin, not one's work; only if
one's background happens to be bad is he called a class heretic, and is dismissed
regardless of how long a history of struggle he has behind him, regardless
of how correctly he has carried on the policy of the party and soviet in
the past and at present. True, we should resolutely wash out those class
heretics and should without question wash out those whose class origin is
bad and whose work is also bad (including the landlords, rich peasants, passive
saboteurs and corrupt and decadent elements ) . But if those who are not
in this category are to be purged, it is an excess.


8. ON THE ART OF LEADERSHIP IN THE LAND INVESTIGATION STRUGGLE


If we understand the task and policy and yet if we do not possess the Bolshevik
art of leading the mass struggle we still cannot commence the land investigation
campaign. In the opening of this essay mention has been made of very many
good examples of leading the struggle in the places like Jent’ien District
and others but in many others places many mistakes were committed over this
question. In some places we did now know how to use various methods to spur
the struggle in the large backward villages where the landlords and rich
peasants were concentrated. That is to say, if such a large village existed,
we should first of all capture the most notoriously bad haoshen and
landlords whom the masses called "big tigers." Only this way can we initiate
the struggle in the locality. Nevertheless our comrades did not do this way.
As regards the best method to spur the mass struggle through the utilization
of the distribution of the confiscated items, they did not know how to use
it in many places. In Watzu hsiang of T'aching District of Juichin
they distributed things, worst of all, only to land investigation cadres
and poor peasants corps members while issuing none to others. The reason
was that if one was not active he does not deserve it. In some places the
distribution of confiscated things was very slow. In some extreme cases even
when a month or so has passed after confiscation, distribution to the masses
was not done. The distribution of the confiscated land was even more slower.
Comrades in quite a few places did not know how to mobilize various departments
of the soviets and mass organizations; nor did they know how to mobilize
the available party and youth league members to play the nucleus leadership
role in the mass organizations, villages and residences. Unable to push forward
the work they said there had been no way out here at the outset. In some
places with the mass struggle for class examination already in full swing,
many people came to report on the landlords and rich peasants and asked for
examination and confiscation. At the time comrades could not immediately
seize on the popular enthusiasm to lead the masses to further the struggle
so as to carry the work of class examination into the villages. In some places,
when the popular zeal in struggle, after a round of investigation, could
not continue to surge upward and reached the state of stalemate, our comrades
were unable to use various methods to invigorate the masses, to make the
struggle continually surge upward leading right up to the stage of eliminating
all the feudal remnants. In many places, when the mass zeal in struggle,
after going through the land investigation campaign, had erupted, they did
not know how to organize the zeal of this sort into other fronts. For instance,
when the masses did secure things and land, they did not then at the mass
meeting or at all other propitious opportunities incite the masses to enlist
in the Red Army, purchase public bonds, to join cooperatives, to accelerate
the harvest work and autumn cultivation, to set up clubs and study groups,
and to develop evening and primary schools. They missed such a best opportunity,
and only until the high-level [organ] pressed for these did they start all
over again to wage propaganda and agitation. Such a leadership of tailism,
following behind the poplar enthusiasm in struggle is the most harmful one
to the revolutionary work. 

In many other places, on the other hand, there occurred again the evil phenomenon
of savagery by a few people. We have emphasized that, in combatting the apathy
in winning a great majority of the masses and the work style of commandism,
we only need to be persevering and enduring with the work of spurring and
winning the masses. Only then can we gain the support of the great majority
of the masses and reach the goal of eliminating the feudal remnants. Such
a mass work is the only guarantee for executing the class line. The land
investigation campaign should commence a broad propaganda in all the villages
and residences, to expound to the masses the need of the land investigation
campaign, explaining that the land investigation is not a land
distribution, and that the class examination is not to examine the
classes of middle and poor peasant and farmhand. Particularly important is
to give a clear analysis as to what constitutes landlords, rich and middle
peasants. Village and residence meetings should not be held only once.
Especially, backward villages and residences should hold more than one meeting
and should not let a single person of the revolutionary masses get away from
listening to our propaganda. To reach this goal we should first explain clearly
to all the active elements in the representative council of the hsiang
soviet, labour unions, poor peasant corps, women workers' and peasants'
associations, as well as other mass organizations, through whom we should
wage propaganda to the broad masses. Class examination should be carried
out not by a few people but by sparring many people. Passage of class status
should be made not merely by the poor peasant corps, the hsiang soviet,
and the district soviet, but by a mass meeting held in the village or residence
of the confiscates to secure popular approval; only then can confiscation
be carried out. In distributing assets, we should issue them to the people
of the village or residence involved to win popular satisfaction. All this
is to win a great majority of the masses. The working personnel of the party
and soviet should not lose sight of the great majority of the masses on every
occasion and in every work. The masses we should face up to is the great
majority of the masses; the deepening of our work among the masses is to
penetrate the masses in all the villages, large or small, and in all the
cities and towns, large or small. We should strictly combat the mistaken
method of closed doorism and commandism followed by a minority. Our comrades
in many places, however, have never done [their work] this way. In Juichin
[ County ], there are very many districts and hsiang where not one
class discussion has been held with the masses (no analysis has been made
as to what constitutes landlords, rich and middle peasants). In many places
of Juichin and other counties it was discovered that they just set out to
investigate [classes ] in every instance without going through propaganda
so as to drive the landlords and rich peasants to fabricate rumors and cheat
the middle peasants or say that there were very many landlords and rich peasants
in the hsiang or state that there were a few hundred landlord families
who were going to be investigated (Juichin). Furthermore, our comrades did
not know clearly the method of conducting "class talk's" to break up this
kind of rumor. Landlords in Kuangch'an said: "The land investigation is
what the Central Government is going to make those who did not pay debt
in the past, pay their debt to the Central Government". Yet our comrades
did not go out immediately to break and expose such a devilish talk. In Several
hsiang of T’aching District they not only did not wage any
propaganda, but the class examination was undertaken merely by a few people
of :the land investigation committee. Passage of class [status] did neither
go through the mass meeting nor through the poor peasant corps. They said:
"The masses are unreliable and do not know how to analyze classes. To bring
up class status at the mass meeting for passage is to cause dispute. It is
all the more reliable to have it passed by the land investigation committee
alone." This theory of the comrades in T'aching District can truly be a fantastic
story in the whole world! In goodly many places landlords and their properties
were confiscated not in the daytime but in the evening. The only reason was
that they were afraid that the landlords would run way. In one place a mass
meeting was held using the technique of holding an "all-district meeting
but no more than a couple or hundred of people attended. Three people took
turns to speak from the morning to the afternoon not letting the masses take
intermissions, nor letting them drink water or eat. They said that they were
afraid that the masses would run away. Such a barbarous method can also be
a fantastic one of its kind.


9. DEVELOP A TWO-FRONT STRUGGLE TO OVERCOME THE MISTAKES AND
  WIN A THOROUGH  VICTORY IN THE LAND INVESTIGATION CAMPAIGN


 

Undoubtedly the land investigation campaign has been unleashed over vast
areas. However. when this campaign is in progress, when we correctly estimate
the achievement already gained and consolidate the foundation of growth of
the campaign, we should yet realize with vigilance, obstacles to be encountered
in the course of the campaign. Only through the unleashing of the fire power
of the two-front struggle to clear away these obstacles, can we advance the
land investigation campaign even more rapidly. To start the fight against
the Rightist thought, to combat the underestimation of the grave significance
of the land investigation campaign, to combat the compromise and the surrender
to the landlords and rich peasants, and to combat the tailism in leadership
of the mass struggle, are the responsibility of every Communist Party member.
At the same time, attention of all the party members should be focused on
the danger of encroaching on the middle peasants and a "severe blow should
be dealt to any attempt to violate the interests of the middle peasants,"
for this is the sufficiently serious danger which has been manifested in
the present work of land investigation. Incorrect ideas about the rich peasants,
too, will undoubtedly affect the middle peasants. All barbarous acts of
commandism are of the greatest harm to the alliance with the middle peasants.
Only upon elimination of all obstacles in the course of the land investigation
campaign by the fire power of the two-front struggle, the campaign will make
great strides forward, and its thorough victory will be sufficiently assured.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Land Investigation Campaign is the Central Important Task in the Vast (Soviet) Areas






THE LAND INVESTIGATION CAMPAIGN IS THE CENTRAL IMPORTANT TASK IN THE
  VAST (SOVIET) AREAS





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  THE LAND INVESTIGATION CAMPAIGN IS THE CENTRAL IMPORTANT TASK IN THE VAST
  (SOVIET) AREAS


August 31, 1933

[ Taken from Hung-ch’i Chou-Pao (Red Flag Weekly), No. 59, August
31, 1933. ]
  

All the past experiences prove that only through the correct solution of
the land question, only through the resolute class slogan under which the
flame of class struggle in the countryside is whipped up to the highest degree,
can we spur the broad peasant masses to participate under the leadership
of the proletariat in the revolutionary war, in the construction of the Soviet
Areas in the various spheres, and in the building of a firm revolutionary
base to further strengthen the soviet movement and score greater progress
and victory. 

According to the experience in developing the land revolution, the growth
of class struggle in the countryside calls for three general stages to follow,
namely, 1) the stage of land confiscation and distribution, 2) the stage
of land investigation, 3) the stage of land construction . Based on the three
stages of development in the land struggle, there exist generally three types
of regions regardless of any soviet area, namely, 1) the region where the
struggle has deepened, 2) the region where the struggle has relatively fallen
behind, 3 ) the region where the struggle is newly developing.

In the newly developing region, the development of land struggle is still
at the stage of land confiscation and distribution. The central question
at this stage is to overturn by armed power the political power of the landlord
class, to establish a revolutionary provisional political power (the
Revolutionary Committee), to build a local armed force of the workers and
peasants as well as revolutionary mass organizations, to confiscate the land
and property belonging to the landlord class plus the land of rich peasants
to be divided among the hired hands, poor peasants, middle peasants, to give
the rich peasants the poor land, to nullify debts and to burn land titles
and IOUs. Involved in the struggle at this stage is the whole range of struggle
in which the revolution commences battle with the counter-revolution by the
revolution and implementing the disposition of their land and property.

In the region where the struggle has deepened, a firm soviet political power
has been established and local armed forces and revolutionary mass organizations
have developed extensively; the feudal forces of landlords and rich peasants
have been completely defeated and the land has been thoroughly distributed.
The struggle of the peasant masses over the land question has advanced to
the stage of improving the soil and developing soil productivity. Therefore,
the central question here is one of land construction.

In the region where the struggle has fallen behind, its stage of development
is between the two stages mentioned above. It has moved into the period of
a formal political power from that of a provisional political power but it
has not yet reached the period completely consolidating the political power.
Here the open counter-revolutionary struggle of the landlords and rich peasants
have been defeated by the revolutionary masses in the first period. From
that time on, many of these elements would turn about, take off their
counter-revolutionary mask and put on the revolutionary mask. They too approve
the revolution and the land redistribution as well, and call themselves poor
peasants and demand that the land be distributed to them accordingly. They
act actively by virtue of their historical advantage in that "come to think
of talking, they can talk; come to think of writing, they can write." Therefore,
during the first period they have taken advantage of the opportunity to snatch
away the fruit of land revolution. Facts in many places proved that they
are dominating the provisional political power by sneaking into the local
armed forces and manipulating the revolutionary organizations to get more
and better land than what the poor peasants have obtained. Having moved into
the second, some of those sham revolutionary elements have been washed out
because of the pressure of the upper-level government as well as the advancement
of mass struggle, and because the Revolutionary Committee has been reconstructed
into the soviet, and the mass organizations and local armed forces have undergone
the preliminary reform and further growth. In many places the land has been
divided twice, even three or four times, and the land stolen by the landlords
and rich peasants has been in par liquidated. However, there are still many
class heretics hidden among the soviet mass organizations and local armed
forces. There they "carry Red ribbons to be called comrades," there they
fabricate rumors and hold secret meetings, there they accuse the masses of
"left opportunism," of "random beating of local bullies," and of "public
revenge for private animosity." Or they "speak articulately at a meeting
but carry out none after the meeting." When the struggle becomes violent,
they organize secret counter-revolutionary organizations like the KMT, the
Social Democratic Party, the A-B Corps, and a New Communist Party, as well
as all kinds of things, to subvert the revolution and try to murder revolutionary
activities. In short, the landlord and rich peasant classes suppress the
mass struggle through various methods and attempt to preserve their rights
to political power, land and property and perpetuate their remaining feudal
forces. In these regions serious struggles are being waged between the
revolutionary masses and the landlords and rich peasants. The struggle here,
however, is not like the open struggle between the Red banner during the
first period but a struggle between the revolutionary peasant masses and
the masked landlords and rich peasants elements. The struggle of this kind
has its special difficulty, that is, the peasant masses cannot as nearly
clearly recognize at a first glance hidden counter-revolutionary as the open
counter-revolutionary. In addition, in view of the various deep-rooted feudal
relations like the clannish ones, it is not an easy matter for the peasants
to attain the degree of class consciousness, so that they can generally recognize
that the feudal remnants should be stamped out eventually. This means that
the Communist Party and the soviet government must certainly be patient in
explaining to the peasants, they must engage in many trying tasks, and that
they must have the correct class line and the [correct] method of the mass
work. The central question here is the question of land investigation and
class investigation. Unless this question is solved, revolutionary activeness
of the peasant masses cannot be developed to the fullest, feudal remnant
forces cannot be completely smashed; nor the soviet can [carry on] the important
tasks as to attain the maximum degree of consolidation and expansion of the
Red Army, to expand the local armed forces and implement land construction
as well as economic construction, and to develop culture and education.
[Otherwise], in no way can all this gain its maximum success. Therefore land
investigation campaign is the most central and most important task in these
regions.

Speaking of the Central Soviet Area [i.e. Kiangsi Soviet], most part of the
Area constitute the regions where the struggle of this kind has relatively
fallen behind, such as the thirteen whole counties, Huich’ang, Hsianwu,
Anyuan, Hsianfeng, Loan, Yuhuang, Kwangch’ang, Shihch’eng, Chienning,
Lich’uan. Ninghua, Ch’angting and Wup’ing, most of the counties
like Juichin. Yutu, Posheng, Shengli. And Yungfeng, portions of the counties
like Kunglueh, Want’ai, Kanhsien, Shanghang, Yungting, and Hsinch’uan
and even the county Hsiangkuo, too has two districts Chunch’un and
Huangt’ang.

All these represent the regions where the land question has not yet been
thoroughly resolved.

The peasant masses of these regions have not yet been spurred broadly; the
feudal forces have not yet been beaten decisively, and in the soviets, in
the mass organizations, and in the local armed forces, there are still numerous
class heretics who are surreptitiously active; there are still numerous
counter-revolutionary secret organizations which are secretly engaging in
the subversion of the revolution. For this reason, war mobilization and economic
and cultural construction all have fallen far behind the advanced areas (nearly
the entire county of Hsiangkuo, section of the counties Shengli, Kanhsien,
Wangt’ai, Kunglueh, Yungfeng, and Shanghang, Huangp’o District
of Posheng, Wuyang District of Juichin, Hsianp’o District of Yutu, Hsinan
District of Yungting, and etc.). These regions occupy nearly eighty percent
of the Central [Soviet] Area in acreage and contain more than two million
people. In this vast area to carry out an all-round deepening land investigation
campaign, to kindle to the maximum degree the flame of class struggle among
the masses of two million people and more, to wage a final war against the
feudal forces to destroy them once and for all, are the tasks that the Communist
Party and the Soviet Government cannot afford to relax for a moment.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Report to the 2nd National Congress of Workers and Peasants Representatives








REPORT TO THE 2nd NATIONAL CONGRESS OF WORKER'S AND PEASANT'S REPRESENTATIVES



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  REPORT TO THE 2nd NATIONAL CONGRESS OF WORKER'S AND PEASANT'S
  REPRESENTATIVES


January 23, 1934

[This is a report presented by comrade Mao before the Second National
Congress of worker’s and peasant’s deputies, held in Juichin in
Kiangsi, on January 23, 1934. Extracted from ‘Chinese worker’s
correspondence’ Shanghai, Vol. 4. No. 11, March 31, 1934. (Please also
see Mao’s article ‘Our Economic Policy’, S.W., Vol. I,
p,141.)] 
  

1. THE PRESENT SITUATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF SOVIET MOVEMENT


Two years have elapsed since the 1st National Soviet Congress
convened. Facts and events of the past two years tell us that the imperialist
Kuomintang rule has further declined in the process of its debacle while
the Soviet movement proceeded and developed vigorously towards its victory!

Now we have arrived at the era when the Chinese Revolution has become further
acute and the whole world is passing its transitory period leading to a new
turn of war and revolution. The opposition of the socialist world to the
capitalist world has become much sharper. On the one hand, the socialist
construction in the Soviet Union and the peace policy of the Soviet Government
have achieved sweeping success, all conducive to the consolidation of the
position of the Soviet Union, in sharp contradiction to the capitalist world
where the eversharpening of the economic crises has led the imperialist powers
to seek a workable solution in the attack on the Soviet Union and China.
Preparations for the intervention against the Soviet Union have never ceased
for a single minute while the imperialist division of China and the intervention
against the Chinese revolution are in full swing.

But the world proletariat revolution and the revolution of the oppressed
nations are extending in every direction precisely under the influence of
the successful socialist construction in the Soviet Union and in face of
the menace of the imperialist crisis and war. A part of the world revolution,
the Chinese revolution, is growing out of the sharpening of the national
crisis, the collapse of national economy, the success of the Soviet movement
at an accelerated pace, resulting in pushing the Chinese revolution to the
foreground in the world revolution.

The dominating factors of the present Chinese situation are: Wide civil war;
death-and-life struggle between revolution and counter-revolution; sharp
contrast between the worker-peasant Soviet power and the Kuomintang power
of landlords and bourgeoisie. On the one hand, the Soviet power is summoning,
organizing, and leading the country-wide masses to fight in national
revolutionary war to overthrow the rule of landlords and bourgeoisie throughout
the country; to oust imperialism from oppression and exploitation by imperialists
and Kuomintang; to save the country from colonization and to build up Soviet
China of complete freedom, independence and territorial integrity.

The growing acute contrast between the two powers cannot but promote the
death-and-life struggle between them to assume more and more violent
proportions,. It had now come to the decisive historical stage of the struggle.
The Kuomintang is launching its 5th offensive against us. The
historical task of the soviet power is : to summon, to organize and to lead
all revolutionary masses both in the Soviet Districts and in other parts
of the country to fight in this decisive war; to mobilize broad worker-peasant
masses to join the Red Army; to improve the political, cultural and technical
levels of the Red Army; to enlarge the local armed forces and partisans;
to agitate for broad partisan wars; to strengthen the concentrated and unified
leadership of the Soviet over all Soviet districts and Red Army; to strengthen
the working speed and quality of the Soviet work in every field; to strengthen
the financial and economical work of the Soviet so as to guarantee the material
demands of the revolutionary war; to develop the class struggle of the working
masses; to organize the revolutionary initiative of the working masses into
the struggle of smashing the 5th offensive of the enemy; to develop
the agrarian revolution of the peasants; to mobilize the broad masses to
fight for the acquisition and protection of land; to call all working and
peasant masses of the Soviet Districts and throughout China to fight with
all efforts and at all cost in the revolutionary war. This is the way to
smash the 5th offensive of imperialists and the Kuomintang, to
save China from being colonized and to attain the soviet victory in one or
several provinces and in the whole territory of China!

2. THE ANTI-IMPERIALIST MOVEMENT


The greatest events in the past two years in China since the inauguration
of the Provisional soviet Central Government were imperialist attacks and
the 4th and 5th offensives waged upon revolution by
counter-revolution. The occupation of Manchuria, Mongolia and North China
by Japanese robbers and the intensified control of Tibet, Sikong, Yunnan,
the Yangtze Valley by British, French and American imperialists, are all
directed by the Imperialists to wreck the Chinese Soviet power and to completely
enslave the Chinese nation as a preliminary step towards the war against
the USSR. The Kuomintang of landlords and bourgeoisie still sticks to its
long followed policy of capitulation while, on the contrary, the anti-imperialist
movement of the country-wide revolutionary masses, with the unprecedented
national crisis before them, has developed with extreme violence.

At the present movement two powers of opposite directions are laid before
the country-wide revolutionary masses: the Kuomintang which surrenders completely
to imperialism with all means suppresses the anti-imperialistic masses; the
Soviet which is determinably anti-imperialistic and does its best to support
and lead the anti-imperialist movement.

In the past two years the Provisional Soviet Central Government has repeatedly
circulated statements denouncing the predatory wars waged by the Japanese
Imperialists and the traitorous capitulation of Kuomintang. On April 14,
1932, the Provisional Central Government formally declared war on Japan and
issued mobilization orders for war against her. The Provisional Central
Government and the Revolutionary Military Council have more than once announced
their readiness to conclude agreement with any armed unit of the Kuomintang
for joint anti-Japanese and anti-imperialist military movement under the
following conditions: (1) Immediate stop of offensive against the Soviet
districts; (2) Guarantee of Civil rights for the masses; (3) Arming of the
masses and creation of anti-Japanese volunteers. The Tankoo Agreement concluded
between the Kuomintang and Japan on May 30, 1933, and Sino-Japanese direct
negotiations since then are policies and actions against the national interests
but repeatedly repudiated by the Provisional Central Government in its statements
made public of late. The Soviet has supported the anti-Japanese struggle
in any and every part of the country. To speak alone of the anti-Japanese
strike of the textile workers in West Shanghai. 1932, the Soviet aided them
with $ 16, 000.

In the Soviet territories, imperialist privileges have been abolished and
imperialist influence wiped out. Imperialist pastors and fathers were ousted
by the masses; estates of the people seized by imperialist missionaries were
returned, missionary schools were turned into Soviet schools. In short, the
Soviet districts in China alone are liberated from the imperialist yoke.

These facts point to one thing; the Soviet is the sole anti-imperialist
government. The Soviet Government wants to make known to the country-wide
masses: the greatest responsibility of the Soviet and the whole masses is
to win victory over imperialists by means of direct war. The fulfillment
of this work depends upon the development of the mass anti-imperialist struggle.
First of all, the lackey of Imperialism, the Kuomintang, should be smashed
because it is the greatest obstacle on the way before the anti-imperialist
Soviet and masses.

3. THE IMPERIALIST – KUOMINTANG OFFENSIVE REPULSED


Because the Chinese Soviet districts are the revolutionary base for the Chinese
anti-imperialist movement, because the Chinese Red Army is the main pillar
of the Chinese anti-imperialist forces, and because the Soviet movement and
the revolutionary war are proceeding violently, the Kuomintang with the direct
help of the imperialists and with all force at its disposal, waged four
offensives and is now waging the 5th one against the Soviet and Red Armies
in an attempt to put down the Chinese revolution and to fulfill its task
of cleaning the ground for imperialism. But every offensive of imperialism
and the Kuomintang ended in glaring failure. The victories of the Soviet
and Red Armies have further confirmed the belief of the country-wide masses
that the Soviet and Red Armies alone are fighting for the national independence
and freedom, and that they are the sole forces for the salvation of China.

The 4th offensive of the enemy began right after the Kuomintang
had surrendered Manchuria to the Japanese and concluded the Shanghai Truce
Agreement of May 5th, 1932. The traitorous Kuomintang did not
mobilize a single soldier to fight the Japanese aggression. On the contrary,
despite the fact that the Soviet and Red Armies have more than once proposed
to conclude an anti-Japanese military agreement with any anti-Japanese troops,
the Kuomintang, led by Chiang Kai-shek, chief of all traitors, concentrated
hundreds of thousands of troops to attack the Hupeh-Honan-Anhui and Hunan-Hupeh
West Soviet districts and forced the Red Armies to withdraw from the cordon
they formed around the district of Wu-Han. On our side, because of some tactical
mistakes, coupled with our reluctance to have a direct clash with a force
of the enemy which was overwhelmingly stronger than ours, the 4th
Red Army Corps was obliged to withdraw from the Hupeh-Honan-Anhui Soviet
district and began the famous expedition to Szechuen where a new and big
Soviet base embracing Tungkiang, Bachun, Nanking, Hsunhan and Suiting has
been created. During the expedition, the 4th Red Army corps had
widely disseminated seeds of the Soviet in the comparatively revolutionary
backward zones of the Northwest where broad revolutionary struggle of the
masses have been brought up to develop. In not more than one year, the
4th Red Army Corps has sovietized more than ten hsien and
called forth leaning of the Szechuen toiling masses and soldiers of the White
troops toward the Soviet revolution. Meantime the 2nd Red Army
Corps which evacuated from the Hung Lake Zone not only has suffered no serious
loss but also gained new success in the Szechuen-Hupeh-Hunan frontier regions
in its operation in coordination with the 4th Red Army Corps.
Even in the Hung Lake zone, Red partisans are still active. In the
Hupeh-Honan-Anhui Soviet district, we did not lose much of our base. On the
contrary, we are now very successful there in the strife to consolidate our
position and to develop partisan wars in the surrounding neighborhood.

As to the Central Soviet District (Kiangsi), it is the location of the Central
Soviet Government headquarters of the country-wide Soviet movement and the
chief target of the offensive of the enemy. Around this district and its
neighbouring Soviet zones the enemy has concentrated most of its forces in
the so-called "Central Government" troops, the units under the command of
militarists Chiang Kwang-lai, Tsai Ting-Kai, together with those under the
command of Kwangtung, Kwangsi, and Hunan warlords. Through one year's hard
struggles, we have gained unprecedented success. The biggest victory was
that we gained in the spring of 1933 when the Red Armies of the Central Soviet
district alone destroyed 23 regiments, 6 battalions and 2 companies of the
enemy and smashed 3 divisions, 12 regiments, 3 battalions and 2 companies
and captured twenty thousand rifles and one thousand machine guns and autorifles.
Particularly in the battles of Tungpi and Hangpi, we annihilated a complete
column of the crack troops of the enemy. These battles ended in the
4th offensive of Nanking with a complete failure to the enemy.

The failure of the 4th offensive of the enemy had brought along
qualitative and quantitative growth of the Red Army. The commanders and fighters
of the Red Army have become more determined politically and more skillful
in military techniques, showing long strides of progress as compared with
the time before the 4th offensive. Moreover, the Soviet territory
has been enlarged. Besides the new Soviet district in Szechuen, we have now
Fukien- Kiangsi province, another new Soviet district in the east part of
Kiangsi, which increased the population of Soviet China by almost one million.
Our old Soviet districts are further consolidated. This has been shown by
the improvement of the Soviet work, by the rise of the militancy of the
worker-peasant masses, by the development of class struggle both in cities
and villages, and by the suppression of the remnants of counter-revolution
in the Soviet districts. This sum-total of the success of the Soviet revolution
has also its influence in the Kuomintang-ruled districts where the struggling
spirit of oppressed worker-peasant masses has been further promoted, the
soldiers and commanders of the White troops have shown their further wavering,
and Chiang Kai-shek himself was even obliged to proclaim his desperate order
of "Death punishment to all who do not fight the 'bandits' but demand to
fight the Japanese."

Since the failure of the 4th offensive, the only manifestation
of the Kuomintang has been to further shamelessly surrender to imperialism.
From the imperialists the Kuomintang has received new loans and consignments
of military supplies. Directly led by the imperialists and with foreign advisers
helping it reorganize its forces (training of new recruits, air forces, and
the Blue Jacket officials), the Kuomintang has been enabled once more to
proceed with its 5th offensive against the Soviet and Red Army.
The struggle of the C.E.C. of the Party, namely, "to make it impossible for
imperialist crisis to seek its way out, or in other words, to struggle for
the independence and freedom of Soviet China." Indeed, the struggle against
the 5th offensive is to determine whether China goes down to complete
independence, freedom. and territorial integrity.

We have acquired all fundamental conditions to win our struggle against our
enemy since our victory over the 4th offensive. We have to point
out that enemy has far more difficulties than we; the wavering of the soldiers
of the White troops; the hatred against the rulers of the workers-peasant
masses together with the broad petty-bourgeoisie in the enemy-ruled districts;
the disintegration of the militarists; the clashes and conflicts among the
imperialists who are supporters of the Kuomintang; the financial and economical
bankruptcy of the Kuomintang. These are all objective conditions that show
the possibility of victory for the revolution.

4. FUNDAMENTAL POLICIES OF THE SOVIET


We get to know its environment, now and past, together with the tasks the
environment calls forth, before we explain the fundamental policies of the
Soviet. The Soviet has grown up from partisan wars and from many isolated
and small districts beyond the boundaries of which is the world of the enemy.
The enemy has been quite busy with the destruction and oppression of the
Soviet. Yet the Soviet has been victorious. It is able to defeat the enemy
and has grown up through its repeated victories over the enemy. This is the
environment of the Soviet. In many respects, the environment of the Soviet
at present is different from that of the past. It has a wider territory,
broader masses and stronger Red Army. It has concentrated many of its scattered
forces (although the work has not been complete). It has been organized into
a state, the Soviet Republic of China, which has now its central and local
organization. The central organ, the Provisional Central Government is the
nucleus of concentrated power depending upon the broad masses and their armed
force - the Red Army. This Government is the power of workers and peasants
themselves. It is the revolutionary workers peasant democratic dictatorship
which is ever enlarging its influence throughout the country by virtue of
the growing confidence of the broad masses in it. Evidently, the Soviet now
no longer has the same environment confronting it as in the partisan war
stage. Yet it still has to face constant warfare which is becoming wider
and more violent. The reason is that the opposition between it and the
landlord-bourgeoisie Kuomintang is growing daily acute and the time has come
when the two contending parties have to fight a decisive battle. In short,
before it there is at present a big scale offensive of Imperialists and the
Kuomintang and that is its environment nowadays.

This very environment determines the tasks of the Soviets. It must do its
best to mobilize, organize and arm the masses, concentrate all of its strength
for the development of the revolutionary war and fight out the other dictatorship
together with the imperialist rule that has acted as the supporter and director
of that other dictatorship. The aim of knocking down imperialism and the
Kuomintang is to unify China, to bring the bourgeois democratic revolution
to realization and to make it possible to turn the said revolution later
to a higher stage of socialist revolution. This is the task of the Soviet.

From this we may understand what the various Soviet policies and tasks are.
They are: to consolidate the victoriously established worker-peasant
dictatorship; to develop this dictatorship to the whole country; to mobilize,
organize and arm the Soviet and country-wide masses to fight in the determined
revolutionary war to overthrew the imperialist Kuomintang rule and to consolidate
and develop the worker-peasant dictatorship; to prepare the present bourgeois
democratic revolution for its turn toward the socialist proletarian dictatorship
in the future. All these form the starting point of the Soviet policies .

  (a) THE ARMED MASSES AND THE RED ARMY.


Let us first speak of the armed masses and Red Army of the Soviet. To fight
against the offensive of the enemy and to wage the revolutionary war, the
first task of the Soviet is to arm the masses and to organize strong and
iron Red Army, local forces and partisans, and provisions, supplies, and
transportation for the war. The Soviet has been successful in its work along
this line during the past two years, particularly during the 4th
offensive and the present determined struggle against the 5th
one.

The formation of the Central Revolutionary Military Council has unified the
leadership over the national Red troops and made the Red forces in every
Soviet district and on any front to be able to fight and to operate in good
coordination under the unified tactics. This is an important turn to convert
the scattered activities of partisan troops into activities of regular and
big scale Red Armies. The Revolutionary Military Council in the past two
years has victoriously led the country-wide Red Armies, particularly those
of the Central Soviet district, in the smashing of the 4th offensive
and in the initial successes of the struggle against the 5th
offensive. The Red Army is now several times bigger than it was two years
ago. This work owes its success to the militancy of the broad worker peasant
masses to join the Red Army, to the improvement of the mobilization methods,
and to the determined execution of the special treatment for the red fighters
by the Soviet. During May, 1933, in the Central Soviet district alone, the
Red Army was increased by twenty thousand new fighters from the various
hsien. This smashed the various opportunistic points of view that
the masses are not willing to join the Red Army or that enlargement of
the Red army cannot be achieved in new Soviet districts. There are many models
of the work to enlarge the Red Army. For instance. in Chankanhsian, Kiangsi,
80 per cent of the men between 16 and 45 and in Shangwanshihsian, Fukien,
88 per cent of them are now serving in the Red Army. In these villages with
the overwhelming majority of the adults going to bravely fight in the
revolutionary war, the daily affairs of farming production are not only not
affected, but also improved and enlarged! Why is that so? The village labour
power has been readjusted and reorganized better, and the difficult problems
confronting the families of the Red fighters have been solved through the
efforts exerted by the Labour Cooperative and Farming Volunteers.

The strengthening of the Red army has proceeded along with its enlargement.
Now the Red army is proceeding to assume the form of ironsides as regular
revolutionary armed forces. The causes are: (1) Growth of the percentage
of worker-peasant toiling masses in it; (2) More worker cadres and universal
practice of political commissioner system; (3) The progress of political
training strengthened the determination of the Red fighters to fight for
the final victory of the Soviet, raised the class-conscious discipline and
increased the relation between the Red Army and the masses; (4) General rise
of military techniques; (5) Better organization increased the organized strength.
These have promoted the fighting strength of the Red Army and made it the
formidable force of the Soviet.

Red Defence and Young Vanguards are ready made reservists for the Red Army
on the fighting front, forces of defence for the Soviet districts and the
bridge that is leading the present voluntary military system to the conscription
system of tomorrow.

Partisan units are creator of new Soviet districts and inseparable detachments
of the main force -- the Red Army. In the past two years more of them are
developed in the various Soviet districts with their political and military
training considerably improved. They have in the past offensives of the enemy
showed marvelous success in their work for the defence of the Soviet districts,
and in their operation to take the troops of the enemy by surprise and to
disturb their rear. Many of their performances were even thought by the enemy
as miracles. Their activities have offered the greatest difficulties to the
enemy in attempting to invade the Soviet districts. This has been particularly
shown in the Central and Kiangsi-Checkiang Soviet districts.

To satisfy the Red Army with supplies and provisions, to organize the military
transportation between the front and the rear and to organize sanitary organs
and hospitals for the Red fighters are all tasks of decisive importance to
the revolutionary war. Since we have not yet captured many central cities
and since the economic blockade of the enemy against us is very strict, there
are numerous difficulties confronting us in our work along this lines. However,
in the past two years the militancy the broad masses in the Soviet district
has guaranteed continued supplies, provisions and transportation for the
Red army. This is also one of our big successes.

The fundamental task of the Soviet is revolutionary war and to mobilize all
mass strength to fight in the war. Around this fundamental task the Soviet
has many urgent tasks. It has to practice wide democracy; to determinably
suppress the counter-revolution under its jurisdiction; to promote class-struggle
of the workers; to promote agrarian revolution of the peasants; to promote
the militancy of the worker-peasant masses under the principle of workers
leading the worker-peasant alliance; to administer the correct financial
and economic policies so as to guarantee the material needs of the revolutionary
war; to wage the cultural revolution so as to arm the heads of the worker-peasant
masses. All these, together with other policies, are but directed to one
goal: to overthrow the imperialist-Kuomintang rule through revolutionary
war, to consolidate and develop the worker-peasant democratic dictatorship
and to be prepared to proceed to the stage of proletarian dictatorship.

  
  (b). SOVIET DEMOCRACY.


The Soviet of the worker-peasant democratic dictatorship is the government
of the masses themselves, directly depending upon them maintaining the closest
relation with them and, therefore, able to operate its maximum strength.
It has already been the organizer and leader of the revolutionary war and
the mass life. Its enormous strength is incomparable to any form of state
in the history. it needs a strong power to cope with its class enemy. But
to the worker-peasant masses it exercises no strong power but wide democracy.
The wide democracy of the Soviet is, first of all, manifested in its election.
The Soviet gives the right to vote to all oppressed and exploited masses
regardless of sex. This right to the worker-peasant masses is unprecedented
in human history. The experience of the past two years tells us that the
Soviet has been very successful in its election. The particulars of the Soviet
elections are as follows: (1) The names of the electors are written on a
big red paper and an election meeting with no exploiters participating in
it takes the place of the general mass meeting of the past. (2) The proportions
of social composition are as follows: one from every fifteen workers and
their family members; one from fifty peasants and poor people; all the city
and village Soviet councils are formed this way. The method guarantees the
leading position of the workers in the worker-peasant alliance. (3) According
to the Election Act proclaimed by the Central Soviet Executive Committee
in September 1933 the electron units for the peasants are villages while
workers have another rule. This makes the election universal among the peasants
while the workers can also elect their best representatives to work in the
Soviet Council. (4) During the two elections in 1932 and the election in
the autumn of 1933 in many places more than 80 per cent of the electorate
joined it. In some places, the sick people and those on defense duty did
not join. (5) In many city or village Soviet councils women form a percentage
of above 25 per cent. In the Soviets of Shangtsaishihhsian and Shiatsaishihhsian,
of Shanhan, in Fukien, the percentages of women are 60 and 66 per cent
respectively. Broad woman masses are now participating in the affairs of
state administration. (7) Before the election takes place the electors have
the chance to hear reports about the past work of the City or Village Soviet
in a preparatory meeting. They are led to led give criticisms of the past
work. This was more universally practiced during the fall election
of last year. All these have helped the masses in getting familiar with the
Soviet election, primary step of state administration, and have guaranteed
the consolidation of the Soviet power.

Next, the Soviet democracy is also manifested in the City and hsiang
councils which form the foundation of the organization of the Soviet. Two
years gives us now better organization of the councils. The characteristics
are as follows: (1) The delegates are scattered evenly to live among the
people the so that they will have the closest relation with them (usually
one delegate leads and lives with 30 to 70 people). This makes the council
not separated from the masses. (2) The delegates are grouped in from 3 to
7 with their fellow-members in the neighborhood having a head who serves
as the a immediate connector between them and the presidium of the council
. The group has the regular task of summoning meetings of the people under
them by order of the presidium to solve problems of minor importance. All
groups in one village have a general head who is responsible for the whole
village This makes the connection between the presidium and the delegates
very close and guarantees strong leadership over the work of each village.
(2) There are various permanent or temporary committees under the City or
hsiang Councils such as Cultural, Irrigation, Sanitary,
Food, Red Army Families Defence, etc., which absorb the active elements among
the masses to work. In this way, the Soviet work is made into the form of
a net and the broad masses can directly participate in it. (4) Election of
City or hsiang Soviet takes place once in six months
and that of province or hsien Soviets once in a year.
This makes it easy for the opinions of the masses to reach the Soviet. (5)
Any delegate who commits serious errors may lose his seat through the suggestion
of ten or more electors, seconded by more than one-half of the whole electorate
or through the resolution of the council meeting.

The City and hsiang Soviets are the foundation for the government
organs of the Soviets above them; they are all formed by the Soviet congresses
and their executives. Government workers are also appointed by election.
If any one is found to be incompetent, he may be recalled by public opinion.
The solution of all problems is based on public opinion. So the Soviet is
really the government of broad masses.

The Soviet democracy is also shown by the fact that all revolutionary masses
are given the right of free speech, free association, free assembly, free
publication and free strike. The Soviet gives them all facilities such as
meeting places, paper, printing shop, and other material needs. Moreover,
to consolidate the worker-peasant democratic dictatorship, the Soviet always
welcomes the supervision and criticism of the broad masses. Every revolutionary
citizen has the right to disclose the error or shortcoming of any Soviet
functionary in his work. Finally, the Soviet democracy is also found in the
division or administrative to hsiang are now smaller
than before. This makes the Soviets of various grades to know exhaustively
the demands of the masses and makes the opinions of the masses to be quickly
reflected in the Soviets.

  
  (c). SOVIET ATTITUDE TOWARD LANDLORD-BOURGEOIS


The Soviet is not democratic to the exploiters – landlord and bourgeoisie
who have been knocked down by the revolutionary masses. The Soviet maintain
a different attitude toward them. Although overthrown, they still have a
deep foundation and their remnants have not yet been wiped out. They have
a superior knowledge and techniques. They are always thinking of the restoration
of their power. Particularly in the course the civil war, they are always
seeking to support the attacking enemies through counter-revolutionary activities
Hence, the Soviet has to curb and oppress them from all sides.

First of all, the Soviet rules the exploiting elements out of the political
power. In the Soviet Constitution, they are all deprived of the rights of
election and military service The Soviet has been ceaselessly engaged in
bitter struggles against the alien elements in the Soviet organs. The past
experience tells us that this task has been very important work of the Soviet
. Secondly, all landlords and bourgeoisie are deprived of the freedom of
speech, publication, assembly and association.

Thirdly, counter-revolutionary activities are under the suppression of the
revolutionary forces and revolutionary courts. The Soviet courts directly
depend upon the mass armed forces, the activities of the State Political
Defence Bureau, and the class-struggle of the broad masses. All these have
offered strict suppression to the counter-revolutionary activities in the
Soviet districts. The well known cases were the suppression by the Soviet
courts of the activities of A-B Corps in the Central and Hunan-Kiangsi Soviets,
of the Social-Democrats in Fukien, of the Re-organizationists in Hupeh-Hunan
west, Hupeh-Honan-Anhui, Fukien- Chekiang-Kiangsi, and Fukien-Kiangsi Soviet
districts and of the Trotskist-Chen Groupings in Hunan-Hupeh-Kiangsi Soviet
district Through these suppressions, the State Political Defence Bureaus
and the Soviet courts have acquired abundant experience and corrected many
errors in the past that were committed through the diversion from the correct
class line. The mass character of the Soviet Court, namely, the suppression
of counter-revolutionary activities by the Soviet courts in coordination
with the me mass struggle ale against counter-revolutionary intrigues, has
been making long strides of progress. The practice of the Traveling Court
is a proof of this.

The Soviet has formally proclaimed prohibition of corporal punishment. In
the Soviet prisons, except for those prisoners who are sentenced to death
punishment, all other prisoners are put under reformatory education; that
is to say, the Soviet policy for prisoners is to train them in the communistic
spirit and with labour discipline. In sharp contradiction to this situation
is the practice in full bloom of medieval tortures in the Kuomintang courts
and prisons. To put own counter-revolutionary intrigues, to keep the Soviet
territory in revolutionary order and to abolish all feudalistic and barbarous
remnants in the field of jurisdiction constitute the aim of the Soviet court.
The improvement of the Soviet in this direction is of
historical significance.

In summary, the Soviet has by far the widest revolutionary democracy for
the broad masses and out of it rises its enormous power -- a power which
is built upon the determined faith and self-conscious needs of the millions
of the worker-peasant masses. Having this power in operation, the Soviet
shapes itself into a dictatorship and organizes the revolutionary war and
the revolutionary court which wage violent attacks upon the class enemy from
all directions. This brings about the enormous function of the Soviet court
in the Soviet territory.

  
  (d). THE SOVIET LABOUR POLICY.


The Soviet, based on the class character of its political power and on its
enormous task of arming the toiling masses to fight out imperialists and
the Kuomintang through a revolutionary war, must initiate class struggles
of workers, defend their every day interests, develop their revolutionary
initiative, organize this initiative in the enormous revolutionary war and
turn the workers into active leaders for the revolutionary war and pillars
for the consolidation and development of Soviet power. Interests of the workers
are completely protected under the Soviet labour policy. The labour situation
under it as compared with that n the past while under the Kuomintang rule,
or with that of the districts now still ruled by the Kuomintang, forms a
sharp contrast which is comparable only to the difference between heaven
and hell. Before the Soviet districts came to exist, that is to say, when
the Kuomintang were the rulers, the workers were slaves of employers. The
long working hours, the meagre wages, the brutal treatment, and the absence
of any legal means whatsoever for protecting the interests of workers are
what will remain permanently in the memory of every worker. All these
disadvantages for the workers still exist in the Kuomintang-ruled districts
and are aggravated . Lately, the real wages of workers in the white districts
have been cut by more than fifty per cent. Cut of production, mass-dismissal,
and lockout, have been the common methods of capitalists to launch attacks
upon their employees. It logically follows that broad workers alone the
unemployed now exceeds 60 per cent. In the Kuomintang-ruled districts, strike
is a criminal act in the eyes of the rulers. In March, 1933, the Kuomintang
authorities at Hankow even proclaimed death punishment for strikers. Whenever
there is a conflict between labour and capital, the Kuomintang never fails
to stand on the side of the capitalist to suppress the workers.

In the Soviet districts these things have been completely wiped out. Under
Soviet power, workers are masters themselves and are leading the broad peasantry
in the enormous task of consolidating and developing the Soviet. Hence the
basic principle of the Soviet labour policy is to protect the interests of
the workers and to consolidate and develop the Soviet power. The Labour Act
proclaimed in December. 1931, was based on this principle. It was revised
and reproclaimed in March, 1933, better applicable to towns, villages, big
enterprises and small ones.

The eight-hour system is now universally observed in the Soviet districts.
There is also a wide practice of labour agreement and collective agreement.
In many urban and rural districts, there are Labour-Inspection offices which
send our inspectors to examine whether the Soviet Labour Act is violated
by employers or not. There is the Labour Court for cases in which the employer
is accused of violating the Soviet Laws. To guard against control of labour
by employers and to work for the interests of the unemployed the Soviet has
the absolute control of employment. All employers must go to the soviet for
hiring workers. Unemployment relief measures are in broader practice. Generally
speaking, unemployed workers can now get concrete relief. Village workers
have their own farming land. The social insurance system is administered
by a Social Insurance Bureau established in the Soviet towns. These are what
the workers cannot get at all in the Kuomintang-ruled districts, but what
the Soviet considers as its big responsibility to fulfill.

Because of the determined execution by the Soviet of its labour policy, the
living conditions of the workers in the Soviet districts are greatly improved.
First of all is the wages. The real wages of the workers of the Soviet
districts has been generally increased as compared with the pre-Revolutionary
period. The following table is a comparison of wages of the workers in Tingchow
before and after the revolution which may be taken as an example:





Maximum 

Minimum 


  Aver.




P-r

A-r.
d .
P-r
A-r
d.
A-r


Fruit workers
$10
monthly
$32
$22
$2
$22
$20
$30


Paper workers
$10
''
35
25
3
31
28
33


Oil workers
6
''
18
12
3
12
9
15


Medicine workers
6
''
18
12
2
26
24
28


Tobacco workers
7
''
36
29
3.5
30
26.5
28


Printers
15
''
36
21
5
28
23
34


Metal workers
6
monthly
18
12
14


16


Dyeing workers
5.5
''
20
14.5
2
18
16
19


Oil- paper workers
5
''
21
16
2
17
15
19


Wine workers
6
''
20
14
3
18
15



Weaving workers
10

35
25
2
31
29
32


Carpenters
0.6
daily
0.8
0.2






Boatmen
14
each travel from 
      Tingchow to Shanghan

$46
$32




[P-r means pre-Revolutionary period; A-r means after the revolution; d-
means difference.]

From this table we can easily see the great difference in the wages of the
workers in Tingchow before and after revolution. The smallest increase is
32 per cent (carpenters) and the biggest is 1450 per cent( weaving workers
). What a contrast it is as compared with the decreasing wages in the Kuomintang
era! In other districts where the employers supply meals to the workers,
the wage level is slightly lower. The wages of a carpenter and mason of Jukin
is now 45 cents a day as compared with 25 cents a day in the pre-revolutionary
period. The increase is 80 per cent.

Wages in the village are also increased. The following table is the comparison
of daily wage scales in cents which prevailed in different periods in Tienchen
district of Kanhsien:


Maximum 
Handicrafts men 
Paper Workers 
Farming hands
Coolies


Pre-rev.
30
40
28
45


Before May 1, 1931
30
40
30
67.5


Now 
35
45
32
96


Difference
5
5
4
51


Average Pre-rev. 
22
22
10
26


Before May 1, 1931 
25
24
15
39


Now 
30
30
20
50


Difference 
8
8
10
24


Minimum Pre-rev. 
10
14
3
10


Before May 1, 1931 
15
21
6
..


Now
20
25
10
20


Difference
10
11
7
10



This is the story of only one village. A similar situation is found in other
villages. As to the wage scale prevalent in the state enterprises, there
has been a general increase of from 20 percent to 40 percent in the past
two years.

Generally speaking the wages of the workers are paid on time. Because of
the superintendence of the Soviet, very few employers delay their wage payments
to workers. Some stubborn capitalists did try to do so, but were brought
under control by the Labour Court.

Concerning the legal al working hour, the 8 hour system has been introduced
to all Soviet cities and towns in the past two years and in the villages
there are but rare cases in which employees work more than eight hours a
day. Employees between the age of 16 and 18 have shorter hours than do adults.

  PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND INFANTS


Equal work, equal pay, rest before and after confinement, prohibition of
infant workers below fourteen years and so on, are in general practice.

As to apprentices, the apprenticeship period is shortened, treatment improved
and feudalistic oppression abolished. The living conditions of apprentices
are increased. For instance, in Kiangsi apprentices receive allowance to
amount of from fifteen to thirty-six dollars annually.

Sanitary conditions and food supplies for the workers in general, and for
the employees of the state enterprises in particular have been greatly improved.
In the cities the workers’ food is rated at least six dollars a month.
In the villages, the farming employees eat the same food as served to their
employers.

The Soviet workers are organized in their strong class trade union which
is the pillar of the Soviet power, burg for the workers themselves and school
in which the broad working masses learn communism. With its interests protected
by the Soviets, the membership of the trade union is ever on the increase.
According to the statistics of the All China Trade Union Federation, the
trade union membership in Central Soviet District, together with its neighbouring
Soviet zones, amount to 229,000. The distribution is al follows: Central
Soviet District 110,000 persons; Hsiang-Kan (Hunan-Kiangsi) 23,000 ; Hsiang-O-Kan
(Hunan-Hupeh-Kiangsi) 40,000; Min-Che-Kan (Fukien-Chekiang-Kiangsi) 25,000;
Min-Kan (Fukien-Kiangsi ) 6 000 ; North Fukien, 5,000. According to statistics
compiled by the Central Soviet District there are 3,676 non-trade union workers
in the said district which means not more than five per cent of the whole
working body. In other words, 95 per cent of the workers in the Central Soviet
District are members in the Trade Unions. In the district of Hsinkuo this
percentage reaches as high as 98 per cent. Can this be dreamed of in the
Kuomintang-ruled districts? Except for U.S.S.R., can this be dreamed of in
any of the imperialist countries?

In short, in the course of only two years, the Soviet Labour Act has been
generally observed in all towns and all villages. In the two years, the
capitalists and the kulaks attempted to resist the Act. But the active struggles
of the working masses, together with the close superintendence of the Soviet,
have frustrated them. In dealing with independent producers and middle peasants
who would have violated the Labour Act in their relation with farming hands
or other employees, the method of convincing them with frank explanations
has been used. All these account for the general improvement of the living
conditions of workers, the development of their militancy in the revolution
and their vital task in the revolutionary war and the Soviet reconstruction.

According to reports from Kun-lu Wantai, Lun-kan, Hsin-kuo, Shien-li, Sikiang,
Yu-tu, Chinwu, Shanghan, Ninhua, Changting, and Hsinchien, out of the 70,580
trade union members in these twelve hsien 19,960 are
now serving either in the Red troops or in the local partisan units forming
28 percent of whole membership, and also 6,752 in various Soviet organs forming
10 per cent. The two make a total of 38 per cent. The remainder amounts to
43,860 persons. It was they who cancelled the 2nd Government Bonds
to the amount of $43,855 and bought the bonds to the amount of $4.5 or the
average. Among them, 12,435 are members of the Communist Party or the Young
Communist League, the percentage being 28 percent.

From these statistics, one learns how ardently the working masses are joining
the Red army, support the revolutionary war and favour the Communist Party.
But these are nothing but the outcome of the work of the Soviet for their
interests and to promote their militancy. Some one said that workers gained
nothing since the revolution, neither have their militancy been promoted.
This is completely a vile slander!

  THE AGRARIAN REVOLUTION


The Chinese Soviet and Red army have grown up from development of the agrarian
revolution, which liberates the, broad peasantry from the brutal oppression
and exploitation by landlords and the Kuomintang militarists The principle
of the land policy of the Soviet is to completely wipe out the feudalistic
and semi-feudalistic oppression and exploitation. In any village of the
Kuomintang district, past or now, there are horrible land rents ( 60 per
cent to 80 per cent ), horrible usury ( 30 per cent to 100 per cent ), and
horrible, onerous taxes (there are above 1,700 different kinds of taxes
throughout the country ) . Consequently, the land is concentrated
in the hands of landlords and kulaks. The overwhelming majority of the peasantry
lost their land and are obliged to live in extreme misery. The relentless
exploitation has exhausted them of their means to combat catastrophe. The
whole country is therefore, exposed to constant inundation or drought.
The catastrophe stricken area in 1931 amounted to 809 hsien
covering a population of 44,000,000. The exploitation has also exhausted
the peasantry of their production power. Much land has been turned infertile
or left uncultivated. Yet with their meager products, they have to face the
dumping of the imperialist agricultural productions. All these lead the Chinese
rural economy to the state of complete bankruptcy from which outbreaks the
violent agrarian revolution.

The power of the agrarian revolution in the Soviet districts has wiped out
all feudalistic remnants. The millions of the peasantry awakening from their
long dark age confiscated land from all the landlords and fertile land from
the Kulaks, abolished usury and onerous taxation, knocked down all that are
against the revolution and built up their own government. For the first time,
the Chinese peasant masses break their way out of the hell and make masters
themselves. This is the fundamental situation that differs the rural district
under the Soviet from those under the Kuomintang.

The First National Soviet Congress proclaimed the Land Act which has since
served as the correct guidance for the proper solution of the land problems
in this country. There have been numerous arguments over the analysis of
classes in the villages owing to the acute class struggle. Based on the
experience of the agrarian revolution, the People's Council has passed a
resolution on the various problems of the struggle for land. Undoubtedly,
this will promote the further development of the village struggle. As to
the methods of partition in connection with the distance, fertility, infertility,
forests, waters, etc., it is now of urgent need to work out a definite resolution
out of the experience of all places so as to make it the guidance for the
partition of land in the new Soviet districts.

The inspection movement mobilized by the Central Government is directed to
thoroughly wipe out the feudalistic remnants and to make sure
that the real benefits resulting from the agrarian revolution have gone to
the farming employees and poor and middle peasants. According to the statistics
of July, August, and September, 1933, through this movement in the Central
Soviet District that further called forth the revolutionary militancy of
the peasant masses, landlords to the number of 6,988 families and the Kulaks
to the number of 6,638 families were disclosed with land to the size of 17,
539 mou revoked and money forfeits from the landlords and fines from
the Kulaks, to the sum of $606,916 seized. The Farming Employee Trade Union
and the Poor Peasant Corps have now formed the pillars of the Soviet in the
villages! This is only the result of three months' work which tells that
the Soviet has as to pay yet closer attention to the class struggle in the
villages. The result also shows that the land inspection movement is an effective
means to further develop the village struggle and to annihilate the feudalistic
remnants in the rural districts. The class line of the agrarian revolution
is to depend upon the farming employees and poor peasants, to ally the middle
peasants, to exploit the Kulaks and to annihilate the landlords. The correct
practice of this line is the key to the success of the agrarian revolution
and foundation for all other policies of the Soviet in the villages. Hence
the Soviet should deal seriously with those erroneous tendencies that attempt
to infringe upon the middle peasants or to annihilate the Kulaks. At the
same time, it should also not compromise with the landlords and Kulaks. That
is the way to lead the agrarian revolution in the correct direction. In the
past two years we have gained much experience in our mass work in the agrarian
revolution. summarized particular are as follows:

(1) Full mobilization of agricultural workers, poor and middle peasants for
struggle against landlords and Kulaks is necessary in the partition and
inspection movements. The partition and inspection works should be done with
concurrence of the masses. The determination of class should be passed by
mass meeting. To conduct these works solely through the activities of a few
Soviet functionaries is liable to cause danger of lowering the struggling
spirit of the masses.

(2) When belongings other than land of the landlords and surplus drag animals
and farming implements of the Kulaks are confiscated, the greater
part of them must be shared by the poor mass. It is bad to have them only
shared by a few for it will lower the struggling spirit of the masses on
the one hand and favor the opposition of the exploiters on the other.

(3) The partition of the land should be completed in the shortest possible
period Unless it is demanded by a considerable mass of the peasants, re-partition
is not a good policy, for otherwise the militancy of the peasant masses to
promote agricultural production may be destroyed and the exploiters may take
advantage of it to hinder the development of the struggle.

(4) The aim of the inspection movement is to disclose the exploiters, but
not to disturb the exploited. So the inspection should not be made from house
to house and from one piece of land to another. It should be done through
the mobilization of broad masses.

(5) Those counter-revolutionary elements who work to hinder the partition
and inspection movements should be seriously dealt with. They should be severely
punished by mass judgement or through mass concurrence to serve imprisonment
or even to face death penalty. This is necessary for otherwise the agrarian
revolution will be handicapped.

(6) Class struggle should be promoted while clashes between families and
localities should be avoided. The land lords and Kulaks are always thinking
of displacing class struggle with family or local struggle.

(7) The development of the agrarian revolution depends upon the
class-consciousness and organizational strength of the basic masses in the
villages. The Soviet functionaries must have, therefore, broad and deep
propaganda in the villages and work to strengthen the organizations of farming
employees and poor peasants.

The aim of the agrarian revolution is not only to solve the land problem
of the peasants but also to promote them to increase the productivity of
their land. Because of the adequate leadership of the Soviet, and the initiative
of the peasant masses themselves, the agricultural production has been restored
in most places and in some places it is even increased.

On this foundation, the living conditions of the peasantry have been much
improved.

In the past, the peasants lived on tree bark or grain husks for months in
a year. This situation no longer prevails and there is no more starvation
in the Soviet districts. The life of the peasantry is better and better year
by year. They are no longer in rags. They eat meat more constantly, which
was a luxury to them in former times.

Which kind of government and which and which kind of life is liked by the
peasants? We have this question for the peasants in the Kuomintang-ruled
districts to answer.

  FINANCIAL POLICY OF THE SOVIETS


The financial policy of the Soviets assured ample supplies demanded by the
revolutionary war as well as all the money needed by revolutionary work.
With a comparatively small territory characterized by economic backwardness
and pursuing a policy of taxation beneficial to masses, the Soviet have got
along fairly well in sharp contrast to the KMT who, controlling a vast territory
and increasing its exploitations from day to day, is now facing financial
Bankruptcy. In accordance with the principle of class and revolution the
Soviet raise its revenue from the following sources: (1) confiscation or
requisition from all feudal exploiters, (2) taxation, (3) development of
national economy.

Under the 1st heading, landlords and kulaks both in the KMT and
Soviet districts are required to raise funds for the soviets, which, as shown
by the past experience, from the largest item in the revenue of the Soviet
government. This is in direct contradiction to the KMT, who always places
the financial burdens on the shoulders of the toiling masses. The Soviet
progressive taxation consists of two categories, namely, the commercial and
agricultural taxes, both imposed on the exploiters. The commercial tax is
again divided into two classes viz., the customs duty and business tax. The
former is designed to control importation with a tariff ranging from entire
exemption to 100 per cent duty, free from any intervention from any foreign
power. It means a that only the Soviets can realize customs autonomy in China.
After payment of the customs duty all goods can flow freely within the Soviet
territory without having to pay any more taxes in contrast to the goods passing
through the KMT territory which are still subject to various taxes similar
to likin.

The business tax is again progressive It takes more from the larger
enterprises. with higher profit but less from the smaller enterprises with
lower profit. Undertakings with less than $100 capital, cooperatives, farmers
selling their own surpluses, are all exempted.

The agricultural tax is likewise progressive. It is heavier for the larger
families who have obtained more land but lighter for those who have got less
land. The poor peasants and middle peasants but the kulaks pay more. Farm
hands and families of the red armies are all exempted. This tax may be reduced
or exempted in case of a disaster.

On the other hand, the KMT lays the principal burden on the peasantry and
the small proprietors. It collects the surtax on the regular ones at a much
heavier rate. According to the Ta Kung Pao, of Tientsin, March 21,
1933, the KMT collects as many as 1,756 taxes, and the Szechwan militarists
have collected the land tax up to 1987. In Shensi the KMT has increased the
tax by 25 times.

The development of national economy as a source of the Soviet finances forms
an important part of the financial policy of the Soviets. It has begun to
make progress in Mien che-kang and Kiangsi. The financial and economical
organs ought to do more in this direction. Here it may be pointed out that
the state banks must issue notes to meet the needs for the development of
national economy, considering financial needs as only secondary.

The use of money shall be governed by the principle of economy. Corruption
and waste are the greatest crimes. Great achievements have been registered
in the struggle against these crimes. "Save every penny for the revolutionary
war" is the guiding principle of the Soviet accounting system.

With the expansion of the red army, with the development of the revolutionary
war, the Soviets are of course facing financial difficulties which
will, however, create conditions for their own solution. The Soviet finances
will improve when conquering more territory from the KMT, developing national
economy on a larger scale, etc., with the financial burdens placed on the
exploiters.

  ECONOMIC POLICY OF THE SOVIETS


Confronted with an impoverished people, the KMT, however, spread lies against
the Soviets, saying that the Soviet government is bankrupt. The KMT is bent
on the destruction of the Soviets not only by guns and cannon but by economic
measures, the most ruthless of which is "blockade." With the broad masses
and the red army behind it, the Soviets have been able to smash the
KMT drives one after another. And it has, too, succeeded a to certain extent
in economic reconstruction within its territory, a step which has
been taken to break the blockade of the enemy.

Engaged in a battle against imperialism and KMT, at the same time
located in a region economically backward encircled by the economic blockade
of the enemy, the Soviets must proceed, whenever possible with the economic
reconstruction, concentrate its forces on war supplies, improve the life
of the masses, consolidate the alliance between the workers and the peasants
in the economic field, assure the leadership for the proletariat over the
peasantry, create the development of socialist construction in future.

The central tasks involved in economic reconstruction of the Soviets are
development of agricultural production, of industrial production, of foreign
trade, of cooperatives.

Agriculture in Soviet districts is apparently forging ahead at a big pace.
Agricultural products in 1933 have increased 15 per cent on the average as
against 1932. The rise in Mien-che-kang is 20 per cent. In the couple of
years following the Soviet revolution agricultural production showed a downward
trend, but thanks to the certainty in the division of land, the promotion
of the Soviets and the growth of enthusiasm among the masses, production
has been moving upwards steadily. In some cases production has been restored
to its original level, but in others it has exceeded the original level.
Fallow land has been cultivated again while new land reclaimed. Wide masses
of women have joined the shock work in agricultural production. These are
the facts never witnessed under the KMT’s rule. Satisfied with the land
obtained, encouraged by the Soviets, the peasants have shown a great enthusiasm
in working up the land allotted to them. Under present conditions, agricultural
production shall be the first task in the economic reconstruction of the
Soviets. It shall solve the food problem as well as secure raw materials
for articles of every-day use. It shall emphasize afforestation and increase
in livestock. Taking the small farm economy as a basis, plans must be worked
out for certain branches of agriculture as, for example, cotton, whose production
shall be fixed for each province.

The Soviets must lead the peasants to solve such vital problems as labour,
oxen, fertilizers, seeds, irrigation, etc. Here the organized mobilization
of the labour force and the participation of women in production are of vital
importance. The Soviets must lead the peasantry in launching the Spring and
Summer ploughing campaigns. About 25 per cent of the peasantry is in need
of oxen, hence the necessity of organizing the oxen cooperatives. The Soviets
must direct the greatest attention to irrigation. At present we are not in
need of Soviet farms and collective farms, but for agricultural improvement
an experimental station shall be set up in each district. In addition,
agricultural research institutes shall be established, agricultural products
show rooms arranged.

As a result of the blockade of the enemy, difficulties have arisen in our
exportation, and many handicraft industries in the Soviet districts have
declined. Tobacco and paper have suffered most. But these difficulties are
by no means invincible. Owing to the large consumption of the people, the
Soviet goods can find a big market within the Soviet territory. In the first
half of 1933 the efforts of the Soviets and the development of the cooperatives
resulted in the revival of many industries as, e.g., tobacco, paper, tungsten,
camphor, fertilizers, agricultural instruments, etc. Attention shall be directed
to cloth, drugs, sugar industries. New industries have sprung up in Mien-che-kang
province (paper, cloth, etc.). To relieve the shortage in salt, nitrate-salt
has been manufactured. It is hard to map out a plan for the scattered handicraft
industries but it is possible to elaborate a plan for the leading industries,
above all, for the undertakings operated by the state and cooperatives. The
Soviet and cooperative-controlled enterprises shall make an appraisal of
the production of materials (raw) as well as market both in the white and
red districts.

The Soviet shall organize foreign trade and directly control the flow of
such goods as the importation of salt and clothes, the exportation of food
and tungsten. It shall see to it that food be equally distributed within
the Soviet districts. This work began in Mien-che-kang at an early date,
followed by Kiangsi in the Spring of 1933. The inauguration of the foreign
trade bureau produced the initial success in this direction.

In the Soviet territory national economy is composed of three parts, namely
state cooperative and private enterprises. The state undertakings are at
present very much limited in scope but have a bright prospect in future.
Within the pale of law, private economy is, far from being restricted, rather
encouraged, owing to the Soviets need for private economy. Not only at the
present time, but for a long time to come, private economy is predominant.
Now it assumes the form of small capital in the Soviet districts.

The cooperative enterprises are making a rapid advance. According to the
statistics of September, 1933, there are 1,423 cooperatives with a capital
of $305,531 in 17 hsiens. In certain hsiens like
Suikin and Sinkuo the number of cooperatives has doubled owing to the
encouragement of the economic conference. At present the consumption and
food cooperatives are of major importance. They overshadow the production
cooperatives. As to the credit cooperatives, they are just in the initial
stage. No doubt the development of the cooperatives constitutes an important
lever of Soviet economy. Combined with state enterprises, it will become
a mighty force in the economic field, assert its supremacy over private economy
in a protracted struggle, create conditions for transition of Soviet economy
to socialist economy. State enterprises shall be pushed together with the
big-scale development of the cooperatives, at the same time, private economy
will be encouraged.

As an aid to the development of the state enterprises and the cooperatives,
$3,000,000 economic reconstruction bonds have been issued thus enlisting
the support of the masses to the Soviet economic construction. In face of
millions of starving people and with an impoverished country, the Soviets
alone boldly embark on economic reconstruction in a planned way which will
carry out the task of saving millions now in distress from final
collapse.

  SOVIET CULTURE


For making sure the victory of the revolution, for consolidating the Soviets,
for drawing the gigantic forces of the masses in the revolutionary class
struggle, for creating a new revolutionary generation the Soviets must proceed
with far-reaching cultural reforms designed to shake off the spiritual yoke
of the reactionary ruling class as well as to create a new Soviet culture
for the workers and peasants.

As is known to all, cultural institutions of the KMT are without exception
in the hands of the landlord and bourgeoisie, employed to spread demagogical
propaganda to check the revolutionary thought of the oppressed classes. In
support of illiteracy they exclude the workers and peasants from education.
Educational appropriations have been used for the attack on the revolution.
Legions of colleges and universities have closed down, throwing out thousands
of students. Over 80 per cent of the population under the KMT is still
illiterate. Left wing thought has been ruthlessly suppressed by the white
terror. Left writers have been arrested by the Fascist thugs. Educational
institutions have become a hell for the masses, a fact that characterizes
the educational policy of the KMT.

But in the Soviet territory all cultural and educational institutions are
under the direct control of the workers and peasants, giving their children
a preferred right to enjoy education, The Soviets have done its best in raising
the cultural level of the masses. In spite of the Soviets being located in
a backward region and threatened by war from all sides, cultural reconstruction
has been going on at an accelerated pace.

For the 2,931 villages in Kiangsi, Fukien and Yeh-kang provinces there are
3,052 Leninist primary schools with 89,710 pupils, 64,612 evening schools
with an attendance of 94,517; 32,388 reading groups with a membership of
155,371; 1,656 clubs with 49,668 workers. These are only the statistics compiled
up from the data in the central Soviet districts.

A majority of the school-children have attended the Leninist primaries. For
instance, out of the 20,969 school children in Sinkuo, 12,860 have attended
the Leninist primaries. The school children spend most of the time in reading
and reserve only a small fraction of the time for family work. They also
join the red boy scouts and learn practical communism therein.

Women are very enthusiastic for education, too. In Sinkuo there are 15,740
pupils for the evening schools, out of which 4,988(31 per cent) are men,
and 10,752(69 per cent) are women. Among the reading groups of Sinkuo we
find that 40 per cent of the membership is men, while the female members
amount to as high as 60 per cent. Not only eager for education, some of the
women have occupied high positions in the cultural institutions. They serve
as heads of the primaries or evening schools, or as directors of the reading
groups. The delegate council of woman workers and peasants is almost universal
in the Soviets, directing close attention to the interests of the toiling
women, including education.

A vigorous campaign against illiteracy is in full swing. Evening schools
for reading have been established (in Sinkuo the number of people who joined
the reading groups, scattered all over the
hsien, – 3,387 ). To help reading, signboards inscribed
with characters have been set up close to the highways.

The cultural advance of the Soviets may be illustrated by the increase in
the circulation of the papers. In the Central Soviet district we have some
34 papers big and small. The Red China, organ of the
Soviet government, has increased its circulation from 3,000 to 40,000; the
True Word of the Youth up to 28,000; the Struggle, (organ of
the Central Communist Party), 27,000; the Red Star (organ of the red
army), 17,300, an increase that testifies to the rapid advance of the masses
in the cultural field.

The revolutionary arts of the Soviets have already made a good start with
the formation of the worker and peasant drama club and the commencement of
the blue-shirt movement extending in all directions in the villages. Red
sports have been gaining ground everywhere. Gymnasium fields may be seen
here and there.

Now the Soviets, though having not much to show in the construction of technical
education, have nevertheless succeeded in establishing the Red Army University.
The Soviet University, the Communist University and many higher schools under
the direct control of the ministry of education, all calculated to train
leaders for the revolutionary leadership. Colleges and high schools must
follow closely on the heels of the development of the ordinary schools as
is scheduled in the educational plan.

For training the revolutionary intelligentsia, for the development of education
and culture the Soviets have utilized the services of the landlord-bourgeoisie
intelligentsia – a point that cannot be overlooked in the cultural policy
of the Soviets.

The general line of the cultural policy of the Soviets is to educate the
broad masses in the spirit of communism, to subordinate education to the
revolutionary war and the class struggle, to link labour with education.
In the educational field the central tasks confronting the Soviets are the
enforcement of compulsory education throughout the whole land, the development
of social education on a wide scale, the rapid liquidation of illiteracy,
the training of large numbers of cadres for revolution. All these tasks can
be performed only under the Soviets because they signalize the sharpened
class struggle and an unprecedented victory for spiritual emancipation.

  MARRIAGE UNDER THE SOVIETS


To free women from the most barbarous marriage system handed down through
thousands of years, the Soviets as early as November, 1931, proclaimed the
equality of men and women in marriages by a new set of regulations which
declared complete liberty of marriage and divorce, abolish the sale of women
as wives, interdict child marriage, provisions that have been enforced throughout
the Soviet territory. As a rule, a man of twenty may marry a girl of 18 by
simple registration with the Soviets provided he is free from dangerous disease.
Lineal descendants from the same grandfather, however, cannot marry each
other within five generations. Divorce may be granted by the Soviets if one
of the parties to the marriage insist on it.

This liberation of women from the feudal marriage fetters is made possible
only under the democratic dictatorship of the workers and peasants subsequent
to the overthrow of the landlord-bourgeoisie and the accomplishment of the
land revolution. Men and women, particularly the latter must have first of
all political liberty and also some measure of economic liberty as a guarantee
for free marriage. More oppressed by the feudal marriage system than men,
women have been given more protection in the matter of marriage, and the
burden arising from divorce is imposed for the most part on the shoulders
of men.

Of vital importance to the revolution are children who we may say are new
revolutionists, to whom protection must be afforded. The Soviets recognize
the illegal children and give them protection. The protection of children
has been laid down in the Soviet Law.

  NATIONALITY POLICY OF SOVIETS


The point of departure for the Soviet nationality policy is the capture of
all the oppressed minorities around the Soviets as a means to increase the
strength of the revolution against imperialism and KMT. The oppressed minorities
such as the Mongols, Tibetans, Koreans, Annamites, Miaos etc. General Geng
Yu-hsiang massacred the Mohammedans in Kansu while General Pei Tsung-shi
butchered the Miaos in Kwangsi to mention but two recent examples of the
Kuomintang in maltreating the minorities. On the other hand, the ruling classes
of the minorities such as princes, living Buddas, Lamas etc. have allied
with the KMT in oppressing and exploiting the mass of people, especially
the toilers. In the case of Tibet, Sinkiang and Inner Mongolia the ruling
classes have directly surrendered to imperialism and accelerated the colonization
of their country.

The Soviets, on the other hand, are decisively against the exploitation of
the minorities by imperialism and KMT. The constitution of the Soviets as
passed by the 1st Soviet Congress in November, 1931, is quite
clear on this point (Article 14):

"Soviet China recognizes the complete self-determination of the minorities
who may go so far as to secede and form independent free states. Soviet China
shall see to it that the minorities be freed from the misrule of imperialism
and KMT and secure complete emancipation from the misrule of their won princes
and Lamas. In this regard the Soviets will gladly aid the minorities in carrying
out this task. The Soviets will permit the development of national culture
and languages among these minorities."

Article 15 of the same constitution provides that "Soviet China will give
the right of asylum to the revolutionaries either from the nationalities
in China or from other countries who should have been persecuted by the
reactionary rule; it will help them in securing complete victory for the
revolutionary movement sponsored by them."

The fact that any Korean, Annam and Taiwan comrades attended the
1st Soviet Congress and 2nd Soviet Congress is a concrete proof
that the Soviets mean what it says. The common revolutionary interests will
unite the toilers of China with those of the minorities in a firm alliance.
The free union of nationalities will replace national oppression, an event
that is possible only under the Soviets. To achieve complete emancipation
the minority nationality shall, on its part, assist the Soviet-revolution
in securing a victory on a national scale.

  CONCRETE TASKS CONFRONTING THE SOVIETS
  IN SHATTERING THE FIFTH CAMPAIGN OF IMPERIALISM AND KMT


In the past two years the Soviets have scored successive victories over the
KMT; as a result of which the relation of power between the Soviets and KMT
has apparently changed in favour of the former, but at the expense of the
latter. The Soviets have consolidated but the KMT has been steadily on the
decline. The masses in KMT territory have put up the revolutionary flag.
But owing to the fact that the Soviets are situated in a region economically
backward with only a comparatively small area, we must extend our territory
and fight for the realization of the task of capturing one or more provinces.
We must shatter the illusions of those who are satisfied with the present
limited area of the Soviets. The revolutionary masses under the Soviets are
called on to fight for the carrying out of the following urgent tasks:

  RECONSTRUCTION OF RED ARMY


First of all the central revolutionary military committee shall be strengthened
in its leadership of the whole red army so as to make it possible for the
red armies to act more efficiently under a unified, strengthened command.
In the second place, the expansion of the red army to 1,000,000 as a slogan
must be popularized among the toiling masses, enabling them to understand
that 1,000,000 red army is a decisive factor in the struggle against imperialism
and KMT. Recruiting shall be made through political agitation instead of
compulsion. At the same time, a sharp class struggle together with the Soviet
laws shall be directed against the alien elements who blocked the expansion
of the red army by desertions. The families of the red armists shall be treated
in a better way. Land shall be cultivated and ploughed for them, articles
of every-day use supplied to them, in order to comfort them spiritually.
The Soviets shall see to it that all those who sabotage the work in this
respect shall be punished by law.

To consolidate the red army a political education is of special importance.
It will enable the red armists to fight consciously for the victory of the
Soviets, to value conscious discipline as a guarantee for the victory of
the revolution. The system of the political commissioners shall be observed
in all the units of the red army, more workers drawn in OT act as military
or political directors, more cadres turned to from the red army schools,
decisive blows directed against the landlord-bourgeois elements who try to
steal into the red army, technique of the red army improved.

The red guards and youth vanguards shall be universally formed in all the
Soviet districts, all the grown boys and girls armed as a reserve in defense
of the rear. Every youth vanguardist shall be made to understand that
conscription plays a big role in the future big-scale civil wars against
imperialism and the KMT. Conscription in general shall be popularized among
the masses, model youth vanguards be incorporated into formal red armies,
more red partisans organized in the bordering districts who may penetrate
far into the white regions. A closer relation shall be maintained between
the red armies and the toiling masses.

The supplies and transport for the red armies shall be assured and taken
care of by the financial and economic organs of the Soviets as well as by
the transport and sanitary organs of the red army.

  
  SOVIET ECONOMIC RECONSTRUCTION


 To crush the economic blockade of the enemy, to counteract the manipulation
of the wicked merchants, to assure the revolutionary needs, to improve the
lot of the workers and peasants, the Soviets must proceed at once with economic
reconstruction in various fields.

In the first place, agricultural production shall be raised, enthusiasm of
the masses for such production aroused, propaganda campaigns in ploughing
and harvest time launched, all peasantry drawn into the production campaign
(including peasant women). Labour mutual assistance and ploughing corps shall
be widely organized, the oxen and seed problems solved with the aid of the
Soviets. Our fighting slogans are "Liquidate all fallow land." "Increase
the crops by 20 per cent." The food bureau of the Soviets shall maintain
a more close relation with the food cooperatives to assure ample food for
the red army and the masses. The commissar of national economy shall map
out a plan for the more important branches of agriculture, as food and cotton.

The tasks of the Soviet economic reconstruction rest need of the revival
of the handicraft industry and the needs of the war. In elaborating the plans
for economic reconstruction, consideration must be taken of the needs of
the revolutionary war, the needs of the masses and the possibility of exports
to the white regions. Maximum energy shall be devoted to the leading industries
as Tungsten, coal, iron, lime, agricultural instruments, tobacco, paper,
cloth, sugar, drugs, nitrate-salt, lumber, camphor, etc. Production cooperatives
shall be organized for these industries, drawing in the unemployed, independent
workers and peasants. Private investment being permitted, the Soviets shall
not monopolize all the productive enterprises but concentrate on those beneficial
to the state. The vital means to raise production are more incentive to labour,
competition in production reward to those who have made achievements on the
production front.

The exchange of Soviet surplus (as food, tungsten, lumber, tobacco, paper)
with salt, cloth, oils, etc., from the white regions as may be made possible
through the development of foreign trade serves as an important lever in
breaking through the blockade of the enemy and in promoting the development
of our national economy. The commercial institutions of the Soviets shall
be consolidated while private merchants be encouraged for exportation and
importation of necessaries. Wide masses of the workers and peasants shall
be organized in consumption cooperatives to be set up everywhere, and thus
enabled to buy cheap but sell at higher prices their products to the white
regions, a possibility that plays a vital role in the economic reconstruction
of the Soviets. The Soviets must strengthen their leadership of the central
consumption cooperatives, and see to it that such centers be established
where they do not yet exist.

The solution of the capital problem as involved in economic reconstruction
is found in the absorption of capital from the masses through the development
credit cooperatives which will smash usury to pieces. The money of the masses
will flow into the state enterprises through such channels as economic bonds,
subscriptions, to the stock of the state bank, etc. Capital in the Soviet
districts will be made mobile through the encouragement of the private capital.
The note issue of the Soviet banks shall correspond to the needs of the market
and absorb the deposits from the masses, to lend the money so gathered to
production enterprises. The soviet banks shall provide financial relief within
the soviet territory and lead the struggle of the cooperatives against the
speculative merchants. 

  RECONSTRUCTION OF SOVIETS


The central Soviet Government inaugurated as the supreme leader of the Soviet
movement in China has a vital significance, and has in the past two years
scored glorious success in the fight against imperialism and KMT, but many
weakness are found in the organization and work of the central government.
The organization and work of the presidium of the central executive committee
shall be improved and strengthened, the commissariats shall have a sufficient
working staff, more commissariats created, if necessary, so the central
government can fulfill its role as the supreme leader of the revolution.

As an important link with the central government as well as with local Soviets,
the provincial Soviet government has been lax in its work in certain respects,
a defect which shall be overcome hereafter.

The village and town Soviets constitute the basis of the Soviet system and
for this simple reason merit the utmost attention . Congresses shall be
established in places where they do not yet exist, and their work strengthened.
Presidia shall be set up, committees moved into the villages, militant workers
and peasants drawn into the Soviets, relation between a delegate and a number
of inhabitants established, each village shall have a general delegate permitting
him to call a conference of the delegates and inhabitants to discuss the
work to be done. The village and town Soviets are the direct organs for the
mobilization of the masses and do practical work in the village and street.
The latter may compete with each other in order to raise the efficiency of
their work. As regards the work done by local Soviets, the system of inspection
shall rigorously be enforced. The district Soviets shall give an efficient
leadership in regard to the lower Soviets.

The provincial Soviets shall direct maximum attention to the work in new
Soviet territory where a revolutionary committee exists in place of the Soviets.
In regard to organization and work, the revolutionary committee differs radically
from the Soviets and its work (as arming the inhabitants, waging the mass
struggle, clearing the counter-revolutionaries, etc.) shall be strengthened.

Soviet democracy has progressed far but not enough. A struggle shall be waged
against bureaucratism and dictation still remaining among the Soviet
functionaries. Persuasion shall replace dictation vis-à-vis the masses.
The worker and peasant inspection commissariat shall draw in large masses
for the critical examination of the work of the Soviet functionaries and
lead the struggle in criticizing the evil functionaries, even punish them
in accordance with Soviet laws, thus maintaining the good relations between
the Soviets and the masses. In the Soviet elections more electors shall be
drawn in and alien elements, bureaucrats, etc., barred. More workers shall
be attracted into the Soviets in order to strengthen the workers' hegemony
in the government. In order to Bet close to the masses the Soviets must establish
an intimate connection with the labour unions, the poor peasant unions,
cooperatives, etc.

All the work of the Soviets shall be adapted to the needs of the revolutionary
war, any relaxation among the Soviet functionaries be stamped out, the
functionaries aroused to enthusiasm and consciousness that they work for
the worker and peasant democratic dictatorship. Slogans shall be put forward
"Subordinate all work to the revolutionary war," "For the greater speed and
better quality of the work," all to be brought before the functionaries of
the Soviets. In this respect the responsible leaders of the Soviets, especially
the worker and peasant inspection commissariat, must win over the Soviet
functionaries by persistent persuasion and education.

The Soviets shall enforce the following laws: labour (eight-hours, minimum
wages, etc. ), land revolution (confiscation of land of the landlord, land
inspection, etc.), culture and education, and, finally, all the laws and
orders against the counter-revolutionaries (GPU and Soviet courts drawing
in large masses in the struggle against the reactionaries. 

  ANTI - IMPERIALIST WORK


The Soviets must strengthen its leadership of the anti-imperialist struggle
throughout the whole country as well as of the revolutionary struggle of
the workers and peasants against the KMT in the white territory. Passivity
on the part of the Soviets in this direction means connivance at the aggression
of imperialism, prolongation of the KMT misrule and limitation on the development
of the Soviets in the territorial aspect. The Soviets must look forward to
the vast area of the KMT and lead the workers, peasants and petty bourgeoisie
there in the struggle against imperialism and KMT. By utilizing the concrete
facts of the KMT's surrender to imperialism the Soviets may arouse the masses
in the white regions to a sharp struggle against imperialism and its lackey,
the Kuomintang. The Soviets shall call on the masses to organize and arm
themselves, to fight for the independence of China, to drive imperialism
out of China; in Manchuria and Jehol where Japanese imperialism still marches
on with bayonets, the people, revolutionary army and volunteers shall be
organized, the existing volunteers be alienated from the influence of the
KMT in a determined fight against Japanese imperialism. The Soviets must
give aid to every anti-imperialist struggle of the workers, peasants and
petty-bourgeoisie.

The Soviets shall aid in every way possible the revolutionary struggle of
the workers against capital and of the peasants against the landlord, and
lead it to victory. The functionaries of the Soviets must understand that
expansion of the Soviet territory and success of the revolution on a national
scale depends much on the work of the Soviets in the KMT area, that they
have to devote the greatest attention to the white regions where the masses
are subject to the military slavery and other exaction and are most apt to
accept our influence, the more so in the districts bordering on the Soviets.

By making use of every opportunity the Soviets in the borderland shall establish
regular contact with the masses, organize their everyday struggle, organize
their revolt, develop partisan fighting, bring the new districts under the
control of the Soviets. The work in the borderland is of special importance.
The partisans must observe the fundamental policy of the Soviets and refrain
from making indiscriminate attacks on the Tuhao without
any regard to class distinctions. In addition, the opposition of the reds
to the whites, the flight of the masses, the salt question, the refugee problem,
etc., shall be solved on the class principle and in accordance with the principle
of mass work. The causes of the opposition of the reds to the whites and
the flight of the masses have to be removed, and in the work in the borderland
to be improved, factors that can play a decisive role in changing the white
into red districts.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Proclamation on the Northward March of the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army to Fight Japan






PROCLAMATION ON THE NORTHWARD MARCH OF THE CHINESE WORKER'S AND RED
  ARMY TO FIGHT JAPAN





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  PROCLAMATION ON THE NORTHWARD MARCH OF THE CHINESE WORKER'S AND RED ARMY
  TO FIGHT JAPAN

July, 15 1934

[Extracted from a proclamation published in 1934. (Min-tsu chan-hsien
hsun-pao, no. 2, 10 August, 1935 ).] 
  

The hateful Japanese imperialism... intends to transform China into its colony
and turn the people of all China into slaves without a country doomed to
suffer eternally the massacre, rape, exploitation, and trampling of the Japanese
bandits.

If their reaction toward the invasion of Japanese imperialism the Kuomintang
militarists—Chiang Kai-shek, Chang Hsueh-liang, and all the
others—have all capitulated and sold out. . . Under the slogan 'No strength
to fight Japan' they have instituted ceaseless 'campaigns of encirclement'
of the Soviet Government, which is the only anti-Japanese and anti-imperialist
government in all China, and the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army. All this
proves that the Kuomintang is the most faithful running dog of Japanese
imperialism and that the Kuomintang militarists are the greatest traitors
in all Chinese history. In the face of the ceaseless aggressions of Japanese
imperialism, the Chinese Soviet Government has repeatedly called upon the
Chinese masses to arm themselves for a national revolutionary war... and
it is preparing for a direct combat with Japanese imperialism. Under. . .
three conditions, the Soviet Government is willing to conclude an agreement
regarding military operations with any armed force anywhere in China... The
Kuomintang attacks make it impossible for our Soviet Government to unite
directly with the masses of all China and to wage a revolutionary war against
Japanese imperialism together with the anti-Japanese volunteers in the
North-east, in order to drive the Japanese imperialist bandits out of China...

Therefore, if the Soviet Government and the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army
is to mobilize all its forces to fight Japanese imperialism, it can do nothing
else but fight a bloody war with the millions of Kuomintang bandit troops
that are attacking us. Only thus can it protect and maintain the free Soviet
area that has already been saved from imperialist bondage, so that it will
not again be trodden underfoot and sold out by the imperialist running dogs,
the Kuomintang bandits. We will definitely not abandon the revolutionary
anti-imperialist bases that have been created as a result of countless bloody
fights with Kuomintang bandit troops. But the Soviet Government definitely
cannot sit by and watch the ruin of the Chinese people at the hand of the
Japanese imperialism. The Soviet Government and the Workers' and Peasants'
Red Army, fearing no difficulties and with the greatest resolution, are sending
an advance guard detachment northward to fight the Japanese. If this detachment
should encounter any armed force that will accept the three conditions we
have put forth, the main units of our Workers' and Peasants' Red Army will
follow the advance guard to unite with all armed forces in China for a common
struggle against Japan... More concretely, the Soviet Government proposes:

1. To oppose resolutely the selling out. . . of the whole of China by the
Kuomintang Government...

2. To proclaim the immediate breaking off of diplomatic relations with Japan....

3. To call upon the masses of all China to arm themselves with the weapons
that can be found in the Kuomintang arsenals and factories as well as with
all the imported weapons and to organize popular anti-Japanese volunteer
units and guerrillas...

4. To confiscate all the enterprises and property of the Japanese imperialists
and the Chinese traitors…

5. To organize everywhere anti-Japanese groups of the masses. Let the running
dogs of imperialism, the Kuomintang, let the Kuomintang traitors who are
selling out their country, shout 'no strength to fight Japan'. By mobilizing
the masses of all China against Japan, by arming the masses of all China
against Japan, we shall gain the strength to overthrow Japanese imperialism
and the band of traitors of Kuomintang.

Chairman of the Provisional Central Government of 
the Chinese Soviets:

MAO TSE-TUNG

Chairman of the military committee of the Chinese Workers'
and Peasants' Red Army:


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## To Lin Piao






TO  LIN  PIAO





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  TO LIN PIAO


1936


Comrade Lin Piao,

I entirely agree with your letter. One further point -- of the three courses,
'cultural' education (cultivating the ability to read, reading books and
newspapers, and writing) is the most important, the basic component. According
to what you and your colleagues say, equal emphasis will be given to theory
and practice, and 'cultural' tools are a part of the 'practice' which links
up theory with practice. 'Cultural' tools can and should be used to link
up the two. If the student, having learnt other things, can neither read
books nor write, his future development after leaving the school will be
limited. If you agree with me, then I think in the next four months there
should be more 'culture' classes (reading, writing and composition) in the
second and third courses. My view is that these classes should be increased
to a quarter or even one third of the total study hours (including home work)
of a student. Please give your consideration to this problem. When the time
comes for the periodic test, 'culture' will be an important criterion of
judgement.

Salute!


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## We Are Not Going to Turn the Country over to Moscow!






WE ARE NOT GOING TO TURN THE COUNTRY OVER TO MOSCOW!





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  WE ARE NOT GOING TO TURN THE COUNTRY OVER TO MOSCOW!


July 23, 1936

[An interview from Edgar Snow's interview with comrade Mao Tse-tung, 23
July 1936.]
  

Question: In actual practice, if the Chinese revolution were victorious would
the economic and political relationship between Soviet China and Soviet Russia
be maintained within the Third International or a similar organization, or
would there probably be some kind of actual merger of governments? Would
the Chinese Soviet Government be comparable in its relation to Moscow to
the present government of Outer Mongolia?

Answer: I assume this is a purely hypothetical question. As I have told you,
the Red Army is not now seeking the hegemony of power but a united China
against Japanese imperialism.

The Third International is an organization in which the vanguard of the world
proletariat brings together its collective experience for the benefit of
all revolutionary peoples throughout the world. It is not an administrative
organization nor has it any political power beyond that of an advisory capacity.
Structurally it is not very different from the Second International, though
in content it is vastly different. But just as no one would say that in a
country where the Cabinet is organized by the social-democrats, the Second
International is dictator, so it is ridiculous to say that the Third
International is dictator in countries where there are communist parties.

In the U.S.S.R., the Communist Party is in power, yet even there the Third
International does not rule nor does it have any direct political power over
the people at all. Similarly, it can be said that although the Communist
Party of China is a member of the Comintern, still this in no sense means
that Soviet China is ruled by Moscow or by the Comintern. We are certainly
not fighting for an emancipated China in order to turn the country over to
Moscow!

The Chinese Communist Party is only one party in China and in its victory
it will have to speak for the whole nation. It cannot speak for the Russian
people or rule for the Third International but only in the interest of the
Chinese masses. Only where the interests of the Chinese masses coincide with
the interests of the Russian masses can it be said to be obeying the will
of Moscow. But of course this basis of common benefit will be tremendously
broadened, once the masses of China are in democratic power and socially
and economically emancipated like their brothers in Russia.

When Soviet government have been established in many countries, the problem
of an international union of soviets may arise, and it will be interesting
to see how it will be solved. But today I cannot suggest the formula, it
is a problem which has not been and cannot be solved in advance. In the world
of today with increasingly close economic and cultural intimacies between
different states and people, such union would seem to be highly desirable,
if achieved on a voluntary basis.

Clearly, however, the last point is of utmost importance; such a world union
could be successful only if every nation had the right to enter or leave
the union according to the will of its people, and with its sovereign intact,
and certainly never at the 'command' of Moscow. No communist ever thought
otherwise, and the myth of 'world domination from Moscow' is an invention
of the fascists and counter-revolutionaries.

The relationship between Outer Mongolia and the Soviet Union, now and in
the past, has always been based on the principle of complete equality. When
the people's revolution has been victorious in China, the Outer Mongolian
republic will automatically become a part of the Chinese federation, at its
own will. The Mohammedan and Tibetan people, likewise, will form autonomous
republics attached to the China federation.

Question: With the achievement of victory of a Red movement in China, do
you think that revolution would occur quickly in other Asiatic colonial or
semi-colonial countries such as Korea, Indochina, the Philippines, and India?
Is China at present the 'key" to the world revolution?

Answer: The Chinese revolution is a key factor in the world situation and
its victory is heartily anticipated by the people of every country, especially
by the toiling masses of the colonial countries. When the Chinese revolution
comes into full power, the masses of many colonial countries will follow
the example of China and win a similar victory of their own…


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## To Hsu T'eh-li






TO HSU  TEH-LI





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  TO HSU TEH-LI


February 1937


[(1877-1968) went to Japan and joined Sun Yat-sen's Alliance Society (T'ung
Meng Hui) in 1912. Hsu visited France, Germany and Belgium in 1920-3 as a
student and a worker also Russia to study at the Sun Yat-sen University in
Moscow in 1928-30. At the age of 57 he joined the Long March.]
  

Old Comrade Hsu,

You were my teacher twenty years ago; you are still my teacher; you will
continue to be my teacher in future. When the revolution failed and many
members left the party, even defecting to the enemy, you joined [the party]
in the autumn of 1927 and adopted an extremely active attitude. From then
until now you have shown through a long period of bitter struggle greater
positiveness, less fear of difficulty and more humility in learning new things
than many younger members of the party. 'Age', 'declining physical and mental
abilities', and 'hardships and obstacles' have all surrendered to you, in
spite of the fact that they have served as excuses for the timidity of many
people. You know a great deal but always feel a deficiency in your knowledge,
whereas many 'half-buckets of water' [people of superficial knowledge] make
a lot of noise. What you think is what you say or what you do, whereas other
people hide filthy things in a corner of their minds. You enjoy being with
the masses all the time, whereas some others enjoy being without the masses.
You are always a model of obedience to the party and its revolutionary
discipline, whereas some others regard the discipline as restraint for others
but not for themselves. For you, it is 'revolution first', 'work first',
and 'other people first', whereas for some others it is 'limelight first',
'rest first', and 'oneself first'. You always pick the most difficult things
to do, never avoiding your responsibilities, whereas some others choose easy
work to do, always shunning responsibilities. In all these respects, I admire
you and willing to continue to learn from you. I also hope that other party
members will learn from you. I write this congratulatory letter to you on
your sixtieth birthday with my wishes that you will enjoy good health and
a long life and continue to be a model for all the members of our revolutionary
party and all the people.

Revolutionary Salute !

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Letter to the Spanish People






LETTER  TO  THE  SPANISH  PEOPLE





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  LETTER TO THE SPANISH PEOPLE


May 15, 1937

[Extracted from a letter dated 15 May 1937, published in Chieh-fang, no.
4, June 1937.]
  

People of Spain, Comrades in arms:

We, the Chinese Communist Party, the Chinese Red Army, and the Chinese Soviets,
regard the war fought by the Spanish Republican Government as the most sacred
war in the world. This war is being waged not only for the life of the Spanish
people, but also for the oppressed peoples of the world, because the Spanish
Government is resisting German and Italian fascism, which, with their Spanish
accomplices. are destroying the culture, civilization, and justice of the
world. The Spanish Government and the Spanish people are fighting the German
and Italian fascists, who are in league with and giving support to the Japanese
facial invaders of China in the Far East...Were it not for the support
received from German and Italian fascism, Japanese fascism could not, as
it is now doing attack us like a mad dog...

We do not believe that the struggle of the Chinese people can be separated
from your struggle in Spain. The Communist Party of China is supporting and
encouraging you, the Spanish people, by struggling against Japanese fascism.
The Communist Party of China, the Chinese Soviets, the Chinese Red Army,
and the Chinese people are greatly moved by your defence of Madrid and by
your victories on the northern and southern fronts. Each day our press here
in the Soviet regions publishes reports and articles about your heroic
struggle... We firmly believe that the unity of your various parties in the
People's Front is the basis for your final victory...

We know that your victory will directly aid us in our fight against Japanese
fascism. Your cause is our cause. We read with emotion of the International
Volunteers organized by people from every land, and we are glad that there
are Chinese and Japanese in their ranks. Many comrades of the Chinese Red
Army also wish to go to Spain to join you. . . Were it not that we are face
to face with the Japanese enemy, we would join you and take our place in
your front ranks.

As many of you know, the Chinese Red Army has carried on a ceaseless and
hard struggle for ten years. We fought without resources, through hunger
and cold, with insufficient arms, ammunition, and medical supplies, until
at last we won our victories. We know that you and your army are also passing
through great hardships such as we also have passed through, and we are certain
that you will be victorious. Our ten years' struggle has proved that if a
revolutionary people and their revolutionary army are not afraid of suffering,
but continue to fight heroically and unyieldingly against the enemy, they
will be victorious …


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Letter to Comrade Browder






LETTER TO COMRADE BROWDER





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  LETTER TO COMRADE BROWDER


July 24, 1937

[Extracted from Mao Tse-tung lun-wen-chi]
  

Dear Comrade Browder:

Taking advantage of the visit of a comrade, I am sending this letter to you,
honoured Comrade Browder, the good friend of the Chinese people and the leader
of the American people.

We have heard from several American comrades and from other quarters that
the American Communist Party and the great mass of the American people are
profoundly concerned about China's anti-Japanese struggle, and they have
already aided us in several ways. This gives us the feeling that our struggle
is not an isolated one, that we are receiving heroic assistance from abroad;
at the same time, we have the feeling that, when we obtain victory. this
victory will be of great assistance to the struggle of the American people
for liberation.

Today's world is on the eve of a great explosion, and the working class of
the whole world, as well as all the peoples seeking liberation, must certainly
unite and carry on a common struggle.

Revolutionary greetings!

MAO TSE-TUNG

24 June, 1937


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Inscription for the Founding of the North Shensi Public School






INSCRIPTION  FOR  THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  NORTH  SHENSI  PUBLIC  SCHOOL





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  INSCRIPTION FOR THE FOUNDING OF THE NORTH SHENSI PUBLIC SCHOOL

1937

We must educate a lot of people — the sort of people who are the vanguard
of revolution, who have political farsightedness, who are prepared for battle
and sacrifice, who are frank, loyal, positive, and upright; the sort of people
who seek no self-interest, only national and social emancipation, who show,
instead of fear, determination and forwardness in the face of hardships;
the sort of people who are neither undisciplined nor fond of limelight, but
practical, with their feet firmly on the ground. If China possesses many
such men, the tasks of the Chinese revolution can easily be fulfilled.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Speech at the Meeting Celebrating the Completion of the Building of the Anti-Japanese Military and Political University






SPEECH  AT  THE  MEETING  CELEBRATING  THE COMPLETION  OF  THE  BUILDING
  OF  THE ANTI-JAPANESE  MILITARY  AND  POLITICAL UNIVERSITY





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  SPEECH AT THE MEETING CELEBRATING THE COMPLETION OF THE BUILDING OF THE
  ANTI-JAPANESE MILITARY AND POLITICAL UNIVERSITY

1937


What I want to say to you, Comrades, is that, in short. the success of this
great enterprise is due to [our] overcoming difficulties and uniting with
the masses. The experience of the struggle in the past ten years. the cave
[-buildings] you have dug, and the future course of the Resistance War have
proved or will prove that if we continue to overcome difficulties and unite
with the masses we shall be ever victorious!

To overcome natural difficulties by defeating the foes and to overcome military
difficulties by defeating the Japanese bandits have something in common but
quite a lot of differences. The latter is harder and more arduous. Therefore
in addition to orienting oneself towards overcoming difficulties and uniting
with the masses, the Resistance War requires skills in strategy and tactics,
in mobilizing, organizing, and leading the masses, and in winning allies.

You have now the spirit to overcome difficulties and unite with the masses.
If you can use your talents to develop from this basis, it is entirely possible
to defeat Japan and drive the Japanese out of China.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Lu Hsun






ON LU HSUN





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  ON LU HSUN


1937

[Speech at the meeting Commemorating the First Anniversary of the Death
of Lu Hsun held in the North Shensi Public School on 19.10.1939. Reproduced
from the fortnightly July (Chi-yueh), March 1938.]


Comrades,

Our main tasks at the present moment are those of the vanguard. At a time
when the great national Resistance War is making rapid progress, we need
a large number of activists to play the leading role [in it] and a large
number of vanguards to find the path. Vanguards must be frank, positive,
and upright people. They seek no self-interest, only national and social
emancipation. They fear no hardships, instead, in the face of hardship they
are determined and forever moving forward. Neither undisciplined nor fond
of limelight, they have their feet firmly on the ground and are realistic.
They are the guides on the road of revolution. In the light of the present
state of the war, if the Resistance is the concern only of the government
and armed forces, without the participation of the broad masses, we cannot
be certain that we shall win the final victory. We must now train a large
number of vanguards who will fight for our national liberation and can be
relied upon to lead and organize the masses for the fulfilment of this historic
mission. First of all, the numerous vanguards of the whole country must urgently
organize themselves. Our communist party is the vanguard of national liberation.
We must fight to the bitter end in order to accomplish our tasks.

Today we commemorate [ the death ] of Lu Hsun. We must first of all understand
him and his place in the history of our revolution. We commemorate him not
only because he was a distinguished writer but also because he, at the forefront
of national emancipation, dedicated all his strength to the revolutionary
struggle. (We commemorate him not only because he wrote well, becoming a
great literary figure, but also because he was a vanguard for national liberation
and gave tremendous help to the revolution. ) Although he did not belong
to the communist party organization, his thinking, action, and writing were
all Marxianized. He showed more and more youthful energy as his life drew
to its end. He fought consistently and incessantly against feudal forces
and imperialism. Under despicable circumstances of enemy pressure and
persecution, he struggled (suffered) and protested. In a similar way, Comrades,
you can also study revolutionary theories diligently while [living] under
such adverse material conditions [because] you are full of militant spirit.
The material arrangement of this school is poor, but here we have truth,
freedom, and a place to train revolutionary vanguards.

Lu Hsun emerged from the decaying feudal society. But he knew how to fight
back against the rotten society and the evil imperialist forces of which
he had had so much experience . He used his sardonic, humorous, and sharp
( powerful ) pen to depict the force(s) of the dark society (and of the ferocious
imperialists). He was really an accomplished 'painter'. In his last years
he fought for truth and freedom from the standpoint of the proletariat and
national liberation.

Lu Hsun's first characteristic was his political vision. He examined society
with both a microscope and a telescope, hence with precision and farsightedness.
As early as 1936 he pointed out the dangerous tendencies of the criminal
Trotskyites. Now the clarity and correctness of his judgement have been proved
beyond doubt by the facts—the obvious fact that the Trotskyite faction
has turned into a traitorous organization subsidized by Japanese special
agents.

In my view, Lu Hsun is a great Chinese saint—the saint of modern China,
just as Confucius was the saint of old China. For his immortal memory, we
have established the Lu Hsun Library and the Lu Hsun Teachers' Training School
in Yenan So that future generations may have a glimpse of his greatness.

His second characteristic was his militancy, which we mentioned a moment
ago. He was a great steadfast tree, not a blade of wavering grass, against
the onslaught of dark and violent forces. Once he saw a political destination
clearly he strove to reach it, never surrendering or compromising half way.
There have been half-hearted revolutionaries who fought at first but then
deserted the battlefield. Kautsky and Plekhanov of foreign countries (Russia)
were good examples [of this]. Such people are not infrequently found in China.
If I remember correctly, Lu Hsun once said that at first all [of them] were
'left' and revolutionary, but as soon as pressure came, [they] changed and
presented their comrades [to the enemy] as a gift. Lu Hsun bitterly hated
this sort of people. While fighting against them, he educated and disciplined
the young writers who followed him. He taught them to fight resolutely, to
be vanguards, and to find their own way .

His third characteristic was his readiness to sacrifice himself, completely
fearless of enemy intimidation and persecution and utterly unmoved by enemy
enticement. With merciless pungency his sword-like pen cut all those he despised.
Among the bloodstains of revolutionary fighters he showed his tenacious defiance
and marched ahead while calling [the others to follow him]. Lu Hsun was an
absolute realist, always uncompromising, always determined. In one of his
essays he maintained that one should [continue to] beat a dog after it had
fallen in water. If you did not, the dog wound jump up either to bite you
or at least to shake a lot of dirty water over you. Therefore the beating
had to be thorough. Lu Hsun did not entertain a speck of sentimentalism or
hypocrisy.

Now the mad dog, Japanese imperialism, had not been beaten in water yet.
We must learn this 'Lu Hsun spirit' and apply it to the whole country.

These characteristics are the components of the great 'Lu Hsun spirit'.
Throughout his life Lu Hsun never deviated from this spirit and that is why
he was an outstanding writer in the world of letters and a tough, excellent
vanguard in the revolutionary ranks. As we commemorate him, we must learn
his spirit. [We] must take it to all the units engaged in the Resistance
War and use it in the struggle for our national liberation.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Basic Tactics








BASIC TACTICS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  BASIC TACTICS

1937


CHAPTER I


  INTRODUCTORY REMARKS


  1. HOW THE POPULAR MASSES CARRY OUT MILITARY ACTION.


How is it that the bare-handed masses, banded together in ill-armed military
units without guns or bullets, are able to charge the enemy, kill the enemy,
and resolutely carry out effective action in the war? This is a very widespread
and very reasonable query. But if we know the function of the weapons used
by an army and the aim of an army's action, we can then understand how our
popular masses, although bare-handed, still have weapons and can engage in
action to subdue the enemy.

The principal function of an army's weapons is simply to kill the enemy,
and an army's final aim is simply to reduce or destroy the enemy's fighting
strength. Well, in our daily life, is there any object that cannot be used
to kill the enemy or any type of action that cannot reduce or destroy his
fighting strength? For example, a kitchen knife, a wooden cudgel, an axe,
a hoe, a wooden stool, or a stone can all be used to kill people. Such actions
as cutting electric lines, destroying bridges, starting rumors, spreading
poison, or cutting off supplies can everywhere inconvenience the enemy or
reduce his fighting strength. All these are methods we may be unwilling to
utilize or unable to employ. If we really want to kill and exterminate the
enemy, there are weapons for us everywhere and work for us to be doing at
all times, in order to ensure effective united action by the army and the
people.

  
  2. POINTS OF SPECIAL ATTENTION.


After from this, we must pay special attention to the present war on the
national level, which has become cruel beyond our imagination and has also
lasted a long time. We must not, because we are undergoing the suffering
of a war more cruel than any seen in the past, immediately capitulate; nor
must we, under the influence of a long war, suddenly lose our endurance and
give way to lassitude. We must inspire ourselves with the most resolute spirit
of unyielding struggle, with the most burning patriotic sentiments, and with
the will to endurance, and carry out a protracted struggle against the enemy.
We must know that, although the circumstances and the duration of the war
are cruel and protracted, this is nothing compared to what would happen if
the war were lost; if our country were destroyed and the whole of our people
reduced to a position of irretrievable ruin, the suffering would be even
more cruel and would never come to an end. Therefore, however cruel the war
may be, we must absolutely and firmly endure until the last five minutes
of struggle. This is especially the case with our present enemy, who finds
his advantage in a rapid decision in the war, whereas our advantage is to
be found in the strategy of a protracted war.

  
  3. WE MUST NOT FEAR THE ENEMY.


When we see the enemy, simply because he has a weapon in his hands, we must
not be frightened to death like a rat who sees a cat. We must not be afraid
of approaching him or infiltrating into his midst in order to carry out sabotage.
We are men; our enemies are also men; we are all men, so what should we fear?
The fact that he has weapons? We can find a way to seize his weapons. All
we are afraid of is getting killed by the enemy. But when we undergo the
oppression of the enemy to such a point as this, how can any one still fear
death? And if we do not fear death, then what is there to fear about the
enemy? So when we see the enemy, whether he is many or few, we must act as
though he is bread that can satisfy our hunger, and immediately swallow him.

  
  4. DEFINITION OF GUERRILLA WARFARE


When it is not advantageous for our main land army to meet the enemy in
large-scale engagements and we, therefore, 'send' out commando units or guerrilla
units, which employ the tactics of avoiding strength and striking at weakness,
of flitting about and having no fixed position, and of subduing the enemy
according to circumstances, and when we do not oppose the enemy according
to the ordinary rules of tactics, this is called employing guerrilla tactics.

CHAPTER II


  TACTICS


At a time when our country's national defense preparation are not completed,
and when our weapons are inferior to the excellent equipment with which the
enemy has provided himself, we must observe the following principles whenever
we wish to wage a battle with the enemy:

  
  1. PRECAUTIONS WHEN ON THE MARCH.


When we are on the march, we must send plainclothes units armed with pistols
ahead of our vanguard, behind our rear guard, and to the side of our lateral
defenses, in order to spy out the situation and to forestall unexpected attacks
by the enemy, or superfluous clashes.

  
  2. PRECAUTIONS DURING HALTS.


When we encamp, if there is a presumption that the enemy may be near, we
should send every day a guerrilla company—or at least a platoon—toward
the enemy's defenses to carry out reconnaissance at a distance (from 20 to
30 li ) or to join up with the local forces and carry out propaganda
among the masses, in order to inspire them to resist the enemy. If this unit
discovers the enemy, it should, on the one hand, resist him and, on the other
hand, report to us so that we can prepare to meet the foe or to retreat without
being drawn into an unnecessary battle. 

  
  3. WE MUST NOT ATTACK STRONG POSITIONS.


If the enemy guards his position firmly or defends a strong strategic point,
then, unless we have special guarantees of success. we must not attack
him. If we attack him, we will waste considerable time, and our losses in
killed and wounded will certainly be many times those of the enemy. Moreover,
in guerrilla warfare, our artillery is not strong: if we recklessly attack
a strong position, it will be very difficult to take it rapidly, at one stroke,
and, meanwhile, it will be easy for the enemy to gather his forces from all
sides and surround us. On this point, the army and the people must be absolutely
firm of purpose and cannot act recklessly in a disorderly fashion because
of a moment's anger.

  
  4. DO NOT FIGHT HARD BATTLES.


If we do not have a 100 per cent guarantee of victory, we should not fight
a battle, for it is not worth while to kill 1,000 of the enemy and lose 800
killed among ourselves. Especially in guerrilla warfare such as we are waging,
it is difficult to replace men, horses, and ammunition; if we fight a battle
and lose many men, and horses, and much ammunition, this must be considered
a defeat for us.

  
  5. WE MUST NOT FIGHT IF THE SITUATION OF THE ENEMY IS NOT CLEAR.


When we are encamped in a certain place and suddenly discover the enemy but
are not informed regarding his numbers or where he is coming from, we must
absolutely not fight, but must resolutely retreat several tens of
li. It is only if we are right up against the enemy that we
should send covering units, for, if the enemy comes to attack us, it is certainly
because his forces are superior or he has a plan, and we must under no
circumstances fall into his trap. If the enemy is in force, it is obviously
advantageous to retreat. If his numbers are small and we retreat, nothing
more than a little extra fatigue is involved, and there will always be time
to return and attack him again later. 

  
  6. WE MUST ORGANIZE THE MASSES AND UNITE WITH THEM.


Modern warfare is not a matter in which armies alone can determine victory
or defeat. Especially in guerrilla combat, we must rely on the force of the
popular masses, for it is only thus that we can have a guarantee of success.
The support of the masses offers us great advantages as regards transport,
assistance to wounded, intelligence, disruption of the enemy's position,
etc. At the same time, the enemy can be put into an isolated position, thus
further increasing our advantages. If, by misfortune, we are defeated, it
will also be possible to escape or to find concealment. Consequently, we
must not lightly give battle in places where the masses are not organized
and linked to us.

  
  7. USING THE MASSES TO MAKE A SURPRISE ATTACK AND BREAK A BLOCKADE.


When the enemy surrounds us and blockades us, we should rouse the popular
masses and cut the enemy's communications in all directions, so that he does
not know that our army is already near him. Then, we should take advantage
of a dark night or of the light of dawn to attack and disperse him.

  
  8. SURPRISE ATTACKS ON ISOLATED UNITS.


When we have reconnoitered the enemy's position and have kept our men at
a distance of several li and when he has unquestionably relaxed his
precautions, then we advance rapidly with light equipment, before dawn when
the enemy does not expect us, and exterminate him.

  
  9. USING THE POPULAR MASSES TO HARRY THE ENEMY.


On the basis of a decision by the main force of the army, in time of battle,
we send out part of our forces, divided into several units—the smallest
element being a platoon—to lead the local militia, police, volunteer
army, or other popular masses of the peasantry and the workers. These groups
use a great variety of flags, occupy mountaintops or villages and market
towns, use brass gongs, spears, rudimentary cannon, swords and spikes, trumpets,
etc. They scatter all over the landscape and yell, thus distracting the enemy's
eyes and ears. Or, both night and day, on all sides, they shoot off isolated
shots to cause panic among the enemy soldiers and fatigue their spirit. Then,
afterward, our army appears in full strength when the enemy does not expect
it and disperses him by a flank attack. 

  
  10. CIRCLING AROUND TO GET AWAY  THE ENEMY.


When we are faced with a large enemy force and do not have sufficient strength
to meet its attack, we use the method of circling around. We hasten to a
place where there are no enemy troops, and we use mountain trails so that
the enemy cannot catch up with us. At the same time, along the way, we utilize
the popular masses, getting them to carry on reconnaissance work in the front
and the rear, so that we are not attacked, by the enemy from either direction.

  
  11. GETTING OUT OF DIFFICULT SITUATIONS.


Presume that in the rear there is a pursuing army and in the front an obstacle,
or that the pursuing army is too strong for us. As a plan to get out of such
a difficult situation, we can send a part of our forces 4 or 5 li
off, to lure the enemy up a big road, while our main force follows a side
road and escapes the enemy. Or we can make a detour around to the enemy's
rear and attack him there by surprise. Or we can use the local militia and
the police to go along another route, leaving some objects, making footprints
in the road, sticking up notices etc., so as to induce the enemy to follow
them. Then, our main force suddenly rushes out from a side road, striking
at the enemy from the front and the rear, encircles him on all sides, and
annihilates him.

  
  12. "CAUSE AN UPROAR IN THE EAST, STRIKE IN THE WEST."


When the army wants to attack a certain place, it does not advance there
directly but makes a detour by some other place and then changes its course
in the midst of its march, in order to attack and disperse the enemy. "The
thunderclap leaves no time to cover one's ears." 

  
  13. CONCEALED ATTACKS  AMBUSH.


When the enemy is pursuing us in great haste we select a spot for an ambush
and wait until he arrives. Thus, we can capture the enemy all at one stroke.

  
  14. AMBUSHING THE ENEMY IN THE COURSE OF HIS MARCH.


When we learn from reconnaissance that the enemy plans to advance from a
certain point, we choose a spot where his path is narrow and passes through
confusing mountainous terrain and send a part of our troops—or a group
of sharpshooters— to lie hidden on the mountains bordering his path,
or in the forest, to wait until his main force is passing through. Then we
throw rocks down on his men from the mountains and rake them with bullets,
or shoot from ambush at their commanding officers mounted on horseback.

  
  15. MAKING A STRONG DEFENSE BY EMPTYING THE COUNTRYSIDE.


When our spies have informed us that the enemy is about to arrive, and if
our force is not sufficient to give battle, we should then carry out the
stratagem of "making a strong defense by emptying the countryside." We hide
the food, stores, fuel, grain, pots and other utensils, etc., in order to
cut off the enemy's food supply. Moreover, as regards the popular masses
of the area in question, with the exception of old men, women, and children,
who are left behind to provide reconnaissance information, we lead all
able-bodied men to hiding places. Thus, the enemy has no one to serve as
porters, guides, and scouts. At the same time, we send a few men to the enemy's
rear communication lines, to cut off his supplies, capture his couriers,
and cut or sabot age his communications facilities.

  
  16. MEETING A SUPERIOR ENEMY.


(1) When the enemy advances, we retreat. If the enemy's forces were weaker
than ours, he would not dare advance and attack us. So, when he advances
toward us, we can conclude that the enemy is certainly coming with superior
force and is acting according to plan and with preparation. It is, therefore,
appropriate for us to evade his vanguard, by withdrawing beforehand. If we
meet with the enemy in the course of our march and either do not have clear
information regarding him or know that his army is stronger than ours, we
should, without the slightest hesitation, carry out a precautionary withdrawal.

As to the place to which we should withdraw, it is not appropriate to go
long distances the main roads, so that the enemy follows us to the end. We
should move about sinuously in the nearby area, winding around in circles.
If the enemy appears ahead of us, we should circle around to his rear, if
the enemy is on the mountains, we should descend into the valleys; if the
enemy is in the middle, we should retreat on the two sides ; if the enemy
in on the left bank of the river, we should retreat on the right bank ; if
the enemy is on the right bank, we should retreat on the left bank.

Moreover, in withdrawing, when we come to a crossroads, we can deliberately
leave some objects in the branch of the road we do not take or send a small
fraction of our men horses that way, in order to leave some tracks or write
symbols. Or we can write some distinguishing marks on the road we do take
to indicate that it is closed. Thus, we induce the enemy to direct his pursuit
and attack in the wrong direction.

At such times, it is best to evacuate the popular masses and such armed forces
as the militia, police, volunteer army, etc., by various routes in all
directions, in order to confuse the enemy's eyes and ears. We can leave behind
part of our men, who bury their uniforms and weapons and disguise themselves
as merchants, street vendors, etc. They spread rumors or pretend to be obliging
in order to spy out information regarding the enemy's numbers, his plans,
the location and routine of his camps, and the precautions he is taking.
If the enemy questions them about the direction in which we have withdrawn
and the strength of our force, they should talk incoherently, pointing to
the east and saying the west, pointing to the south and saying the north,
replacing big by small and small by big, talking at random and creating rumors.
They wait until our army is about to attack, and then they dig up their uniforms
and put them on, take out their weapons, and attack the enemy from his midst,
thus completely routing him and leaving him with nowhere to turn.

(2) When the enemy retreats, we pursue. When the enemy army retreats, it
is appropriate to take advantage of the situation to advance. On such an
occasion, the enemy's military situation must have undergone a change, otherwise
he would not have retreated, and he is certainly not prepared to join battle
against us with any resolution. If we take advantage of the situation and
make a covering attack on his rear, the enemy's covering units will certainly
not be resolved to fight, and in the context of the enemy's over-all plan
it will be difficult for his forward units to return and join in the fray.
In rough mountainous terrain, where the paths are narrow and rivers and streams
intertwined so that there are many bridges, even if the enemy's forward forces
were to turn back, this move would require much time. So, by the time he
turns back, his rear will already have been annihilated and he will already
have been disarmed.

At this time, the organizations of the popular masses, should devise methods
for destroying the bridges on the route over which the enemy is retreating,
or cutting the wires of his communications system. Or, best of all, they
should wait until the bulk of the enemy's army have retreated and, taking
advantage of the protection afforded by our guards and army, block the enemy's
path of retreat, so that, although his forces may want to turn back, they
cannot do it, and, although they yearn for help, they cannot obtain it.

But, at such a time, the most important task of the popular masses
is to spy out the direction in which the enemy is withdrawing, in order to
ascertain whether or not there may be an ambush or a feigned retreat intended
to encircle us from two sides, and report to us immediately so that our army
can pluck up courage and pursue the enemy or devise a method of evading
him.

(3) When the enemy halts, we harass him. When the enemy is newly arrived
in our territory, is not familiar with the terrain, does not understand the
local dialect, and is unable to gain any information from the scouts he send
out, it is as though he had entered a distant and inaccessible land. At such
a time, we should increase our harassment—shooting off guns everywhere,
to make him ill at ease day and night, so exercising a great influence on
both his mind and body under such circumstances, I fear that any army, however
overbearing, will begin to waver and will become weary. We need only await
the time when his spirits are wavering and his body weary, and then, if our
armies rush in all together, we can certainly exterminate him completely.

  
  17. DEALING WITH A WEAK ENEMY.


Fighting as we are for the existence of our nation and the achievement of
the aims of guerrilla warfare—which are to destroy the enemy and to
stir up the courage of the popular masses— when we are faced with a
weak enemy, naturally we should unite with the popular masses of the place
in question to surround him and exterminate him at one stroke.

  
  18. AROUSING THE MASSES.


There are always a good many among the popular masses who forget the great
cause for the sake of petty advantage. Frequently having received great favors
from the enemy, they act contrary to conscience and aid the forces of evil.
For this reason, before the arrival of the enemy in a given place, we must
do our utmost to whip up the spirits of the popular masses, to rouse their
will to resist and to endow them with an unshakable resolve to fight to the
end. without seeking advantage, without compromise or surrender. We must
induce them to follow our orders sincerely and to cooperate with our army
to resist the enemy. At the same time, we should also organize "resist-the-enemy
associations", "associations for national salvation", and other types of
professional bodies to facilitate the transmission of orders and the evacuation
of villages in time of necessity and to clean out traitors and prevent their
utilization by the enemy.

CHAPTER III


  
  THE AIM OF THE WAR


The ultimate aim of guerrilla warfare is certainly to disarm the enemy, to
destroy his fighting strength, to get back the territories he has occupied
and to save our brethren whom he is trampling under foot! But when, because
of objective circumstances and other factors of various kinds, it is impossible
to attain this goal, it sometimes happens that the areas unaffected by the
fighting are controlled by the enemy in all tranquility. This should not
be. Because of this possibility, we must think up methods for inflicting
economic and political damage in these areas and destroying communication
facilities, so that, although the enemy has occupied our territory, it is
of no use to him and he decides to withdraw on his own initiative.

In guerrilla warfare, we must observe the principle "To gain territory is
no cause for joy, and to lose territory is no cause for sorrow." To lose
territory or cities is of no importance. The important thing is to think
up methods for destroying the enemy. If the enemy's effective strength is
undiminished, even if we take cities, we will be unable to hold them. Conversely,
when our own forces are insufficient, if we give up the cities, we still
have hope of regaining them. It is altogether improper to defend cities to
the utmost, for this merely leads to sacrificing our own effective strength.

CHAPTER IV


  ORGANIZATION


  
  1. OPPORTUNITIES FOR ORGANIZATION.


(1) When we are devoting ourselves to warfare in an open region, it is the
sparsely populated areas, with a low cultural level, where communications
are difficult and facilities for transmitting correspondence are inadequate,
that are advantageous.

(2) Narrow mountainous regions, rising and falling terrain, or areas in the
vicinity of narrow roads—all of which are inconvenient for the movement
of large bodies of troops— are also advantageous.

Opportunities also exist:

(3) When the people in the enemy's rear are in sympathy with our army.

(4) When the enemy is well-armed, and his troops numerous and courageous,
so that we have to evade direct clashes.

(5) When the enemy has penetrated deeply into our territory and we are preparing
everywhere to carry out measures of harassment and obstruction against him.

(6) Dense forests or reedy marshes, in the depths of which we can disappear,
are most advantageous for this purpose, especially in the late summer and
autumn, when we find ourselves behind a curtain of green.

  
  2. FORMS OF ORGANIZATION.


The action of a guerrilla unit takes one of the following forms:

(1) We send out a large cavalry unit from our main force, together with mounted
artillery, or cavalry accompanied by a platoon or more armed with light automatic
weapons. They penetrate as rapidly as possible into the enemy's rear destroy
there all his communications links, and carry out the thorough and complete
destruction of all his storehouses of food, grain for his horses, and ammunition.
Moreover, they send out a small group of their forces to destroy all places
of military significance in the enemy's rear. Once these forays have been
carried out, the group fights its way out in another direction and rejoins
the main force.

(2) We send out cavalry or a special task group of infantry. Their strength
should be from a platoon to a few companies. They should penetrate as deeply
as possible into the enemy's rear and, moving rapidly and unpredictably,
should carry the battle from one place to another. When there is no alternative,
or when the enemy is not expected to arrive before a certain time, they can
also dwell temporarily in secret where they are. As required by the exigencies
of the situation, they can employ either all or a part of their forces. They
return when the time comes that they can no longer stay in the enemy's rear,
or when the task entrusted to them is completed, or because the enemy has
already discovered our traces and our intentions, and has taken effective
measures of defense.

(3) In the enemy's rear, we choose some young, strong, and courageous elements
among the local population and organize some small groups who will accept
the leadership of the experienced and trained persons we send out or of
experienced persons whom we had trained previously in the place in question.
The secret activity of these small groups involves moving from their own
area to another one, changing their uniforms, unit numbers, and external
appearance, and using every method so as to cover their tracks to the utmost.

(4) Or we seek volunteers from our army and provide them with high-quality
light weapons, in order to form them into special guerrilla units under the
leadership of such officers as have benefited from experience and study.

(5) Guerrilla units can be classified according to their nature. Those formed
of selected volunteers are called special guerrilla units. Those organized
generally from a part of our army are called basic guerrilla units. Those
organized from the local population are called local guerrilla units. When
basic and local guerrilla units engage in combined actions, they are subject
to the unified command of the commander of the basic unit.

(6) As for the choice of the members of a guerrilla unit, the members of
a basic guerrilla unit should be taken from among those soldiers who are
healthy, firm of purpose, patient, courageous, and quick-witted. Moreover,
the soldiers themselves be willing to join the group in question. In the
case of the independent actions carried out by these men in the course of
guerrilla operations, there is generally no way to verify whether or not
their tasks are executed in accordance with orders, and frequently they act
beyond the knowledge of the responsible commander. For this reason, the choice
and training of members of guerrilla units should have as its central theme
"faithfully carrying out one's task. "

(7) The choice and the nomination of the commander of a guerrilla task group
or small group requires even greater forethought and reflection. The capacity
of the commanders for faithful and courageous action, their military
knowledge-especially their knowledge of guerrilla tactics-their possession
of a lively intelligence and the ability to adapt rapidly to changing
circumstances, their loyalty, and their daring are indispensable conditions
for carrying out plans and completing our tasks.

  
  3. NUMBER OF TROOPS


The number of men belonging to a guerrilla unit is determined by the tasks,
but it commonly ranges from five or ten men to something over a thousand.
However, the maximum strength of such a unit may not exceed one regiment.
If the number of soldiers is too large, the movements of our forces will
be encumbered, there will be greater difficulties regarding food supply,
and it will be difficult to conceal the troops by the use of false uniforms.
Because of these problems, our plans may be discovered or revealed before
they have been carried out. Moreover, replenishing our supplies of ammunition
will be a problem. Furthermore, we will often have difficulties because of
poor roads, with the result that not only will all our plans prove merely
illusory, but also we will often fall into difficulties to no good purpose
in going and returning.

The great superiority of a small guerrilla unit lies in its remarkable mobility.
With very little expenditure of time and effort, one can get food, and it
is also easy to find a place to rest, for one does not need much in the way
of rations or a place of shelter to camp. Still less is one held up by bad
roads, and supplies of ammunition and medicine are also easy to replenish.
If we do not succeed in our operation, we can retreat in good order.

  
  4. TYPES OF SOLDIERS.


As for the type of soldiers employed in guerrilla units, cavalry, engineers,
and highly mobile infantry troops are excellent. Cavalry is entrusted with
the task of creating disorder on the enemy's flanks, and also, when we are
pursuing the enemy, with that of maintaining pressure on his rear guard and
creating confusion on his flanks and in his rear. Moreover, at all times,
cavalry is the guerrilla unit's only instrument for transmitting correspondence
and for reconnoitering. Hence, the cavalry is indispensable to any guerrilla
unit. Engineers are used for destroying communications in the enemy's rear
(such as railroads, telephone and telegraph lines, bridges, etc. ) As for
the highly mobile infantry units, they are useful to startle the enemy and
produce in him a feeling of insecurity night and day.

  
  5. WEAPONS.


Apart from the rifles of the infantry and the cavalry, light machine guns,
hand grenades, etc., guerrilla units should also be supplied with pistols
and submachine guns.

To the extent that the terrain permits it, one can also add heavy machine
guns, mortars, and small cannons.

  
  6. MEN AND BAGGAGE 


Convenience of movement and agility being the characteristics of a guerrilla
unit, the baggage train, cases of equipment and ammunition, etc., should
all be kept as simple as possible for the sake of convenience. The combatant
and noncombatant members of the unit should all be organized as most appropriate
for guerrilla warfare, and all other persons who are not indispensable should
be kept to the strict minimum.

(1) The officers and men in each guerrilla squad should not exceed 8; each
platoon should not exceed 26; and each company should not exceed 100.

(2) When automatic weapons are somewhat more numerous, the number of men
can be still further reduced, and guerrilla units composed of 5 or 6 men
can be sent out repeatedly, in order to achieve the greatest results in terms
of harassing the enemy or securing intelligence.

(3) Each commanding officer of a unit should have only one orderly at most.
Apart from this according to the complexity of the tasks, two or three officers
should share the services of one orderly. Even more attention should be accorded
to not abusing this rule by unnecessarily increasing the number of couriers
as a substitute for orderlies and to seeing that an unnecessarily large number
of men are not sent to carry out a given task, thereby reducing the fighting
strength of one's own unit. Hence, when one sends out couriers, one must
reflect carefully on whether they can accomplish their task or not.

(4) It is preferable that each mass unit should not carry bundles of food.
When the dry rations carried separately by each soldier are exhausted, one
should take advantage of opportunities to borrow the pots and pans of the
population so as to prepare supplementary rations. If it is necessary to
carry bundles, each unit should not carry more than two.

(5) Bundles of writing materials should not be carried in excess of needs.
Normally, two bundles per regiment, one per battalion, and one per company
are permissible. The weight of each bundle should not exceed 40 kilograms.

(6) Each officer and soldier should carry his own bedding, knapsack, etc.
Bearers should not be engaged to transport these items. This rule should
be firmly established in advance.

  
  7. OBJECTS TO BE CARRIED.


A guerrilla unit preferably should have the following things:

(1) Equipment and explosives for destroying railroads, telephone and telegraph
lines, arsenals, etc.

(2) Medicines. Those needed in case of emergencies should be carried according
to the season, but dressings, etc., should be provided on a permanent basis.

(3) A compass, and maps of the area in which the guerrilla unit operates.

(4) Light radio equipment, which is especially important in order to be able
to report at all times on the situation of the enemy and to listen in on
the enemy's reports.

(5) A certain quantity of gold coins, to provide for unexpected needs and
for buying food.

  
  8. DISCIPLINE.


Whether or not the military discipline of a guerrilla unit is good influences
the reputation of our whole army and its ability to secure the sympathy and
support of the popular masses. Only strict discipline can assure the complete
victory of all our independent actions. Consequently, our attitude toward
those persons who violate military discipline, harm the people's interest,
and do not resolutely execute the orders of their superiors, should consist
in punishing them severely without the slightest regard for politeness. The
application of military discipline in a partisan unit does not aim exclusively
at punishment. Rather, it aims at strengthening the political instruction
of the officers and men and raising their level of political consciousness,
thereby indirectly eliminating a large number of actions contrary to military
discipline and causing the officers and soldiers to understand the psychology
of the masses, so that at appropriate times they can unite effectively with
the common people.

  
  9. POLITICAL ORGANIZATION.


(1) Each guerrilla task group and small group should have a political director,
and in the headquarters of the guerrilla unit there should be a political
training department, for directing the political work of officers and soldiers
and dealing with the human problems of all the political instructors.

(2) Each mess unit of a guerrilla unit should establish a special commissioner
in order to guard against the infiltration and activity of reactionary elements
and to encourage those soldiers without clear ideological consciousness who
are wavering in their purposes.

(3) In order to prevent desertion by the soldiers, a committee against desertion,
as well as "groups of ten," should be organized in each guerrilla unit. The
groups of ten and the committee against desertion are negative methods for
preventing desertion. Their organization and work should be carried out roughly
as follows:

  a.  
    In order to prevent desertion, every guerrilla unit should establish a desertion
    committee and every mess unit should organize a group of ten.
b.
    The committee against desertion should be composed of from seven to nine
    people, one of them being the chairman and the others members. It should
    be composed of lower-level cadres who can endure difficulties and whose thinking
    is friary, as well as heads of the groups of ten. The groups of ten are composed
    of ten men in all, one of them being the head and the others members. They
    are made up of faithful and reliable soldiers.
c.  
    The over-all activity of the groups of ten is subordinated to the committee
    against desertion. As regards military matters, it is subordinated to the
    commander of the unit and to the committee against desertion. In other work,
    it is subordinated to the political training department. Both groups of ten
    and committees against desertion must accept the guidance of their commanding
    officer.
d.  
    The work of the group of ten should take account of all the actions and talk
    of the officers and soldiers, especially of "camp idlers" and such. Unstable
    elements should be secretly watched, even if they are members of the group
    of ten or their friends.
e.  
    Meetings should be held once a week to review the work and to report to the
    commanding officer and the committee against desertion regarding the situation
    in general at all times. After each extreme difficulty or when our army has
    suffered a slight defeat and is staying in its base camp, special attention
    should be paid to unfavourable attitudes that may develop among the soldiers
    and to conversations that may endanger the morale of the soldiers.
f.  
    The work of the committee against desertion consists above all in reviewing
    the work of the groups of ten and in admonishing and guiding them at the
    appropriate times. The committee may also call conferences of the heads of
    all the groups of ten, or plenary conferences of all the members of the groups,
    to discuss the progress of the work as a whole.


The soldiers' life is rather like living in the desert, and every day the
men undergo the fatigue of political study and training in the art of combat.
This may easily engender feelings of disgust and opposition. In order to
provide entertainment for the army and to compensate for a dull life, one
should establish in a guerrilla unit clubs or amusement rooms. (For details
of the organization and activities of such clubs, see the account in Chap.
XV, 10.)

  
  10. SPECIAL FORMS OF MILITARY ORGANIZATION.


(1) In order to make up for insufficient supplies of ammunition and poor
marksmanship, every company should have: from three to nine sharpshooters,
to be employed exclusively for shooting from ambush at long distances or
for shooting at special targets (enemy officers, machine-gunners or
artillery-men, couriers, etc. ) .

(2) The commander of each task group and small group should choose particularly
sharp-eyed couriers to serve as observes. Normally, a task group commander
should have two of these, and a small group commander one. These men serve
exclusively to remedy the insufficiency of battlefield observation.

(3) Each task group and small group of a guerrilla unit should have two nurses,
who devote themselves exclusively to emergency care of sick officers and
soldiers and to instruction in hygiene.

(4) In order to obtain reliable information regarding the enemy's disposition,
so as to be able to oppose him without losing any opportunities, all guerrilla
units should establish groups of scouts. Normally, it will be sufficient
if each unit has one platoon, each task group has one squad, and each small
group a smaller element. A network of local scouts should also be established
by the group of scouts wherever they go, or by scouts concealed in advance.

CHAPTER V


  TASKS


The principal object of the action of a guerrilla unit lies in dealing the
enemy the strongest possible blows to his morale, and in creating disorder
and agitation in his rear, in drawing off his principal force to the flanks
or to the rear, in stopping or slowing down his operations, and ultimately
in dissipating his fighting strength so that the enemy's units are crushed
one by one and he is precipitated into a situation where, even by rapid and
deceptive actions, he can neither advance nor retreat.

    1.  Destroy railroads and highways within the area of action, as well as important
    structures along the roads. Telephone lines and telegraph systems are especially
    important.

    2.  Destroy the enemy's principal or secondary supply depots.

    3.  Destroy the enemy's storehouses of food and military equipment.

    4.  Strike in the enemy's rear, at his baggage train, or at his mounted and unmounted
    couriers, as well as at his mounted scouts, etc. Also seize the provisions
    and ammunition that the enemy is bringing up from the rear to the front.

    5.  Strike at the enemy's independent task groups and at the inhabited areas
    that he has not yet solidly occupied.

    6.  Mobilize and organize the popular masses everywhere and aid them in their
    own self-defense.

    7.  Destroy airfields and military depots of the air force in the enemy's rear.


CHAPTER VI


  OPERATIONS


  
  1. ACTION.

1.  
    The first principle lies in careful and secret preparation, and in rapid
    and sudden attack. Fierce wind and heavy rain offer a favorable occasion
    for a guerrilla attack, as do thick fog, the darkness of night, or circumstances
    in which it is possible to strike at an exhausted enemy.
2.  
    The operations of a guerrilla unit should consist in offensive warfare. Whether
    its numbers be great or small, such a unit can nonetheless appear where it
    is not expected and, in its attacks, take advantage of the enemy's lack of
    preparation. But when there are indications that the situation is unfavourable,
    or when there is no certainty of victory, it is appropriate to withdraw rapidly,
    so as not to suffer damaging losses. If the attack originally planned by
    the guerrilla unit fails to give an advantageous result, and, the enemy goes
    over to the offensive, a guerrilla unit should withdraw quickly. Only when
    the enemy pursues us, and it is impossible to evade his attacks, can we fight
    a defensive action and then gradually withdraw.


  
  2. THE USE OF TACTICS.


    1.  The redoubtable force of a guerrilla unit definitely does not depend exclusively
    on its own numerical strength, but on its use of sudden attacks and ambushes,
    so as to "cause an uproar in the east and strike in the west," appearing
    now here and now there, using false banners and making empty demonstrations,
    propagating rumors about one's own strength, etc., in order to shatter the
    enemy's morale and create in him a boundless terror. In addition, we must
    pay attention to such principles as: "The enemy advances, we retreat, the
    enemy retreats, we advance, the enemy halts, we harass him," camouflaged
    attacks, etc.

    2.  A really excellent stratagem for bringing the enemy to his destruction lies
    in mobilizing the popular masses, in making a strong defense by emptying
    the countryside, in luring the enemy to penetrate our lines deeply, in cutting
    his communications, in placing him in a position where he has difficulties
    with his food supply, where his men are weary and the terrain is unfavorable
    and then launching an attack.

    3.  By such tactics as sudden attacks, ambushes, making a strong defense by emptying
    the countryside, etc., a guerrilla unit should make every effort to avoid
    positional warfare, and all frontal engagements. Before the local guerrilla
    units have received regular military training. they should not be launched
    against the enemy in a regular and prolonged battle. For this reason, when
    local guerrilla units are first formed, they should be used only in conjunction
    with actions by basic or special guerrilla units. It is only after a certain
    period that they can act independently.

    4.  If we strike at the point where the enemy feels the greatest difficulties,
    in order to draw his main force to come to the relief of the position, then,
    afterward, we send our main force somewhere else, either to attack other
    isolated and weak forces of the enemy or to attack his reinforcements on
    the march.


  
  3. ADVANTAGEOUS AND DISADVANTAGEOUS TERRAIN. 

1.  
    Because open terrain affords very little good cover, it is slightly
    disadvantageous for us when guerrilla units operate there. Covered, mountainous,
    or broken terrain are advantageous for us.
2.  
    A guerrilla unit should be thoroughly familiar with the terrain in its region
    of action and should think frequently about the ways in which it can appear
    from a place where the enemy army does not expect it, following secret and
    hidden routes such as valleys, forests, or narrow winding paths, so as to
    approach close to the enemy army and take advantage of a situation in which
    the enemy, persuaded he is quite secure, has taken no measure of defence
    whatsoever. Then, following the principle that the "thunderclap leaves no
    time to cover one's ears," the unit can strike sudden blows and then vanish
    into hiding without a trace, thus reducing the enemy to a level where he
    does not feel secure whether he is withdrawing or advancing, attacking or
    defending, moving or remaining still, sitting or lying down.
3.  
    Relatively large villages, market towns, and places where there is a reasonably
    large amount of grain and other moveable property are frequently the objects
    of enemy attack and harassment. A guerrilla unit should regularly spy out
    the enemy's traces, and prepare an ambush so as to attack him when he is
    in the midst of his march.
4.  
    A guerrilla unit should use every method, within its area of action, to prevent
    the enemy's small units from entering. and his main force from concealing
    itself there. In case of necessity, a guerrilla unit should also strive to
    unmask the military strength, disposition, and plans of the enemy operating
    outside its area of action.


  
  4. SEASONS.


A guerrilla unit must consider the seasons (winter, summer, or autumn are
suitable for operations ), with reference to the strength of our forces and
those of the enemy, and especially with reference to the weapons of war;
it must also be thoroughly familiar with the organization of the enemy's
rear. Whether or not each season is favourable to us is also determined with
reference to the terrain.

  
  5. SECRET ACTION


The peculiar quality of the operations of a guerrilla unit lies entirely
in taking the enemy by surprise. Consequently, we must take every possible
measure to preserve military secrecy, as described in detail below:
1.  

    The commander of the unit should explain to his subordinates their tasks
    and the plan for the operation only just before the action begins, or while
    they are advancing. In case of necessity, he should explain the whole plan
    only by stages, so that others learn about each stage only when required.
2.  
    The best method for the transmission of orders in a guerrilla unit is by
    oral explanations from the commander to his subordinates. It is necessary
    to limit written orders insofar as possible, in order to avoid leakage of
    military secrets.
3.  
    One should not discuss the whole of one's actions and plans with guides or
    the local population. This is the case even with regard to local populations
    favourable to us; it is even more necessary to forbid such talk when we are
    about to attack a certain place.
4.  
    We should send out faithful and reliable scouts in advance to observe the
    point where we are going to camp or to lie in ambush along important roads
    in the enemy's rear, in order to cut off his information.
5.  
    When we advance, our rear guard should take full responsibility for obliterating
    and removing all secret signals and road signs. We should also advance by
    circuitous route, so that the enemy does not know the direction of our advance.
6.  
    Fixed code names should be used in place of all unit designations, and the
    use of the real names of units should be strictly prohibited.
7.  
    Except in case of necessity, all documents should be burned immediately after
    they have been read.
8.  
    Apart from the methods already enumerated, the true plans of a guerrilla
    unit can also be obscured in certain cases by using the local population
    for the deliberate propagation of false information about the operations
    of the guerrilla unit, in order to deceive the enemy.


  
  6. ARRANGEMENTS AND PREPARATIONS FOR MOVEMENT.


In order that our movements may be rapid, apart from doing our utmost to
simplify all our organization, we should at all times maintain excellent
preparations for action (investigation and intelligence regarding the front,
care of sick soldiers, preparation for guides, preferably employing local
peasants whose sympathies lie with the guerrillas, or other reliable persons),
and we should also preferably carry three days' dry rations. If this is done,
then when we want to move, we move, and when we want to stop, we stop, and
there is no need for special arrangements.

  
  7. THE CONDITIONS FOR VICTORY.

1.  
    A condition for the victory of a guerrilla unit is that the officers and
    soldiers have an absolutely courageous and resolute spirit. They must also
    be filled with a spirit of action in common, and be thoroughly alert and
    resolved to carry out their own tasks. Apart from this, they must have healthy
    bodies and be able to endure boundless hardships, be good at the use of their
    weapons, etc.
2.  
    A guerrilla unit should not lose heart in difficult times, nor should it
    cease its activity if it encounters difficult circumstances. As regards their
    confidence in ultimate victory, their confidence in the success of their
    cause, and especially their hatred of our national enemy, such circumstances
    should only strengthen their purpose to advance courageously in spite of
    all obstacles.


  
  8. UNITED ACTIONS.


If a small guerrilla unit, because its numbers are insufficient, cannot carry
out a task assigned to it, it can unite temporarily with a few other guerrilla
units, in order to fulfill its task.

Guerrilla operations are best carried out under cover of night.

CHAPTER VII


  SURPRISE ATTACKS


  
  1. POINTS THAT SHOULD BE CAREFULLY CONSIDERED REGARDING OUR TASKS BEFORE
  A SURPRISE ATTACK.


When a guerrilla unit has finished concentrating for an attack, and when
plans for scouts, courier service etc., have all been satisfactorily completed,
and one is preparing a surprise attack on a certain inhabited place, the
commander of the guerrilla unit must first form a clear idea about each of
the following points.

1.  
    What is the strength of the military forces defending the given inhabited
    place? How are they deployed? How are they armed? What is their fighting
    capacity? How many scouts to sound a warning have they sent out?
2.  
    Is there any other enemy nearby? If there is, how far away is he? Can he
    quickly come to the aid of the defending forces? Can we imagine how he would
    come to aid them? From what direction he would come?
3.  
    What sort of roads are there that could be followed by the guerrillas and
    by the enemy? What hidden roads are there in the vicinity of the place we
    intend to attack by surprise? What route will we take to get to the place
    we are attacking? The preceding three points are not only things we should
    know in view of carrying out a surprise attack; we must also not fail to
    consider them with reference to our withdrawal after the attack.
4.  
    As for fixing the time of a surprise attack, it is best to carry it out at
    night, for, under the cover of darkness, even if the attack should fail,
    it can still inspire panic in the enemy. But we can attack at night only
    if we are thoroughly familiar with the terrain, and have clearly understood
    the enemy's dispositions or have extremely good guides. Otherwise, we should
    choose instead to carry out such surprise attacks at daybreak. If a surprise
    attack is to be directed against a supply depot, it should be carried out
    in the dead of night, for the men, horses, and military equipment in such
    a depot will be on the move again very early, at daybreak.
5.  
    Can the population of the given inhabited place aid the enemy or not? How
    can we prevent the population from bringing trouble on itself in this way?


 While we should think through our plans at length, we should avoid
overly subtle plans.

  
  2. POINTS FOR ATTENTION BEFORE SETTING OUT.

1.  
    Before setting out, a guerrilla unit should complete all its preparations
    for the march (see below). Moreover, it should consider taking stretchers
    for transporting wounded soldiers.
2.  
    The method for a surprise attack on the enemy should be thoroughly understood
    beforehand not only by the commander of the unit and the commanders of each
    task group, but also by all the members of each independent task group. The
    best mode of transmitting this information is through oral explanations by
    the commander and his staff. Written orders of all kinds should be held to
    a minimum, in order to avoid having their contents divulged by loss or mistake.
3.  
    Prior to setting out, all officers at every level should appoint a replacement,
    in order, on the one hand to express their resolution to sacrifice themselves
    and, on the other hand, to avoid the risk that, if they are wounded or killed,
    the action of the guerrilla unit may fail to attain its objective because
    of them, thus influencing the whole situation.


  
  3. POINTS FOR ATTENTION WHILE ON THE MOVE.

1.  
    We must make the greatest efforts to conceal the movements of a guerrilla
    unit and to prevent discovery by the enemy. Consequently, while advancing,
    we must leave the highroads and avoid large villages, and choose out-of-the-way
    places or even places where there are no roads at all, advancing along narrow
    winding trails. But we should keep away from miry roads, so as to avoid excessive
    fatigue.
2.  
    When advancing, we should not proceed for long time on the same road, for
    this makes it easy for the enemy to discover our tracks. From the standpoint
    of keeping our movements secret, it is also generally appropriate to move
    by night, even when we are advancing a long distance.
3.  
    When we are advancing, for the sake of concealing ourselves, we should hold
    the number of people we send out for reconnaissance to the very lowest level.
    In general, it will be sufficient to send just a few scouts along the road,
    but we must have very good guides.
4.  
    If we are not absolutely certain that there are no enemy spies coming to
    observe us, it is best to divide our forces into small groups, which advance
    separately in different directions and then concentrate at a point which
    has been secretly designated.
5.  
    When a guerrilla unit is on the move, it should be constantly prepared for
    a meeting with the enemy. For this reason, the commanding officer of a guerrilla
    unit generally advances, accompanied by his staff, just behind the scouts,
    behind the elite soldiers, or ahead of the staff of the unit (the staff is
    entrusted to the leadership of the second in command). Thus, it is easy to
    obtain a clear picture of the situation, and decisions can be taken very
    rapidly. If the commander sees that it is possible to advance, he advances;
    if he becomes aware of difficulties, he withdraws. All that is required is
    for two or three officers to hold a discussion, and then the decision can
    be made. Thus, we avoid sending orders back and forth, with the consequent
    wasting of opportunities, and we diminish command form the rear, and its
    attendant evil of taking action not in keeping with the circumstances.
6.  
    Apart from the scouts sent out along the road, the soldiers of the guerrilla
    unit should not load their rifles, so as to avoid accidental discharges during
    the march and discovery by the enemy.


  
  4. MEASURES TO BE TAKEN IF THE ENEMY IS ENCOUNTERED WHILE ON THE MARCH.

1.  
    Under no circumstances should a guerrilla unit provoke a pointless battle
    before it has reached its objective. Even though a guerrilla unit may encounter
    the enemy in the course of its march, it should devise a way for getting
    around him—if necessary, departing from the original plan. If there
    is no way of avoiding battle, we should emerge from ambush, after rapid
    preparations, so as to appear where the enemy does not expect us and annihilate
    him by a surprise attack. At the same time, when we are carrying out such
    a maneuver, we should pay attention to whether the enemy halts or advances,
    and send out scouts to reconnoiter from all directions. If the enemy army
    is not prepared for battle or if, although he is in some strength, he is
    not on the alert, we should charge him immediately. Otherwise, we should
    remain in hiding and quietly await an opportunity.
2.  
    When, in the course of our march, we encounter enemy outposts or scouts,
    we should avoid being seen by them and circle past them in strict silence.
    But it we encounter a situation in which we judge there is an opportunity
    to be grasped, we should act rapidly and capture them without firing a shot.


  
  5. DISPOSITION OF TROOPS DURING A SURPRISE ATTACK.


When a guerrilla unit carries out a surprise attack, the disposition of its
troops should be more or less as follows:
1.  
    We should launch a fierce attack by our main force on the point in the enemy's
    disposition where it hurts the most — a really swift and resolute sudden
    blow. We should also send another force around to carry out energetic action
    on the enemy's flanks and in his rear, in order to confuse his judgement,
    and prevent him from fathoming where our main force is located.
2.  
    We should attack one point in the enemy's disposition with all our might,
    but we should also carry out feigned deployments in other places and make
    an empty demonstration with a few scattered soldiers, so as to confuse the
    enemy's eyes and ears, and disperse his forces.
3.  
    If we can determine beforehand the enemy's line of retreat, then we should,
    within the limits of what is possible, send a part of our forces to intercept
    him. Ii the enemy has his heavy artillery and logistic supply installed outside
    the village, then we should designate a special small group to seize them.
4.  
    If the guerrilla unit is numerically strong, it should be divided into several
    columns and should carry out the attack from two, three, or several directions,
    attempting to cut off the enemy's retreat, But we should consider the matter
    thoroughly, so as to avoid causing confusion in our own ranks, which might
    result in erroneously taking our own troops for those of the enemy. Because
    of this possibility, it is necessary, in advance of the action, to agree
    on signals.
5.  
    In the case of a surprise attack on the enemy, if there is reason to fear
    that enemy reinforcements may arrive from a certain direction, we should
    send a small body of troops in advance of the action to the route where the
    reinforcements may arrive, so as to obstruct their advance, or report this
    peril to the main force.
6.  
    At the time of a surprise attack, the choice of the point on which the brunt
    of the attack will fall, and the geographical distribution of our forces
    (in general, two-thirds of our men are used for the principal direction of
    attack, and only one-third for the auxiliary directions of attack) must
    absolutely be such as to prevent the enemy forces from spreading out or receiving
    reinforcements and to make it possible for us to smash them one by one.
7.  
    The various task groups making up a guerrilla unit should divide their forces
    within a very short distance of the point where the attack is to be made,
    and from there make a separate but coordinated advance. The best place for
    this is the point from which the charge will be made. In this way, we can
    avoid such misfortunes as losing our way, or the premature division of our
    forces, and we can also. guard against the danger of surprise attacks by
    the enemy. For the farther apart are the various independent columns or groups,
    the more likely they are to be separated by the terrain, and the more difficult
    it will be to expect them all to strike at the same moment.

  
  6. THE SUCCESS OF A SURPRISE ATTACK.


In general, we charge the enemy when he is not prepared, in circumstances
where he is frightened and flustered. If we really want to strike when the
enemy is not expecting us and attain success, the following points should
be attended to:
1.  
    We must act rapidly and secretly and not allow our plans to be revealed
    prematurely.
2.  
    We must strike at a time when the enemy's warning system is not very alert.
3.  
    We must make an empty display, and attack in several places at once, so that
    the enemy's reaction is confused, his forces are frightened and hamper one
    another, and he cannot use all his strength to resist us stubbornly.
4.  
    In carrying out the surprise attack, we must attack at the appointed hours;
    there must be no noise; no shots must be fired; there must be no battle cries.
    We must make every soldier understand the use of the arms employed in a surprise
    attack, which are the bayonet and the hand grenade. We must not return fire
    simply because we hear the gunfire of the enemy. It is only when we have
    an opportunity to take advantage of the situation to attack the enemy that
    we should launch our attack, with our vanguard well supported by our rear
    guard, choosing frontal, flanking, or direct blows.


  
  7. DISPOSITIONS FOLLOWING THE SUCCESS OF A SURPRISE ATTACK.

1.  
    As soon as the tasks of a surprise attack have been carried out, a guerrilla
    unit should rapidly withdraw. Before withdrawing, it is best to go a few
    li in a false direction, and then afterward turn and go in
    our true direction, so that the enemy will be unable to discover our tracks,
    and will not be able to follow us.
2.  
    It is not appropriate for a guerrilla unit to take along prisoners, or to
    acquire large amounts of booty, which hinder our movement. It is best to
    require the prisoners first to hand over their weapons, and then to disperse
    them or to execute them. As for booty, it should be dispatched by the local
    government, or by the population.
3.  
    During the battle, three officers and men out of every company should be
    given the exclusive task of picking up and gathering together abandoned rifles
    and ammunition. After a victorious battle, we should devote all our efforts
    to collecting everything on the battlefield, and we can also call upon the
    population of nearby areas to gather such things together, so that not the
    smallest trifle is left behind.


  
  8. DISPOSITIONS FOLLOWING THE DEFEAT OF A SURPRISE ATTACK.


If a surprise attack is defeated, we should rapidly withdraw to the place
of assembly designated in advance. The usual assembly point is in the place
where we encamped the previous night. If our forces are sufficient, we can
leave a reserve unit along the designated withdrawal route, to look out for
prisoners and wounded men.



CHAPTER VIII


  ESPIONAGE


  
  1. POINTS FOR ATTENTION WHEN CARRYING OUT ESPIONAGE.

1.  
    All reports on the situation should be transmitted without loss of time to
    one's superiors or to friendly armies.
2.  
    The reports which we collect absolutely must be in full detail. All sloppy
    and negligent reporting must be severely prohibited.
3.  
    The scope of espionage is not limited merely to the situation of the enemy;
    spies should also pay attention to the terrain. We should be informed of
    all aspects of the terrain that are disadvantageous to us, especially those
    aspects favourable to the enemy, such as narrow roads, river crossings,
    circuitous routes for avoiding these river crossings and narrow roads, etc.
4.  
    We should bend every effort to obtain complete and detailed information regarding
    all matters having any relation to our guerrilla unit; our efforts should
    never cease until we understand the situation thoroughly.
5.  
    We should pay attention to the sentiments of the people toward ourselves
    and the enemy. Are the people actively aiding us? How is their positive attitude
    manifested?

  
  2. METHODS OF ESPIONAGE.


Apart from sending out courageous and intelligent individuals (i.e., spies)
to carry out espionage on every hand, a guerrilla unit must unite closely
with the popular masses of the place in question. Moreover, in strategically
important places, we use reliable local inhabitants or those among the people
who sympathize with the guerrilla unit (for example, we can make use of feudal
relationships and find a relative, or someone belonging to the family of
person who has been executed by the enemy; we can also employ those among
the people who hate the enemy, etc. ). We give these people a relatively
good salary, establish a secret espionage network, as well as a system of
sentries, so that we can transmit information with facility.

  
  3. ESPIONAGE REGARDING THE NUMBER OF THE ENEMY'S TROOPS, HIS TACTICAL SKILL,
  AND HIS ARMAMENT.


1.  
    Where are so and so many enemy infantrymen, cavalrymen, artillery-men, and
    other units to be found? How many armored cars and trains, tanks and air
    planes does the enemy have? And where are they?
2.  
    What kind of defensive works does the enemy have in his front, in his rear,
    and around his cities and other places? What kind of forces are defending?
3.  
    Where are the enemy's encampments and arsenals?
4.  
    What about the enemy's reserves and flanking troops? Where are they?
5.  
    How is the morale of the enemy soldiers? Are they prepared to fight or not?
    What are their relations with the people and with their own officers?
6.  
    What about the enemy army's supplies of military equipment, bedding and clothes,
    food, and other items?


  
  4. ESPIONAGE REGARDING THE TERRAIN.

1.  
    First of all, we must pay attention to the important roads within this area,
    as well as their direction, their width, their type of surface, whether or
    not they are muddy, etc., and whether or not they are suitable for use by
    all types of forces.
2.  
    Are there any forests or not? If there are, we must pay attention to the
    kinds of trees, and to their area.
3.  
    We must consider rivers, their width and depth, their rate of flow, the slope
    and type of soil of the banks. Are there bridges, ferries, or other means
    for crossing the river? If there are bridges, will they bear up under artillery,
    the baggage train, and other types of unit?
4.  
    Are there any marshes? Where? What is their area? Can they be crossed or
    not? If so, we must note what kinds of troops can get through them.


CHAPTER IX


  AMBUSHES


  
  1. TYPES OF AMBUSH.


When we emerge suddenly from hiding, and strike a sudden blow at the enemy
who is just passing by, this is called an ambush. The sole habitual tactic
of a guerrilla unit is the ambush. By means of an ambush it is extremely
easy to obtain a good result, and as a general rule they are always advantageous.
Such action is divided into the following types:
1.  
    Ambush by luring the enemy. This occurs when our troops, so to speak, prostrate
    themselves and hold out both arms, enticing the enemy to penetrate deeply.
    It is carried out by first placing our main force in ambush along the two
    sides of the road, or in a hiding place on one side, and then attacking the
    enemy with a small force. This force then feigns defeat and withdraws, luring
    the enemy deep into our lines, after which the main force rushes out from
    one side or both sides and carries out a surprise attack.
2.  
    Waiting ambushes. These are very similar to ambushes by luring the enemy,
    but it is not necessary for a part of our forces to feign defeat. Instead,
    we establish an observation post on some height, to observe the movements
    of the enemy army, and when his main force has reached the appropriate point,
    we rush out and attack him by surprise.


  
  2. SPOTS FOR CARRYING OUT AMBUSHES, AND OBJECTIVES TO BE ATTACKED.


Ambushes can be carried out against a variety of objectives such as isolated
enemy soldiers, couriers, whole mobile units, logistic convoys, transport
columns, trains, etc. Further details are given below.
1.  
    When ambushing the enemy's cavalry or infantry, we should choose a spot where
    they cannot use their weapons and where it is not easy for them to manifest
    their full strength.
2.  
    Ambushes against logistic convoys or transport columns should be carried
    out in the midst of a forest or in the countryside.
3.  
    Ambushes of small enemy units, or whole mobile units or motorized transport
    columns are most valuable. But we must first understand their plans, the
    direction in which they are advancing, and the time it will take them to
    pass. We must also reflect in detail on the location for the ambush and carefully
    seek out a place likely to contribute to a favourable result. At the same
    time, we must carefully select in advance the route for our own withdrawal.
4.  
    When a guerrilla unit carries out an ambush against a railroad train, our
    forces can be split into three parts. The first part should take up battle
    positions near the railroad, to guard against resistance from the train.
    The second part should take up a position on the two sides of the train,
    and shoot into the carriage. The third part has the task of charging and
    boarding the train to make a search, unloading the cargo, taking charge of
    the weapons, etc .


  
  3. THE TERRAIN IN AMBUSHES.


The point at which an ambush is carried out must have the following features:
1.  
    It must have good cover, in order to prevent our being observed by the enemy
    and, at the same time, permit us to observe the enemy.
2.  
    It must permit us to employ our maximum fire power.
3.  
    It must allow us to leap out rapidly at one bound from ambush and come to
    grips with the enemy. Hence, between the point where we lie in ambush and
    the enemy, there should be a dense forest, a damp depression, a narrow road,
    or some other intervening ground.


  
  4. THE DISTANCE  WHICH AN AMBUSH SHOULD BE CARRIED OUT.  


If the guerrilla unit which carries out a surprise attack is in sufficient
strength so that it wants to come to grips with the enemy at one bound, then
it should stage its ambush near the side of the road. If, on the other hand,
the enemy is in considerable strength, and our plan is merely to harass him
and cause confusion, then we should remain in a place some distance from
the road.

  
  5. IMPORTANT TRICKS FOR AN AMBUSH.

1.  
    An ambush can most advantageously be carried out in silence. Whether by day
    or night, loud talking should be absolutely forbidden, as should patrolling
    along the front.
2.  
    Remaining a long time in ambush can easily lead to discovery of our plans
    and an increase in the danger. Because of remaining too long in ambush, the
    state of tension of our men is gradually weakened, and they can no longer
    maintain their vigilance. Hence, one can easily be discovered by the enemy.
    A point that especially merits attention is that, if we have already been
    discovered by the enemy, we should immediately either launch our attack or
    withdraw.



CHAPTER X


  SURPRISE ATTACKS ON THE ENEMY'S FORAGING UNITS


  
  1. OCCASIONS FOR SURPRISE ATTACKS.


A charge against the enemy's foraging units should be carried out under the
following circumstances:
1.  
    It can be executed when the enemy unit is nearing a village.
2.  
    We can wait until the enemy enters a village and has scattered in all directions
    to forage from door to door, and then carry it out.
3.  
    We can wait until the enemy has finished foraging and is returning loaded
    with booty, and then attack by surprise from ambush.
4.  
    Which of the above types of attack is most appropriate should be determined
    with reference to the circumstances, by the persons who are responsible for
    the guerrilla unit. They should carefully evaluate all the factors and make
    arrangements adapted to circumstances.


  
  2. SURPRISE ATTACKS IN A VILLAGE.


It is most advantageous to attack the enemy's foraging units in a village.
At such a time the greater part of the enemy's foraging unit is scattered
all over the place, and it is not easy for them to gather together quickly.
But, in carrying out this type of surprise attack we must steal by the enemy's
warning outposts or capture his sentinels without the slightest sound; only
then can we make our attack.

  
  3. SURPRISE ATTACKS OUTSIDE A VILLAGE.


It the force carrying out a surprise attack is especially weak, it must wait
until the foraging is completed and until the foraging column has reached
a place favourable to a surprise attack— such as when it is passing
through a forest, across a bridge, or along a narrow road—before attacking.

  
  4. THE OBJECTIVES OF THE SURPRISE ATTACK.


When a guerrilla unit has attacked and dispersed the enemy unit covering
a foraging operation, it can reckon only that it has completed part of its
attack. It must also destroy or capture all of their wagons. Consequently,
the guerrilla unit should first engage the enemy covering unit in combat
and then attack the logistic convoy with its main force and capture it.

  
  5. POINTS TO WHICH THE GUERRILLA UNIT SHOULD PAY ATTENTION.


It is easy to obtain the assistance of the local population when attacking
one of the enemy's foraging units. Hence, within the limits of what is possible,
part of the property seized should be given to the popular masses, to heighten
their courage.

CHAPTER XI


  SURPRISE ATTACKS ON THE ENEMY'S TRANSPORT UNITS


An attack on a transport column is one of the most advantageous forms of
action for a guerrilla unit, since we can obtain in this manner the weapons,
food, and supplies we need.

  
  1. SUDDEN SURPRISE ATTACKS.


With such attacks, we can frighten the enemy out of his wits, and precipitate
him into a state of complete confusion. The coolies of the transport units
are, in large part, timid peasants forcibly impressed. Moreover, the size
of the covering force is limited, and it is generally spread out over a very
long distance. If we overturn one of the wagons, we can make all the wagons
behind it stop too.

  
  2. METHODS OF ATTACK.

1.  
    The guerrilla unit must not forget that its task is not to defeat the enemy,
    but to capture the enemy's wagons. Consequently, we should detail only a
    part of our forces to do battle with the enemy's covering unit. The rest
    of our men should be ordered to plunder, pursue, and demolish the materials
    he is transporting. Hence, whenever we carry out such a surprise attack,
    we should do our best to contrive matters so as to open fire rapidly against
    the transport unit and cause them to stop, in order to increase their confusion
    and fear.
2.  
    In order to stop the whole transport column, it is only necessary to shoot
    at the front part of it, because, under conditions of mass anxiety and
    bewilderment, when the wagons in front stop, they will interfere with one
    another, fall over on the side of the road, and bring about a situation of
    extreme confusion. If there are a large number of transport wagons, and if,
    because the front of the column is under fire, the wagons at the rear endeavor
    to turn around and escape, the guerrilla unit should send out a small number
    of riflemen to shoot furiously from cover at the tail end of the column,
    so that it does not dare turn around.
3.  
    If the unit carrying out the surprise attack is in an inferior position,
    and the covering unit is taking active precautionary measures, the guerrilla
    unit should exhaust the enemy by incessant false alarms, and then when the
    transport column is passing through a forest or valley or along a narrow
    road in some other type of terrain, where the enemy's logistic convoy cannot
    easily turn around, the attack should be swiftly carried out.
    It is not often advantageous to carry out a surprise attack on a baggage
    train in a village, for the covering unit and the logistic convoy can easily
    make use of the houses and other cover, and offer strong resistance.
4.  
    If the covering unit has already been dispersed by our attack, the resistance
    of the transport unit has also been overcome, and enemy reinforcements cannot
    arrive in time, the guerrilla unit can then destroy the wagons and the goods
    they are carrying or destroy completely whatever the guerrillas cannot carry
    away or have no use for.



CHAPTER XII


  THE CORRESPONDENCE NETWORK OF A GUERRILLA UNIT AND THE DESTRUCTION OF
  COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN THE REAR


  
  1. THE OBJECT OF THE NETWORK.


So that they may be able to call upon one another for aid and receive information
at all times regarding the situation of the enemy, guerrilla units
should do their utmost to maintain the closest and most solid relations with
the local population for the exchange of correspondence.

  
  2. MEANS FOR MAINTAINING RELATIONS.


In order to set up such a correspondence network, we should, in addition
to utilizing the telephone in the greatest possible measure, employ all means
at hand. These include runners, messengers on horseback, messengers on bicycles,
secret couriers posted in advance for transmitting information, as well as
transmittal by sentries, and even signals and pre-established signs, etc.

  
  3. METHODS FOR TRANSMITTING REPORTS.

1.  
    A network for important correspondence should be set up. Reports of an urgent
    character can best be transmitted by messengers on horseback. When this is
    impossible, we should send out reliable individuals particularly good at
    going on foot. It is also possible to arrange in advance for the transmittal
    of secret letters. There are times, too, when we must send out several men,
    each of them taking a different route, to make certain that the report in
    question will reach its destination. (This method should be limited to the
    most important reports. )
2.  
    As for ordinary reports that are not particularly important, they are commonly
    transmitted by runners or messengers on bicycles. There are times when one
    can also use faithful individuals from among the local population who are
    thoroughly familiar with the routes to carry such reports. 


  
  4. SIGNALS FOR COMMUNICATIONS.


For the sake of convenience in guiding each guerrilla group or unit by day
or by night, in its actions in mountainous terrain or in forests, the commander
of a guerrilla unit should establish in advance a certain number of basic
signals and signs (such as signals fires at night, smoke signals by day,
coloured pennants, flags, semaphore signaling by flags, paper signals, whistles,
bugle calls, etc. ). 

  
  5. DISPOSITIONS REGARDING ROUTES OF COMMUNICATION IN THE REAR.


Should we or should we not destroy the routes of communication in the enemy's
rear? We must reflect in detail about this problem. If we conclude that,
in the future, our own army will not need to utilize these roads, or will
not be able to utilize them, then we can destroy them.

  
  6. POINTS FOR ATTENTION IN DESTROYING ROUTES OF COMMUNICATION.


If we want to destroy routes of communication, we must be thoroughly familiar
with the terrain. It is only then that, moving rapidly and elusively, we
appear suddenly and quickly withdraw. In eliminating the enemy's sentries,
we must not fire a shot, in order not to alert them and give them a chance
to flee. 

  
  7. PRECAUTIONS WHEN BEGINNING THE DESTRUCTION OF ROUTES OF COMMUNICATION.


When we begin the destruction of routes of communication, we must first send
out a detachment to the place where the presence of the enemy has been reported,
in order to keep an eye on the enemy's patrols and his small detachments,
so that they cannot quickly and secretly get close to the point where our
own unit is at work. If, while beginning work, we are discovered by the enemy,
we should shoot at him to keep him from coming nearer. 

  
  8. METHODS OF DESTROYING WORKS ON THE GROUND.

1.  
    Railroads should be destroyed at the points where they are most difficult
    to repair, such as at curves, at points where the railway is hidden from
    view, where the enemy's precautions are lax, where we can work under cover,
    or where we can destroy a large length of track. When destroying the rails,
    we should bend them, or hollow out the ground beneath them. In low-laying
    places we should dig ditches. As for tunnels, we should obstruct them.
2.  
    Railroad ties, wooden bridges, telegraph and telephone poles, etc., should
    be burned up. Wires should be carried away or dropped into the water.
3.  
    Signals switches, semaphores, railroad carriages, etc., located in the stations
    should be destroyed, preferably by blowing them up with explosives.
4.  
    In destroying cobblestone roads, highways, bridges, and other constructions,
    we must in all cases choose a method of destruction appropriate to the nature
    of the construction.




CHAPTER XIII


  REGULAR HIDING PLACES AND PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN WHEN WE HALT


  
  1. MARSHALING OUR TROOPS.


The problem is not merely one of resting and marshaling out troops. We require
a place that can also be used for conserving ammunition and food and for
receiving and looking after wounded and sick soldiers. Hence, the place in
question commonly serves also as a supporting point in time of battle. As
soon as we are the objects of the enemy's pursuit and attack, we withdraw
there, and secretly hide, so as to await an opportunity to act or to begin
resisting the enemy again.

  
  2. THE CHOICE OF A SPOT.

1.  
    A hiding place where we can rest for a long time may conveniently be found
    deep in the forest, in a thatched hut near a marsh, in a cave under the ground
    or in a mountainside, on a lonely farm, or in a small and secluded hamlet.
    Because of the sympathy it enjoys a small guerrilla unit normally has no
    difficulty at all in finding a regular hiding place.
2.  
    A guerrilla unit must absolutely maintain the strictest secrecy regarding
    the hiding places it has selected. Even one's closest friends and relatives
    must not be informed if they have no connection with the guerrilla unit in
    question. If our original hiding place has been discovered by the enemy,
    then, in general, we should not wait for the enemy to come and attack us
    but must quickly remove elsewhere.
3.  
    Sometimes such hiding places also serve as storehouses for military equipment,
    powder, and provisions, and also for receiving wounded and sick soldiers.
    More often, a separate secret location in the vicinity of the hiding place
    is selected for each type of storehouse because there are people continually
    going in and out of a hiding place and it can very easily be discovered by
    the enemy.
4.  
    The more individuals there are among the people who support the guerrillas,
    so that the guerrilla unit can also maintain a communications network among
    the people, the easier it is for the guerrilla unit to find a hiding place.
    There are times when, in order to evade the enemy's pursuit and attack, and
    find a good place to hide, a given guerrilla unit must be split up, each
    of its members being obliged to find a way to hide himself in one of the
    houses of the local population. In such circumstances, the local population
    is the only hope of salvation of the members of the guerrilla unit.


  
  3. THE QUESTION OF PROVISIONS.


In places where the local population is hostile to the guerrillas, there
is no alternative to foraging backed by force, but one should send reliable
people from among the detachment, in order to guard against pillaging.

When the guerrilla unit does not fear discovery, it can send out a special
small unit to forage for food, to collect contributions of food, or to demand
food supplies from the local authorities.

  
  4. CHANGING ONE'S HALTING PLACE.


The best method by which a guerrilla unit can maintain its own security is
through the agility of its action. In case of necessity, the unit can make
a habit of changing its halting place every night (if, during the day, it
has been in village A, at twilight it moves to village B).


  
  5. OCCUPYING A HALTING PLACE.


When a guerrilla unit encamps, the arrangement of its forces should be determined
entirely by the nature of its action, but it should not occupy a large village
that its own forces are insufficient to hold. If a guerrilla unit cannot
do otherwise, and finds itself in such a place, it should occupy only a few
collective dwellings situated apart and convenient for defense. The best
thing is to be located in a village where one can keep a lookout in all
directions, especially on the road along which the enemy might come. We must
absolutely not disperse the members of the unit to stay in different houses,
acting, for the sake of individual convenience, in a way of which the enemy
could take advantage. In order to keep the enemy from knowing where we are
staying, the best method is to enter the village only late at night. Moreover,
we should look about carefully and all sides of the village and not allow
anyone at all to come out.

  
  6. THE DEGREE OF PRECAUTIONS.


In order to avoid excessive fatigue to the members of a guerrilla unit, and
to assure them of a real rest, it is not necessary to send out large numbers
of scouts to sound a warning. It suffices to arrange for military outposts
and concealed scouts in all adjoining places and along all roads ( those
which the enemy must take, or those related to us ). We should also send
out spies to places from 2 to 4 li away. This distance will be sufficient.

Whether or not the enemy attacks us, we must always fix an assembly point
at a distance of from 10 to 16 li, for use in case of withdrawal.
Moreover, the roads leading to the assembly point should be designated and
marked in advance (but there must be at least two roads giving access to
such a place ) .

  
  7. PREPARATIONS.


When a guerrilla unit is staying in a place, all its members, whether they
be officers or soldiers, must at all times take measures to prepare for battle.
Especially after twilight, every officer and soldier must gather together
the arms and other equipment he carries with him, and arrange them in proper
order, so that it will be convenient, in case there is an alarm in the dark,
for him to go out quickly and meet the attack.

  
  8. WHEN THERE IS ANXIETY ABOUT A SURPRISE ATTACK BY THE ENEMY.

1.  
    If the guerrilla unit itself is especially alert, if its intelligence network
    is organized with exceptional discretion, and if the people of the area are
    in sympathy with us, so that they regularly report all movements to us, then
    it is extremely difficult for the enemy to mount sudden surprise attacks.
    But whatever the circumstances may be, we must always exercise due caution.
2.  
    In order to prevent the enemy relying on a hostile population from coming
    and making a surprise attack on us, we must take special precautionary measures.
    Thus by methods of intimidation we warn the local population, we arrest and
    detain people. But at the same time, the unit must exercise caution and be
    prepared.
3.  
    If there is an alarm, we should assemble the whole unit in a building that
    has been prepared for defense. We should dispatch to this building advance
    sentries and observers as required. The entrance to the building should be
    closed by movable obstacles, and we should establish in advance signals for
    the defense. Weapons and other equipment should be properly prepared and
    placed within reach of each man.
4.  
    When circumstances are extremely critical, part of a friendly unit should
    take over responsibility for the security of our position and the place in
    which our army is staying, as well as for sending out spies far and wide
    to add to the warning system. They report constantly to the guerrilla task
    group on the situation of nearby enemy forces.
5.  
    When we use artificial obstacles to block the roads, we must make provision
    for communication with our first line and reserves, as well as with the local
    population and our correspondence network.
6.  
    In case of necessity, the roads within villages can be completely blocked
    off, or we can leave a way through. Whenever possible, each guerrilla task
    group should have a prepared position.


  
  9. DISPOSITIONS IN CASE OF AN ENEMY SURPRISE ATTACK.


 
1.  
    When we discover that the enemy is moving toward us, if we find out from
    reconnaissance that he is not in strength, we should annihilate him with
    one sudden blow. If the enemy forces are several times more numerous than
    ours, we should rapidly withdraw. But while we are withdrawing we should
    give the enemy a false impression of the direction in which we are moving,
    so as to conceal our actual route of withdrawal.
2.  
    If the enemy attacks us by surprise and we do not succeed in evading him,
    we should exploit in full measure the advantages of a village for defensive
    action, resist him firmly, and then later take advantage of an opportunity
    to withdraw.
3.  
    If we have already lost a village, we should reply by a counterattack or
    counterblows in order to take it back quickly and save our captured comrades,
    or those comrades who are clinging to a position and defending it stubbornly
    to the death. If our action is rapid, we can always attain such objectives,
    because after a victory the enemy is often in great confusion and lax in
    his precautions.
4.  
    The best occasion for carrying out such counterblows, or such a counteroffensive,
    is just after the victory of the enemy's surprise attack. The sacrifices
    of a charge under such circumstances are less than those from running away,
    or from stopping and giving battle in unfavourable terrain following the
    enemy' s attack.




CHAPTER XIV


  TRAINING


  
  1. THE SCOPE OF TRAINING.


Training is not limited to the military arts; we must also pay attention
to political training, to the literacy movement, to training in hygiene,
etc. Consequently, when a guerrilla unit is engaged in drill, literacy training
should represent an appropriate part of the whole, and can be given in all
places and at all times.

For the purpose of achieving a full and satisfactory result from all the
kinds of training carried out in a guerrilla unit, we must increase the will
to study on their own initiative among the officers and soldiers. Apart from
the political aspect, and in addition to increasing political consciousness,
we must also promote amusements for the army, mitigate a painful and tedious
existence, assist the people in their own self-defense, and cause the armed
force of the popular masses to unite closely with us.

  
  2. TRAINING IN ALL SUBJECTS.


The consequence of training in all subjects, though it is difficult to reduce
it to uniformity, is, as regards methods in general, to proceed from the
superficial to the profound, first the broad and then the rigorous, from
the simple and easy to the complex and difficult, first the partial and then
the universal. In all fields, one must demonstrate one's theories by concrete
experience, so as to strengthen the students' confidence.

  
  3. CULTIVATING THE PEOPLE'S CAPACITY FOR SELF-DEFENSE.


The most pressing and most important task of a guerrilla unit is to carry
out guerrilla attacks without ceasing in the places occupied by the enemy,
to seize and kill all traitors and reactionaries, and to protect the popular
masses. At the same time, a guerrilla unit must investigate the concrete
offenses of the enemy and use every possible method to discover and smash
his tricks and plots. Therefore:
1.  
    It is advantageous to make known our good government, to make great efforts
    to unite with the popular masses, and to support the forces of the popular
    masses. Such actions can also be carried out on the territory of the enemy.
    We should also use every possible method and devote all our strength to encourage
    the people to imitate our own actions, stimulate them to fight the enemy
    actively, and guide their combat.
2.  
    Our action in supporting the people's capacity for self-defense should be
    of long duration, and not ephemeral. We must do the best we can to let people
    know that, at all times, a guerrilla unit struggles and sacrifices itself
    for the popular masses and, even in the case of the most dangerous crisis,
    will absolutely not harm the popular masses. If the local population meets
    with a defeat in its first military action, after we have drawn it into the
    war, its spirit of struggle will necessarily be dissipated to some extent.
    When the masses falter in this way, we must devise a way to rouse their
    enthusiasm and to bring their spirit of struggle to a high level once more.
3.  
    A guerrilla unit constitutes the most conscious and advanced segment of the
    people. Hence, they should first unite those among the popular masses who
    are dissatisfied with the enemy and who accept the leadership of those we
    send among them. We must also aid the people to establish plans, to get arms,
    and to establish liaison and mutual assistance with mass organizations in
    neighboring villages and even in other cities that are victims of the enemy's
    oppression. But, in carrying out all such work, we must maintain the strictest
    secrecy.


  
  4. TRAINING IN HYGIENE.

1.  
    In order to strengthen its own fighting capacity, every mess unit should
    designate one or two soldiers as nurses, to treat the ailments of the officers
    and soldiers when they arise and, also to explain the rudiments of hygiene,
    as well as to assist, direct, supervise, and encourage all matters of hygiene
    in the unit.
2.  
    Replenishing stocks of medicines is an extremely difficult matter in a guerrilla
    unit. Hence we should, in accordance with the seasons etc., prepare certain
    medicines especially for emergency care, and other normally indispensable
    medicines. As regards wounded and seriously ill members of the unit, when
    there is no alternative, they are entrusted to fellow soldiers with some
    slight medical knowledge or to local inhabitants sympathetic to us.


  
  5. MILITARY TRAINING.


Military training all relates to the enemy army. Its purpose is to create
greater skill than that of the enemy in each specialized art.
1.  
    Subjects. The items requiring particular attention are dispersing, assembling,
    marksmanship, maneuvering an army, mountain climbing, construction of military
    works, night fighting, mountain fighting, fighting on narrow roads, espionage
    and security measures, searches, liaison, and other such actions.
2.  
    Methods. In carrying out military instruction, particular attention should
    be paid to all methods of teaching and explanation, which should be more
    or less as described below:
a.
For theoretical instruction one can employ the method of giving suggestions
and the method of questions and answers. All methods of teaching that adopt
the style of speechmaking and injecting [ideas into the students' heads]
should be eliminated in so far as possible.
b.  
When explaining actions, we should pay attention to linking our talks with
the living reality, so that it will be easy for the soldiers to understand
us.
c.  
We should devote more time to concrete demonstrations of actions and less
time to talking about empty theories. Consequently, the greatest effort should
be made to diminish the duration and number of classroom sessions and the
numbers of practical exercises should be increased.
d.  
All explanations in the classroom should in so far as possible correspond
to the exercises outside.
e.  
All demonstrations of actions should be carefully prepared in advance before
they are executed. All negligent and perfunctory behaviour—doing things
any old way—must absolutely be eliminated.
f.  
With respect to all activities, we should devise a way to incite the officers
and soldiers to carry out a competition, in order to increase the spirit
of initiative and the positive attitude they manifest in their work, and
to speed up the work.
g.  
Increase applied training, diminish training according to a fixed pattern,
and correct the erroneous idea that training according to a fixed pattern
is useful in maintaining military discipline.
h.  
The plan of training should be suited to the circumstances, time, and place
in which it is to be carried out. The training plan must absolutely not be
rigid; we must seize every occasion and strive to give training adapted to
the circumstances. This is done more or less as indicated below:
i.  
We utilize the time when the army is on the march to carry on direction finding,
recognizing differences in terrain, estimating distances, reconnaissance
action, and designating objectives and the utilization of terrain.
i.  
    When we are in camp, we utilize preparations for security measures in order
    to carry out exercises in all kinds of observation and precautions, beginning
    with the role of advanced sentries. We also provide training in construction
    of military works.
ii.  
    We utilize the opportunity provided by a battle, and before setting out or
    before the fighting begins, we explain, on the basis of the tasks we have
    been ordered to perform, such forms of action as ambushes, surprise attacks,
    main attacks, and supporting attacks, etc.
iii.  
    We utilize the opportunity, when we are awaiting the moment for action, to
    explain in practical terms how we resist the charges of the enemy, as well
    as shooting and other such military actions.
iv.  
    We utilize post-battle exposition and criticism (such exposition and criticism
    should be based on a minute investigation of the facts, carried out beforehand)
    to point out the strength and weaknesses in our actions during the battle
    and what was appropriate and inappropriate in the individual commands, thus
    giving a concrete lesson to all of officers and men.
v.  
    We utilize the time offered by morning and evening roll calls to give various
    kinds of talks.
vi.  
    We utilize the occasion offered by the recreation period to put on games,
    dances, and modern-style plays, having military significance, thus imperceptibly
    increasing the officers' and soldiers' desire to correct themselves, and
    increasing their willingness to follow good examples.
vii.  
    We utilize each occasion of reward and punishment to carry out thorough
    propaganda among the officers and soldiers, in order to increase the soldiers'
    sense of achievement and their shame in doing evil, and thus, little by little,
    fostering a good military discipline.


  
  6. POLITICAL TRAINING.


In order to assure that all the independent actions of a guerrilla unit attain
complete victory, apart from reinforcing military training, the most important
thing is that we must make certain that the officers and soldiers have a
high level of "political consciousness" and of "devotion" to their own cause.
Political training is the only method by which this objective can be attained.
Its content is described in detail later on.

  
  7. THE LITERACY MOVEMENT.


In order to increase the cultural level of the officers and soldiers, so
that they may more easily absorb all kinds of training, each mess unit must
carry out literacy training. The methods are as follows:

1.  
    The "A" class includes all those who know about fifty characters.
2.  
    The "B" class includes those who know above twenty characters.
3.  
    The "C" class includes those who know no characters at all.
4.  
    The teachers of the various classes consist of those in the unit with a
    relatively high cultural level.
5.  
    When we halt, there should be an hour each day devoted to the study of
    characters. When we are on the march, we can carry out instruction either
    while moving or during rest periods. In such training, the important thing
    is regularity rather than speed. In general, if the soldiers learn two words
    a day, it is excellent.


 

CHAPTER XV


  POLITICAL WORK


  
  1. THE AIM OF THE POLITICAL WORK OF A GUERRILLA UNIT.


This aim lies in strengthening and raising to a higher level the fighting
capacity of each member of the unit. The fighting capacity of a guerrilla
unit is not determined exclusively by military arts, but depends above all
on political consciousness, political influence, setting in motion the broad
popular masses, disintegrating the enemy army, and inducing the broad popular
masses to accept our leadership. All the plans of a guerrilla unit, whether
they be political. military, or of any other nature, are all directed toward
this single end.

  
  2. THE MAIN CONTENT OF POLITICAL WORK.


We must carry out political instruction directed toward the resurrection
of our people (stimulate the soldiers' national consciousness, their patriotism,
and their love for the people and for the masses) and see to it that every
officer and soldier in a guerrilla unit understands not only the national
tasks for which he is responsible but also the necessity of fighting in defense
of our state.

We must also pay attention to supporting the leaders, to maintaining the
solidarity of the unit with real sincerity, to carrying out to the end the
orders of one's superiors, and to maintaining an iron military discipline.
We must see to it that the multitude of the soldiers are of a single mind
and endowed with the resolve and the will to save our country together.

Apart from strengthening its own fighting capacity, a guerrilla unit must
also carry out propaganda among the masses regarding the plots of the invaders
and of the enemy.

  
  3. DISCUSSIONS IN SMALL GROUPS.


These are excellent activities to unite our walls, to strengthen confidence,
and to proclaim our doctrine.
1.  
    We collect the view of all the comrades, in order to avoid feelings of alienation
    and to achieve the effect of gathering together ideas and obtaining greater
    advantage.
2.  
    By the cadres, we increase their capacity for work and give them more practice
    in techniques for holding meetings and in methods of speaking. We will also
    be able to solve problems more quickly, investigate the past, and transform
    the future.
3.  
    We can thus verify the fellowship existing among the members of the unit,
    and draw new comrades into the party.
4.  
    This method is convenient for training, and makes it possible to understand
    completely each comrade's circumstances, capacity, and knowledge.
5.  
    According to their character, these activities can be divided into discussion
    meetings, review meetings, and criticism meetings.


  
  4. METHODS


Before the meeting we must prepare for it. These preparations consist in
informing the members of the group, establishing the essential subject matter
of the discussion, and, at the same time, reporting to the next higher echelon.
1.  
    As regards the number of participants, from three to five represents the
    optimum.
2.  
    One should not be bound by any rigid pattern. Discussion meetings can be
    held at all times and in all places.
3.  
    As for the time limit, it is not desirable that the meetings should last
    too long. One hour is the maximum permissible.
4.  
    It is appropriate to hold one meeting a week. The order of procedure consists
    in a report by the chairman, discussion of the report by the participants,
    and a conclusion entrusted to the leader of the group. The record of the
    meeting should indicate in detail the name of the chairman, the subjects
    of discussion, the number of those present and absent, and the place where
    the meeting was held.
5.  
    Not more than two problems at most should be discussed. The discussion should
    have as its starting point the individual problems of the participants.
6.  
    As for the manner of speaking, it is appropriate that the remarks of the
    participants should deal with essentials and be simple and clear. They should
    be systematic and not repetitive. They should be persuasive in content and
    presented in a friendly and agreeable manner. In answering questions, one
    should avoid any hint of mockery and pay attention to what the others say.
    At the same time, one should arrive at a decision concerning the topic discussed.
7.  
    As regards the leader of the group, his report should be simple. He should
    not give a long and repetitive presentation but seize the occasion to induce
    the participants to speak.
8.  
    The conclusion should follow the inductive method. It should include a criticism
    of the whole of the discussions. If there are dissident conclusions, they
    may also be expressed


  
  5. CARRYING OUT POLITICAL WORK.


One should not merely rely on a few political workers. The best thing is
to be able to attract and train conscious elements, or interested officers
and soldiers, to participate in the work and to train the whole personnel
of the unit so that they can all carry on effective political work.

  
  6. TYPES OF POLITICAL WORK.


In broad terms, political work can be divided into three categories according
to whether it is carried out in ordinary times, during battle, or after a
battle. As for propaganda destined to encourage the troops, the various aspects
are as indicated below:

1.
    Political work in ordinary times. We intensify political training in order
    to raise the level of political consciousness, create unity in thought, word,
    and deed, maintain an iron military discipline, and unite closely with the
    popular masses. The methods are roughly as follows:
a.  
We must really put into practice the principles of not disturbing or harming
the people (such as "Pay fairly for what you buy," "Speak politely," "Return
everything you borrow", and "Pay for anything you damage" ).
b.  
At all times and in all places, aid the popular masses and help them to solve
their difficulties (for example, help the popular masses to gather the harvest
or to cultivate their land and send our army doctors to prevent epidemics
or treat the people's ailments, or to enquire after people who have suffered
difficulties and devise methods to aid them), maintain the unity of the army
and the people, and encourage the spirit of sharing both good fortune and
adversity together.
c.  
Chat frequently with the popular masses and let them know about our military
discipline and our affection for them, and also learn in detail about the
hunger and suffering among the people.
d.  
Frequently hold joint entertainment sessions for the soldiers and the people,
so as to smooth over any feelings of alienation between the army and the
people and increase the affection of the army and the people for one another.

2.  
    Resolving any feelings of alienation between the lower and higher ranks of
    officers and soldiers. The methods employed are roughly as follows:
a.  

Persons engaged in political training, apart from sharing the good fortune
and adversity of the soldiers, should also frequently chat with the soldiers,
carefully investigate all their deep grieves and report their problems at
all times to their superior officers, and devise methods for improving the
situation.
b.  
As regards all the opinions of higher and lower ranks, we should take our
stand on a position of pure rational knowledge, convince them by an attitude
of sincere entreaty, and explain things to them. We must make absolutely
certain that higher and lower ranks unite solidly as one man, and we must
strengthen their capacity to unite.
c.  
With respect to soldiers who violate discipline, we should use educational
methods to persuade them. All corporal punishment and insults must absolutely
be reduced.
d.  
We should frequently hold meetings at which officers and soldiers can enjoy
themselves together, in order to heighten the affection between officers
and soldiers.

3.  
    Augmenting the officers' and soldiers' hatred of the enemy, and increasing
    their resolve to fight to the death to kill the enemy. Increasing the common
    hatred of the enemy is an important factor in strengthening the soldiers'
    morale. Consequently, a guerrilla unit should pay particular attention to
    all the atrocities of the enemy, and to all the instances in which he massacres
    our army or our people, and carry out propaganda generally among the army
    regarding these atrocities, so as to heighten the courage of the officers
    and soldiers to fight to the death and harden their resolve to fight the
    enemy to the death, since either we or they must perish.
4.  
    Strengthening confidence in the inevitable victory of our war against the
    enemy. The methods are more or less as follows:
a.  
We must frequently avail ourselves of the tales of the glorious feats of
arms in our past, in order to carry out propaganda among our officers and
soldiers and inspire them.
b.  
We put forward examples of the enemy's defects (such as difficulties, collapses,
and other problems that he has recently encountered), in order to demonstrate
that in the end the enemy must be defeated.
c.  
We must put forward examples of our own strong points (such as the support
of the popular masses, transmission of information, familiarity with the
terrain) and the present victorious circumstances, in order to demonstrate
that we must ultimately triumph.
d.  
By exposing the clever tricks habitually used by the enemy, we make known
the points to which our army should pay particular attention, in order to
prevent the emergence of a mentality of fearing or underestimating the enemy.


After we have suffered an attack, we sink for a time into a situation
characterized by difficulties and painful effort, and as a consequence we
underestimate ourselves, exaggerate the enemy's strength, and lose our confidence
in victory.

  
  7. POLITICAL WORK IN TIME OF BATTLE.


Political work before we set out is carried on as described below.
1.  
    The commander in chief of the unit first calls a meeting of the cadres. He
    explains in what respects the existing political situation is favorable to
    us, as well as the conditions of victory and the significance of the battle.
    He also explains the methods and points for attention in attaining our goal,
    but without infringing military secrecy.
2.  
    On the basis of the meeting of the cadres, the political training section
    immediately calls meetings of political workers at all levels, at which the
    essential points and the methods of propaganda are explained and concrete
    tasks are assigned.
3.  
    The various groups immediately call meetings of all the officers and soldiers,
    at which, in addition to reporting on the current political situation and
    the guarantees of our victory, conditions for competition are also put forward.
    ("He who is lightly wounded should not leave the firing line, he who is seriously
    wounded should not cry out in pain"; "Let us see who can hand in the most
    weapons"; or "Let us see who can take the most prisoners,") At the same time,
    tasks are distributed to all political workers and activists (supervision,
    leadership, or propaganda ).
4.  
    Political workers should be sent to the local population to gather them together,
    call meetings, and give talks, inspiring them to participate in the battle
    or to join the ranks of the porters or the transport units. As regards the
    organizations of the popular masses, we should guide them in methods of calling
    meetings, of fighting, and of preparing mobilization.
5.  
    After the battle has begun, the most important political training workers
    should be sent to inspire the units responsible for the main attack or for
    particularly important actions. The less important political training workers
    should be sent to inspire the less important fighting units.
6.  
    Propaganda units and groups of singers and dancers (all composed of lively
    and lovable boys in uniform and attractive clothing) should be sent in advance
    to positions along the side of the roads where the army will advance, to
    give short talks, sing, dance, or shout slogans, so as to inspire the maximum
    of courage in the officers and soldiers.


  
  8. POLITICAL WORK AFTER THE BATTLE HAS BEGUN.


 
1.  
    After the battle has begun, we should pay attention to calling out slogans
    to the soldiers of the other side, so as to dissipate their morale. This
    is one of the forms taken by our work of sabotage.
2.  
    When the situation on the battlefield enters the stage of an encounter at
    close range or from positions arrayed opposite one another, we devise a method
    for holding a joint meeting with the soldiers of the opposite side and take
    advantage of this opportunity to give them food, in order to gladden their
    hearts. After this, we carry on more propaganda work, which must be prepared
    in advance.
3.  
    After the battle has begun, we must assuredly carry out propaganda directed
    toward those outside our army. It is even more important to inspire those
    within our army. The methods for this work are diverse and are determined
    primarily by what is adapted to the circumstances. For example:
a.  
On the attack:
i.  
    When we suffer a surprise attack by the enemy while advancing to attack,
    we should give an explanation such as the following "Comrades! Airplanes
    cannot decide a battle. We must seize this opportunity, advance rapidly,
    and quickly come to grips with the enemy on the ground. Charge the enemy
    with your bayonets!"
ii.
    When firing begins, we should encourage the soldiers in the following terms:
    "Comrades! Don't shoot at random, shoot only when you have taken careful
    aim. We must try to kill an enemy with every bullet."
iii.  
    When we are near the enemy and are about to charge, the method for inspiring
    the soldiers is as follows: 
    "Comrades! The time to dispose of the enemy has come. We shall pay no attention
    to sacrifice, we shall summon up our courage, defeat the enemy and annihilate
    him. Let our victory inspire the whole army! Forward quickly! Charge!"
iv.  
    When the first charge is repelled and we charge a second time, we should
    encourage the soldiers as follows: "Comrades! We are an invincible iron army,
    we are a mighty unit victorious in every battle, we are absolutely resolved
    to destroy this enemy and preserve our glorious reputation."
v.  
    When officers are wounded or killed in battle, we should exhort the troops
    as follows: "Comrades! Our officers (So-and-so) and (So-and-so) have already
    sacrificed themselves gloriously. Let us tread in their bloody footsteps,
    complete their task, and annihilate the enemy before us. Let us go and avenge
    them!"
vi.  
    If the enemy shows signs of wavering, we should exhort the soldiers as follows:
    "Comrades! The enemy is wavering. Charge quickly and capture his commander
    in chief alive!"
vii.  
    When we pursue the enemy, we should exhort the soldiers as follows: "Comrades!
    The enemy has retreated. Pursue him quickly! Charge and smash the enemy's
    holding units, finish off his main force, annihilate his whole force. Let
    us see who can hand in the most arms, and who can take the most prisoners.
    To win a battle and not to pursue the enemy is a great pity."
b.  
On the defence:
i.  
    When the order has been received, we should carry out propaganda as follows:
    "Comrades! The enemy has arrived. This is the best opportunity to annihilate
    the enemy. Make skillful use of natural obstacles, and shoot with
    sang-froid. The more of the enemy we kill and wound, the easier it
    will be for our main attack to progress and obtain results."
ii.  
    When the enemy charges, we should exhort the troops as follows: "Comrades!
    The enemy is about to charge. Fix your bayonets, and prepare your hand grenades.
    Let us summon up our awe-inspiring reputation, preserve the glory we have
    already won, and annihilate the enemy in front of our position."
iii.  
    When we are surrounded by the enemy, we should exhort the soldiers as follows:
    "Comrades! We are an ever-victorious unit. We are a courageous and invincible
    iron army. We will wage a bloody battle to the end for our people and our
    country, shed our last drop of blood, hold onto our rifles to the death,
    and die rather than surrender. To hand over one's rifle is suicide, to surrender
    is the supreme shame. Let us smash their lines at one point and break through."
iv.  
    At the time of the counterattack or when the order to go over to the offensive
    is received: "Comrades! We are counterattacking. Let us take away the enemy's
    rifles, let us capture the enemy officers, let us see who is most courageous!"
v.  
    Propaganda when we retreat: "Comrades! Let us keep our movements secret and
    baffle the enemy in his calculations. Let us open wide our arms and lure
    the enemy to penetrate deep. Do not break ranks, do not fall behind, do not
    waver, do not succumb to panic, do not fear sacrifice, execute resolutely
    to the end the orders of your superiors. Final victory will be ours!"
vi.  
    When we cover the withdrawal of our forces, the methods for exhorting them
    are similar to those indicated above.


  
  9. POLITICAL WORK FOLLOWING A BATTLE.


After the battle has been concluded, political work continues.
1.  
    In order to avoid the appearance of attitudes of slighting the enemy or fearing
    the enemy, we should pay attention to the following points:
a.
We should correctly point out the causes of victory and defeat. We must not
become puffed up because of a small victory; still less can we lose our
confidence in victory because of a small setback.
b.  
We must establish the attitude that should be adopted henceforth, or the
points requiring attention.

2.  
    We should collect materials and anecdotes concerning our victory, as well
    as the names of units, individual officers, and soldiers who have fought
    courageously. We should then use these materials to compose propaganda outlines,
    songs, dances, old- and new-style plays, etc.
3.  
    We should print large numbers of victory announcements and slogans and stick
    them up everywhere. At the same time, we should organize a roving propaganda
    unit, which spreads out toward areas established in advance, to carry out
    propaganda and to call the popular masses together and hold meetings to celebrate
    the victory.
  4.  
    When meetings are held to celebrate the victory, one should pay attention
    to the following points:
a.  

Report on the significance of the victory, and the tasks now before us, as
well as the concrete methods to be employed to carry out these tasks.
b.  
Report on units that have fought courageously, as well as individual officers
and soldiers. As for officers and soldiers wounded or killed, one can select
the most valuable among them and report about them.
c.  
Put on new versions of classic plays, as well as songs and dances.


    While the reports indicated under a and b above are being delivered, or the
    play is being put on, the units participating in such a meeting should shout
    out slogans in accompaniment. We should also bring up the methods for providing
    pensions to the members of the families of the soldiers killed in battle.

    Moreover, we should bring together the prisoners and booty in the sight of
    the masses, thus further increasing the courage and the spirit of struggle
    of our soldiers and of the people.
5.  
    At meetings to celebrate the victory, all organizations should also launch
    a consolation movement. The main points for attention in this respect are:
a.  
As regards material consolation, the important thing is not the quantity,
but the significance; it is not the elegance and refinement of the items
given, but their utility. Such things as straw sandals, face towels, pigs,
sheep, chickens, and ducks are all suitable for this purpose.
b.  
In case there is a lack of goods for material consolation, consolation in
the form of honors should be used. For example, one can make flags for
presentation, or compose songs in memory of the fallen, or issue an order
of the day in their praise.
c.  
Following a small victory, there should be no large-scale consolation.
Consolation should be carried out only if we can devise means for doing it
in a place near the battlefield.
6.  
    We should praise examples of combined operations, autonomous actions, and
    the resolute application of orders. Thus:
a.  
When there are those who, in the course of a fierce battle, have achieved
victory by combined operations, autonomous action, and the resolute execution
of orders, the maximum effort should be made to publicize the fact and to
praise them. Those who have the misfortune to be defeated in similar
circumstances should also be praised.
b.  
When there is punishment for those who, in order to preserve their own forces,
fail to advance, or fail to carry out their tasks energetically, thus bringing
about the defeat of another unit of our army, the case should also be the
object of large-scale propaganda within the unit. In this way we give a lesson
to the officers and soldiers of the whole unit, or of other units, and make
them afraid to commit similar offenses.


  
  10. WORK PERTAINING TO CLUBS AND AMUSEMENT ROOMS.


By virtue of the fact that it compensates for a painful and tedious existence
in the army, this is also a way of preventing desertion. The essentials regarding
the organization and work of clubs are dealt with below.

1.  
    Rules regarding organization.
a.  
In order to promote entertainment in the army, compensate for a tedious
existence, increase interest in our work, and inspire a taste for study,
each mess unit within a guerrilla unit should organize an amusement room,
This should be divided into a military section, a guerrilla section, and
a physical culture section. Each officer and soldier in the mess unit should
choose one of these sections, in accordance with his own nature; he can,
if he wishes, participate in two or three of the sections.
   b.  
One person from among the company commanders or the particularly energetic
and capable platoon commanders should be chosen to be responsible for the
amusement room. Each of the three sections should have a section head, chosen
at a meeting of the members of the section, for a period of six months with
the possibility of being chosen to succeed himself .
c.  
Each week there should be one meeting of the section heads and one meeting
of the members of each section. A meeting of the leaders should be held once
a month. It is called separately by the chairman of the section heads.
d.  
In its work, the amusement room should follow the guidance of the club of
the next higher echelon. It is also subject to the supervision and guidance
of the commanding officer of the unit. In military affairs, it is absolutely
subordinate to the commanding officer of the unit.
e.  
In order to guide and unify the work of the various amusement rooms, a guerrilla
battalion should establish a club. This club should have a chairman and a
secretary who are responsible for all its activities.
f.  
The club should be attached to the political training section, because the
work of the amusement rooms constitutes a kind of political training. If
there is no political training section, the club is directly subordinated
to the commanding of officer.
g.  
The work of the club consists in guiding and promoting the work of the various
amusement rooms. Consequently, each week there should be a meeting of the
responsible heads of the various amusement rooms, and each month we should
call a meeting of all the officers and soldiers or a meeting of the army
and the people together.

    All the work of both the clubs and amusement rooms should have as its principle
    not to interfere with military administration, military training, or military
    action.
2.  
    The essentials of the work of clubs and amusement rooms.
a.  
    
The work of the military section consists in furthering a spirit of independent
study among the officers and soldiers, in discussion of military questions,
or in the mutual rectification of the actions of the members in order to
remedy the lacks and insufficiencies of military training. Its content is
as indicated below.
i.

    Bayonet section (practice, taking a hypothetical enemy dummy as the object).
ii.
    Grenade section (throwing a wooden hand grenade at a target).
b.  
Guerrilla section.
i.  

    Taking aim from a fixed support.
ii.  
    Checking one's aim.
iii.  
    Carriage while shooting.
iv.  
    Investigations when setting out.
v.  
    Utilization of obstacles.
vi.  
    Shooting at various types of objectives in the field.
3.  
    Physical culture section. The work of this section lies in strengthening
    the bodies of the officers and soldiers. It can also remedy insufficiencies
    in military training. Its contents is as follows:
a.  

Ball playing (basketball, football, volley ball, tennis, baseball, etc.).
b.  
Track and field sports (high jump, broad jump, races, obstacle course ).
c.  
Boxing and swordplay.
4.  
    Entertainment section. The work of this section consists in providing amusement
    for the members of the army, in compensating for a tedious existence, and
    in increasing the soldiers' interest in their work and their taste for study.
 a.  
Joke section. This section can carry on its activities at any time at all,
but attention should be paid to the following points:
i.  

    When jokes are told, we must make them easy to understand. We can take materials
    from joke books and such, but they should not be too obscene.
ii.  
    When telling stories, we should devote much time to stories about the abundant
    exploits and great enterprises of the ancients, and to their excellent words
    and admirable conduct, in order to achieve an inspirational effect.
iii.
    When reporting on the news, we should devote attention to our own victories
    and to the atrocities of the enemy.
b.  
Theatrical  section. This section utilizes rest periods, both in the evenings
and during the day, to put on all sorts of new-style plays, traditional operas,
comedy teams, storytellers with drums, etc.—performances that have political
content and are at the same time amusing, in order to improve morale.
c.  
Song and dance section. In accordance with the circumstances in which the
unit finds itself and the nature of its tasks, this section composes all
sorts of songs in order to stimulate the interest of the officers and soldiers
in singing songs, or it puts on dances in costume, assuming various comical
attitudes, in order to make the onlookers laugh until they hold their sides.
d.  
Music section. This is divided into violin, harmonica, guitar and other groups,
which can accompany the plays and dances.
e.  
The methods of work of all sections should be adapted to the time and
circumstances. They should be employed in a lively manner, and on no account
in a wooden fashion.
f.
The work of all sections should be subject to strict control and supervision.
We should also use methods of competition to induce all the officers and
soldiers to make spontaneous efforts.
g.  
All kinds of songs and old and new plays, etc.
h.  
For the benefit of the work, all groups and sections should have specialized
talents.
i.  
The officers and soldiers who participate in these performances should be
excused from their other duties.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Guerilla Warfare







On Guerrilla Warfare




Mao Tse-tung Reference Archive



On Guerrilla Warfare



Written: Written and published with the title 游击战 in 1937.

Source: Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung: Vol. VI

Transcription/Markup: Maoist Documentation Project/Brian Baggins

Online Version: Maoist Documentation Project (2000); Mao Tse-tung Reference Archive (marxists.org) 2000


Written by Mao in 1937, when Japanese imperialists occupied all of China, this book served as an instruction manual for guerrilla fighting, written based on more than a decade of personal experience by Mao. Based on the basic strategy and tactics of warfare as described by Sun-tzu, Mao stresses the importance of guerrilla warfare tactics in a revolutionary war, emphasizing that they must be combined in conjunction with conventional warfare tactics.


 

Contents:


What Is Guerrilla Warfare?

The Relation Of Guerrilla Hostilitiesto Regular Operations

Guerrilla Warfare In History

Can Victory Be Attained By Guerrilla Operations?

Organization For Guerilla Warfare

The Political Problems Of Guerrilla Warfare

The Strategy Of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan

Appendix



Mao Tse-tung Reference Archive





==========

## What is Guerrilla Warfare







On Guerrilla Warfare — Ch 1




Mao Tse-tung

On Guerrilla Warfare



1. What Is Guerrilla Warfare?



In a war of revolutionary character, guerrilla operations are a necessary
part. This is particularly true in war waged for the emancipation of a people
who inhabit a vast nation. China is such a nation, a nation whose techniques
are undeveloped and whose communications are poor. She finds herself confronted
with a strong and victorious Japanese imperialism. Under these circumstances,
the development of the type of guerrilla warfare characterized by the quality
of mass is both necessary and natural. This warfare must be developed to
an unprecedented degree and it must co-ordinate with the operations of our
regular armies. If we fail to do this, we will find it difficult to defeat
the enemy.


These guerrilla operations must not be considered as an independent form
of warfare. They are but one step in the total war, one aspect of the
revolutionary struggle. They are the inevitable result of the clash between
oppressor and oppressed when the latter reach the limits of their endurance.
In our case, these hostilities began at a time when the people were unable
to endure any more from the Japanese imperialists. Lenin, in People and
Revolution,[A] said: 'A people's insurrection and a people's revolution
are not only natural but inevitable.' We consider guerrilla operations as
but one aspect of our total or mass war because they, lacking the quality
of independence, are of themselves incapable of providing a solution to the
struggle.


Guerrilla warfare has qualities and objectives peculiar to itself. It is
a weapon that a nation inferior in arms and military equipment may employ
against a more powerful aggressor nation. When the invader pierces deep into
the heart of the weaker country and occupies her territory in a cruel and
oppressive manner, there is no doubt that conditions of terrain, climate,
and society in general offer obstacles to his progress and may be used to
advantage by those who oppose him. In guerrilla warfare we turn these advantages
to the purpose of resisting and defeating the enemy.


During the progress of hostilities, guerrillas gradually develop into orthodox
forces that operate in conjunction with other units of the regular army.
Thus the regularly organized troops, those guerrillas who have attained that
status, and those who have not reached that level of development combine
to form the military power of a national revolutionary war. There can be
no doubt that the ultimate result of this will be victory.


Both in its development and in its method of application, guerrilla warfare
has certain distinctive characteristics. We first will discuss the relationship
of guerrilla warfare to national policy. Because ours is the resistance of
a semi colonial country against an imperialism, our hostilities must have
a clearly defined political goal and firmly established political
responsibilities. Our basic policy is the creation of a national united
anti-Japanese front. This policy we pursue in order to gain our political
goal, which is the complete emancipation of the Chinese people. There are
certain fundamental steps necessary in the realization of this policy, to
wit:


  1. Arousing and organizing the people.

  2. Achieving internal unification politically.

  3. Establishing bases.

  4. Equipping forces.

  5. Recovering national strength.

  6. Destroying enemy's national strength.

  7. Regaining lost territories.


There is no reason to consider guerrilla warfare separately from national
policy. On the contrary, it must be organized and conducted in complete accord
with national anti-Japanese policy. It is only who misinterpret guerrilla
action who say, as does Jen Ch'i Shan, "The question of guerrilla hostilities
is purely a military matter and not a political one." Those who maintain
this simple point of view have lost sight of the political goal and the political
effects of guerrilla action. Such a simple point of view will cause the people
to lose confidence and will result in our defeat.


What is the relationship of guerrilla warfare to the people? Without a political
goal, guerrilla warfare must fail, as it must, if its political objectives
do not coincide with the aspirations of the people and their sympathy,
co-operation, and assistance cannot be gained. The essence of guerrilla warfare
is thus revolutionary in character. On the other hand, in a war of
counter-revolutionary nature, there is no place for guerrilla hostilities.
Because guerrilla warfare basically derives from the masses and is supported
by them, it can neither exist nor flourish if it separates itself from their
sympathies and co-operation. There are those who do not comprehend guerrilla
action, and who therefore do not understand the distinguishing qualities
of a people's guerrilla war, who say: 'Only regular troops can carry on guerrilla
operations.' There are others who, because they do not believe in the ultimate
success of guerilla action, mistakenly say: 'Guerrilla warfare is an
insignificant and highly specialized type of operation in which there is
no place for the masses of the people' (Jen Ch'i Shan). Then there are those
who ridicule the masses and undermine resistance by wildly asserting that
the people have no understanding of the war of resistance (Yeh Ch'ing, for
one). The moment that this war of resistance dissociates itself from the
masses of the people is the precise moment that it dissociates itself from
hope of ultimate victory over the Japanese.


What is the organization for guerrilla warfare? Though all guerrilla bands
that spring from the masses of the people suffer from lack of organization
at the time of their formation, they all have in common a basic quality that
makes organization possible. All guerrilla units must have political and
military leadership. This is true regardless of the source or size of such
units. Such units may originate locally, in the masses of the people; they
may be formed from an admixture of regular troops with groups of the people,
or they may consist of regular army units intact. And mere quantity does
not affect this matter. Such units may consist of a squad of a few men, a
battalion of several hundred men, or a regiment of several thousand men.


All these must have leaders who are unyielding in their policies—resolute,
loyal, sincere, and robust. These men must be well-educated in revolutionary
technique, self confident, able to establish severe discipline, and able
to cope with counter-propaganda. In short, these leaders must be models for
the people. As the war progresses, such leaders lack of discipline which
at first will gradually overcome the lack of discipline which at first prevails;
they will establish discipline in their forces, strengthening them and increasing
their combat efficiency. Thus eventual victory will be attained.


Unorganized guerrilla warfare cannot contribute to victory and those who
attack the movement as a combination of banditry and anarchism do not understand
the nature of guerrilla action. They say, 'This movement is a haven for
disappointed militarists, vagabonds, and bandits' (Jen Ch'i Shan), hoping
thus to bring the movement into disrepute. We do not deny that there are
corrupt guerrillas, nor that there are people who under the guise of guerrillas
indulge in unlawful activities. Neither do we deny that the movement has
at the present time symptoms of a lack of organization, symptoms that might
indeed be serious were we to judge guerrilla warfare solely by the corrupt
and temporary phenomena we have mentioned. We should study the corrupt phenomena
and attempt to eradicate them in order to encourage guerilla warfare, and
to increase its military efficiency. 'This is hard work, there is no help
for it, and the problem cannot be solved immediately. The whole people must
try to reform themselves during the course of the war. We must educate them
and reform them in the light of past experience. Evil does not exist in guerrilla
warfare but only in the unorganized and undisciplined activities that are
anarchism,' said Lenin, in On Guerrilla Warfare.[B]


What is basic guerrilla strategy? Guerrilla strategy must be based primarily
on alertness, mobility, and attack. It must be adjusted to the enemy situation,
the terrain, the existing lines of communication, the relative strengths,
the weather and the situation of the people.


In guerrilla warfare, select the tactic of seeming to come from the east
and attacking from the west; avoid the solid, attack the hollow; attack;
withdraw; deliver a lightning blow, seek a lightning decision. When guerrillas
engage a stronger enemy, they withdraw when he advances; harass him when
he stops; strike him when he is weary; pursue him when he withdraws. In guerilla
strategy, the enemy's rear, flanks, and other vulnerable spots are his vital
points, and there he must be harassed, attacked, dispersed, exhausted and
annihilated. Only in this way can guerrillas carry out their mission of
independent guerrilla action and coordination with the effort of the regular
armies. But, in spite of the most complete preparation, there can be no victory
if mistakes are made in the matter of command. Guerilla warfare based on
the principles we have mentioned and carried out over a vast extent of territory
in which communications are inconvenient will contribute tremendously towards
ultimate defeat of the Japanese and consequent emancipation of the Chinese
people.


A careful distinction must be made between two types of guerrilla warfare.
The fact that revolutionary guerrilla warfare is based on the masses of the
people does not in itself mean that the organization of guerrilla units is
impossible in a war of counter-revolutionary character. As examples of the
former type we may cite Red guerilla hostilities during the Russian Revolution;
those of the Reds China; of the Abyssinians against the Italians for the
past three years; those of the last seven years in Manchuria, and the vast
anti-Japanese guerrilla war that is carried on in China today. All these
struggles have been carried on in the interest of the whole people or the
greater part of them; all had a broad basis in the national manpower and
all have been in accord with the laws of historical development. They have
existed and will continue to exist, flourish, and develop as long as they
are not contrary to national policy.


The second type of guerrilla warfare directly contradicts the law of historical
development. Of this type, we may cite the examples furnished by the White
Russian guerrilla units organized by Denikin and Kolchak; those organized
by the Japanese; those organized by the Italians in Abyssinia; those supported
by the puppet governments in Manchuria and Mongolia, and those that will
be organized here by Chinese traitors. All such have oppressed the masses
and have been contrary to the true interests of the people. They must be
firmly opposed. They are easy to destroy because they lack a broad foundation
in the people.


If we fail to differentiate between the two types of guerrilla hostilities
mentioned, it is likely that we will exaggerate their effect when applied
by an invader. We might arrive at the conclusion that 'the invader can organize
guerrilla units from among the people'. Such a conclusion might well diminish
our confidence in guerrilla warfare. As far as this matter is concerned,
we have but to remember the historical experience of revolutionary struggles.


Further, we must distinguish general revolutionary wars from those of a purely
'class' type. In the former case, the whole people of a nation, without regard
to class or party, carry on a guerrilla struggle that is an instrument of
the national policy. Its basis is, therefore, much broader than is the basis
of a struggle of class type. Of a general guerrilla war, it has been said:
'When a nation is invaded, the people become sympathetic to one another and
all aid in organizing guerrilla units. In civil war, no matter to what extent
guerrillas are developed, they do not produce the same results as when they
are formed to resist an invasion by foreigners' (Civil War in
Russia). The one strong feature of guerrilla warfare in a civil struggle
is its quality of internal purity. One class may be easily united and perhaps
fight with great effect, whereas in a national revolutionary war, guerrilla
units are faced with the problem of internal unification of different class
groups. This necessitates the use of propaganda. Both types of guerrilla
war are, however, similar in that they both employ the same military methods.


National guerrilla warfare, though historically of the same consistency,
has employed varying implements as times, peoples, and conditions differ.
The guerrilla aspects of the Opium War, those of the fighting in Manchuria
since the Mukden incident, and those employed in China today are all slightly
different. The guerrilla warfare conducted by the Moroccans against the French
and the Spanish was not exactly similar to that which we conduct today in
China. These differences express the characteristics of different peoples
in different periods. Although there is a general similarity in the quality
of all these struggles, there are dissimilarities in form. This fact we must
recognize. Clausewitz wrote, in On War: 'Wars in every period
have independent forms and independent conditions, and, therefore, every
period must have its independent theory of war.' Lenin, in On Guerrilla
Warfare said: 'As regards the form of fighting, it is unconditionally
requisite that history be investigated in order to discover the conditions
of environment, the state of economic progress and the political ideas that
obtained, the national characteristics, customs, and degree of civilization.'
Again: 'It is necessary to be completely unsympathetic to abstract formulas
and rules and to study with sympathy the conditions of the actual fighting,
for these will change in accordance with the political and economic situations
and the realization of the people's aspirations. These progressive changes
in conditions create new methods.'


If, in today's struggle, we fail to apply the historical truths of revolutionary
guerrilla war, we will fall into the error of believing with T'ou Hsi Sheng
that under the impact of Japan's mechanized army, 'the guerrilla unit has
lost its historical function'. Jen Ch'i Shan writes: 'In olden days guerrilla
warfare was part of regular strategy but there is almost no chance that it
can be applied today.' These opinions are harmful. If we do not make an estimate
of the characteristics peculiar to our anti-Japanese guerrilla war, but insist
on applying to it mechanical formulas derived from past history, we are making
the mistake of placing our hostilities in the same category as all other
national guerrilla struggles. If we hold this view, we will simply be beating
our heads against a stone wall and we will be unable to profit from guerrilla
hostilities.


To summarize: What is the guerrilla war of resistance against Japan? It is
one aspect of the entire war, which, although alone incapable of producing
the decision, attacks the enemy in every quarter, diminishes the extent of
area under his control, increases our national strength, and assists our
regular armies. It is one of the strategic instruments used to inflict defeat
on our enemy. It is the one pure expression of anti-Japanese policy, that
is to say, it is military strength organized by the active people and inseparable
from them. It is a powerful special weapon with which we resist the Japanese
and without which we cannot defeat them.

 

Chapter 2: The Relation Of Guerrilla Hostilitiesto Regular Operations

 


[A]
A document by this name was not written by Lenin.


[B]
This is a misquotation. No passage resembling this is in Lenin's Guerrilla Warfare.



Table of Contents: On Guerrilla Warfare





==========

## The Relation of Guerrilla Hostilities to Regular
  Operations







On Guerrilla Warfare — Ch 2




Mao Tse-tung

On Guerrilla Warfare



2. The Relation Of Guerrilla Hostilitiesto Regular Operations



The general features of orthodox hostilities, that is, the war of position
and the war of movement, differ fundamentally from guerrilla warfare. There
are other readily apparent differences such as those in organization, armament,
equipment supply, tactics, command; in conception of the terms 'front' and
'rear'; in the matter of military responsibilities.


When considered from the point of view of total numbers, guerrilla units
are many, as individual combat units, they may vary in size from the smallest,
of several score or several hundred men, to the battalion or the regiment,
of several thousand. This is not the case in regularly organized units. A
primary feature of guerrilla operations is their dependence upon the people
themselves to organize battalions and other units. As a result of this,
organization depends largely upon local circumstances. In the case of guerrilla
groups, the standard of equipment is of a low order and they must depend
for their sustenance primarily upon what the locality affords.


The strategy of guerrilla warfare is manifestly unlike that employed in orthodox
operations, as the basic tactic of the former is constant activity and movement.
There is in guerrilla warfare no such thing as a decisive battle; there is
nothing comparable to the fixed, passive defence that characterizes orthodox
war. In guerrilla warfare, the transformation of a moving situation into
a positional defensive situation never arises. The general features of
reconnaissance, partial deployment, general deployment, and development of
the attack that are usual in mobile warfare are not common in guerrilla war.


There are differences also in the matter of leadership and command. In guerrilla
warfare, small units acting independently play the principal role and there
must be no excessive interference with their activities. In orthodox warfare
particularly in a moving situation, a certain degree of initiative is accorded
subordinates, but in principle, command is centralized. This is done because
all units and all supporting arms in all districts must co-ordinate to the
highest degree. In the case of guerrilla warfare, this is not only undesirable
but impossible. Only adjacent guerrilla units can coordinate their activities
to any degree. Strategically, their activities can be roughly correlated
with those of the regular forces, and tactically, they must co-operate with
adjacent units of the regular army. But there are no strictures on the extent
of guerrilla activity nor is it primarily characterized by the quality of
co-operation of many units.


When we discuss the terms 'front' and 'rear' it must be remembered, that
while guerrillas do have bases, their primary field of activity is
in the enemy's rear areas. They themselves have no rear. Because an orthodox
army has rear installations (except in some special cases as during the
10,000-mile Long march of the Red Army or as in the case of certain units
operating in Shansi Province), it cannot operate as guerrillas can.


As to the matter of military responsibilities, those of the guerrillas are
to exterminate small forces of the enemy; to harass and weaken large forces;
to attack enemy lines of communications; to establish bases capable of supporting
independent operations in the enemy's rear, to force the enemy to disperse
his strength; and to co-ordinate all these activities with those of the regular
armies on distant battle fronts.


From the foregoing summary of differences that exist between guerrilla warfare
and orthodox warfare, it can be seen that it is improper to compare the two.
Further distinction must be made in order to clarify this matter. While the
Eighth Route Army is a regular army, its North China campaign is essentially
guerrilla in nature, for it operates in enemy's rear. On occasion, however,
Eighth Route Army commanders have concentrated powerful forces to strike
an enemy in motion and the characteristics of orthodox mobile warfare were
evident in the battle at P'ing Hsing Kuan and in other engagements.


On the other hand, after the fall of Feng Ling Tu, the operations of Central
Shansi, and Suiyuan, troops were more guerrilla than orthodox in nature.
In this connection the precise character of Generalissimo Chiang's instructions
to the effect that independent brigades would carry out guerrilla operations
should be recalled. In spite of such temporary activities these orthodox
units retained their identity and after the fall of Feng Line Tu, they were
not only able to fight along orthodox lines but often found it necessary
to do so. This is an example of the fact that orthodox armies may, due to
changes in the situation, temporarily function as guerrillas.


Likewise, guerrilla units formed from the people may gradually develop into
regular units and, when operating as such, employ the tactics of orthodox
mobile war. While these units function as guerrillas, they may be compared
to innumerable gnats, which, by biting a giant both in front and in rear,
ultimately exhaust him. They make themselves as unendurable as a group of
cruel and hateful devils, and as they grow and attain gigantic proportions,
they will find that their victim is not only exhausted but practically perishing.
It is for this very reason that our guerrilla activities are a source of
constant mental worry to Imperial Japan.


While it is improper to confuse orthodox with guerrilla operations, it is
equally improper to consider that there is a chasm between the two. While
differences do exist, similarities appear under certain conditions and this
fact must be appreciated if we wish to establish clearly the relationship
between the two. If we consider both types of warfare as a single subject,
or if we confuse guerrilla warfare with the mobile operations of orthodox
war, we fall into this error : We exaggerate the function of guerrillas and
minimize that of the regular armies. If we agree with Chang Tso Hua, who
says - 'Guerrilla warfare is the primary war strategy of a people seeking
to emancipate itself,' or with Kao Kang, who believes that 'Guerrilla strategy
is the only strategy possible for oppressed people', we are exaggerating
the importance of guerrilla hostilities. What these zealous friends I have
just quoted do not realize is this: If we do not fit guerrilla operations
into their proper niche, we cannot promote them realistically. Then, not
only would those who oppose take advantage of our varying opinions to turn
them to the own uses to undermine us, but guerrillas would be led assume
responsibilities they could not successfully discharge and that should properly
be carried out by orthodox force. In the meantime, the important guerrilla
function of co-ordinating activities with the regular forces would be neglected.


Furthermore, if the theory that guerrilla warfare is our only strategy were
actually applied, the regular forces would be weakened, we would be divided
in purpose, and guerrilla hostilities would decline. If we say, ' Let us
transform the regular forces into guerrillas', and do not place our first
reliance on a victory to be gained by the regular armies over the enemy,
we may certainly expect to see as a result the failure of the anti-Japanese
war of resistance. The concept that guerrilla warfare is an end in itself
and that guerrilla activities can be divorced from those of the regular forces
is incorrect. If we assume that guerrilla warfare does not progress from
beginning to end beyond its elementary forms, we have failed to recognize
the fact that guerrilla hostilities can, under specific conditions, develop
and assume orthodox characteristics. An opinion that admits the existence
of guerrilla war, but isolates it, is one that does not properly estimate
the potentialities of such war.


Equally dangerous is the concept that condemns guerrilla war on the ground
that war has no other aspects than the purely orthodox. This opinion is
often expressed by those who have seen the corrupt phenomena of some guerrilla
regimes, observed their lack of discipline, and have seen them used as a
screen behind which certain persons have indulged in bribery and other corrupt
practices. These people will not admit the fundamental necessity for guerrilla
bands that spring from the armed people. They say, 'Only the regular forces
are capable of conducting guerrilla operations.' This theory is a mistaken
one and would lead to the abolition of the people's guerrilla war.


A proper conception of the relationship that exists between guerrilla effort
and that of the regular forces is essential. We believe it can be stated
this way: 'Guerrilla operations during the anti-Japanese war may for certain
time and temporarily become its paramount feature, particularly insofar as
the enemy's rear is concerned. However, if we view the war as a whole, there
can be no doubt that our regular forces are of primary importance, because
it is they who are alone capable of producing the decision. Guerrilla warfare
assists them in producing this favourable decision. Orthodox forces may under
certain conditions operate as guerrillas, and the latter may, under certain
conditions, develop to the status of the former. However, both guerrilla
forces and regular forces have their own respective development and their
proper combinations.'


To clarify the relationship between the mobile aspect of orthodox war and
guerrilla war, we may say that general agreement exists that the principal
element of our strategy must be mobility. With the war of movement, we may
at times combine the war of position. Both of these are assisted by general
guerrilla hostilities. It is true that on the battlefield mobile war often
becomes positional; it is true that this situation may be reversed; it is
equally true that each form may combine with the other. The possibility of
such combination will become more evident after the prevailing standards
of equipment have been raised. For example, in a general strategical
counter-attack to recapture key cities and lines of communication, it would
be normal to use both mobile and positional methods. However, the point must
again be made that our fundamental strategical form must be the war of movement.
If we deny this, we cannot arrive at the victorious solution of the war.
In sum, while we must promote guerrilla warfare as a necessary strategical
auxiliary to orthodox operations, we must neither assign it the primary position
in our war strategy nor substitute it for mobile and positional warfare as
conducted by orthodox forces.

 

Chapter 3: Guerrilla Warfare In History

 


Table of Contents: On Guerrilla Warfare





==========

## Guerrilla Warfare in History







On Guerrilla Warfare — Ch 3




Mao Tse-tung

On Guerrilla Warfare



3. Guerrilla Warfare In History



Guerrilla warfare is neither a product of China nor peculiar to the present
day. From the earliest historical days, it has been a feature of wars fought
by every class of men against invaders and oppressors. Under suitable conditions,
it has great possibilities. The many guerrilla wars in history have their
points of difference, their peculiar characteristics, their varying processes
and conclusions, and we must respect and profit by the experience of those
whose blood was shed in them. What a pity it is that the priceless experience
gained during the several hundred wars waged by the peasants of China cannot
be marshaled today to guide us. Our only experience in guerrilla hostilities
has been that gained from the several conflicts that have been carried on
against us by foreign imperialists. But that experience should help the fighting
Chinese recognize the necessity for guerrilla warfare and should confirm
them in confidence of ultimate victory.


In September 1812, Napoleon, in the course of swallowing all of Europe, invaded
Russia at the head of a great army totaling several hundred thousand infantry,
cavalry, and artillery. At that time, Russia was weak and her ill-prepared
army was not concentrated. The most important phase of her strategy was the
use made of Cossack cavalry and detachments of peasants to carry on guerrilla
operations. After giving up Moscow, the Russians formed nine guerrilla divisions
of about five hundred men each. These, and vast groups of organized peasants,
carried on partisan warfare and continually harassed the French Army. When
the French Army was withdrawing, cold and starving, Russian guerrillas blocked
the way and, in combination with regular troops, carried out counterattacks
on the French rear, pursuing and defeating them. The army of the heroic Napoleon
was almost entirely annihilated, and the guerrillas captured many officers,
men, cannon, and rifles. Though the victory was the result of various factors
and depended largely on the activities of the regular army the function of
the partisan groups was extremely important. The corrupt and poorly organized
country that was Russia defeated and destroyed an army led by the most famous
soldier of Europe and won the war in spite of the fact that her ability to
organize guerrilla regimes was not fully developed. At times, guerrilla groups
were hindered in their operations and the supply of equipment and arms was
insufficient. If we use the Russian saying, it was a case of a battle between
"the fist and the axe" [Ivanov ].


From 1918 to 1920, the Russian Soviets, because of the opposition and
intervention of foreign imperialists and the internal disturbances of White
Russian groups, were forced to organize themselves in occupied territories
and fight a real war. In Siberia and Alashan, in the rear of the army of
the traitor Denikin and in the rear of the Poles, there were many Red Russian
guerrillas. These not only disrupted and destroyed the communications in
the enemy's rear but also frequently prevented his advance. On one occasion,
the guerrillas completely destroyed a retreating White Army that had previously
been defeated by regular Red forces. Kolchak, Denikin, the Japanese, and
the Poles, owing to the necessity of staving off the attacks of guerrillas,
were forced to withdraw regular troops from the front. 'Thus not only was
the enemy's manpower impoverished but he found himself unable to cope with
the ever-moving guerrilla' [The Nature of Guerrilla Action].


The development of guerrillas at that time had only reached the stage where
there were detached groups of several thousands in strength, old, middle-aged,
and young. The old men organized themselves into propaganda groups known
as 'silver-haired units'; there was a suitable guerrilla activity for the
middle-aged; the young men formed combat units, and there were even groups
for the children. Among the leaders were determined Communists who carried
on general political work among the people. These, although they opposed
the doctrine of extreme guerrilla warfare, were quick to oppose those who
condemned it. Experience tells us that 'Orthodox armies are the fundamental
and principal power, guerrilla units are secondary to them and assist in
the accomplishment of the mission assigned the regular forces [Gusev,
Lessons of Civil War.]. Many of the guerrilla regimes in Russia gradually
developed until in battle they were able to discharge functions of organized
regulars. The army of the famous General Galen was entirely derived from
guerrillas.


During seven months in 1935 and 1936, the Abyssinians lost their war against
Italy. The cause of defeat — aside from the most important political
reasons that there were dissentient political groups, no strong government
party, and unstable policy—was the failure to adopt a positive policy
of mobile warfare. There was never a combination of the war of movement with
large-scale guerrilla operations. Ultimately, the Abyssinians adopted a purely
passive defence, with the result that they were unable to defeat the Italians.
In addition to this, the fact that Abyssinia is a relatively small and sparsely
populated country was contributory. Even in spite of the fact that the Abyssinian
Army and its equipment were not modern, she was able to withstand a mechanized
Italian force of 400,000 for seven months. During that period, there were
several occasions when a war of movement was combined with large-scale guerrilla
operations to strike the Italians heavy blows. Moreover, several cities were
retaken and casualties totaling 140,000 were inflicted. Had this policy been
steadfastly continued, it would have been difficult to have named the ultimate
winner. At the present time, guerrilla activities continue in Abyssinia,
and if the internal political questions can be solved, an extension of such
activities is probable.


In 1841 and 1842, when brave people from San Yuan Li fought the English;
again from 1850 to 1864, during the Taiping War, and for a third time in
1899 in the Boxer Uprising, guerrilla tactics were employed to a remarkable
degree. Particularly was this so during the Taiping War, when guerrilla
operations were most extensive and the Ch'ing troops were often completely
exhausted and forced to flee for their lives.


In these wars, there were no guiding principles of guerrilla action. Perhaps
these guerrilla hostilities were not carried out in conjunction with regular
operations, or perhaps there was a lack of co-ordination. But the fact that
victory was not gained was not because of any lack in guerrilla activity
but rather because of the interference of politics in military affairs.
Experience shows that if precedence is not given to the question of conquering
the enemy in both political and military affairs, and if regular hostilities
are not conducted with tenacity, guerrilla operations alone cannot produce
final victory.


From 1927 to 1936, the Chinese Red Army fought almost continually and employed
guerrilla tactics contently. At the very beginning, a positive policy was
adopted. Many bases were established, and from guerrilla bands, the Reds
were able to develop into regular armies. As these armies fought, new guerrilla
regimes were developed over a wide area. These regimes co-ordinated their
efforts with those of the regular forces This policy accounted for the many
victories gained by the guerrilla troops relatively few in number, who were
armed with weapons inferior to those of their opponents. The leaders of that
period properly combined guerrilla operations with a war of movement both
strategically and tactically. They depended primarily upon alertness. They
stressed the correct basis for both political affaires and military operations.
They developed their guerrilla bands into trained units. They then determined
upon a ten year period of resistance during which time they overcame innumerable
difficulties and have only lately reached their goal of direct participation
in the anti-Japanese war. There is no doubt that the internal unification
of China is now a permanent and definite fact, and that the experience gained
during our internal struggles has proved to be both necessary and advantageous
to us in the struggle against Japanese imperialism. There are many valuable
lessons we can learn from the experience of those years. Principle among
them is the fact that guerrilla success largely depend upon powerful political
leaders who work unceasingly to bring about internal unification. Such leaders
must work with the people; they must have a correct conception of the policy
to be adopted as regards both the people and the enemy.


After 18 September 1931, strong anti-Japanese guerrilla campaigns were opened
in each of the three north-east provinces. Guerrilla activity persists there
in spite of the cruelties and deceits practiced by the Japanese at the expense
of the people, and in spite of the fact that her armies have occupied the
land and oppressed the people for the last seven years. The struggle can
be divided into two periods . During the first, which extended from 18 September
1931 to January 1933, anti-Japanese guerrilla activity exploded constantly
in all three provinces. Ma Chan Shan and Su Ping Wei established an anti-Japanese
regime in Heilungkiang. In Chi Lin. the National Salvation Army and the
Self-Defence Army were led by Wang Te Lin and Li Tu respectively. In Feng
T'ien, Chu Lu and others commanded guerrilla units The influence of these
forces was great. They harassed the Japanese unceasingly, but because there
was an indefinite political goal, improper leadership, failure to co ordinate
military command and operations and to work with the people, and, finally,
failure to delegate proper political functions to the army, the whole
organization was feeble, and its strength was not unified. As a direct result
of these conditions, the campaigns failed and the troops were finally defeated
by our enemy.


During the second period, which has extended from January 1933 to the present
time, the situation has greatly improved, This has come about because great
numbers of people who have been oppressed by the enemy have decided to resist
him, because of the participation of the Chinese Communists in the anti-Japanese
warm and because of the fine work of the volunteer units. The guerrillas
have finally educated the people to the meaning of guerrilla warfare, and
in the north-east, it has again become an important and powerful influence.
Already seven or eight guerrilla regiments and a number of independent platoons
have been formed, and their activities make it necessary for the Japanese
to send troops after them month after month. These units hamper the Japanese
and undermine their control in the north-east, while, at the same time they
inspire a Nationalist revolution in Korea. Such activities are not merely
of transient and local importance but directly contribute to our ultimate
victory.

 

However, there are still some weak points. For instance: National defence
policy has not been sufficiently developed; participation of the people is
not general; internal political organization is still in its primary stages,
and the force used to attack the Japanese and the puppet governments is not
yet sufficient. But if present policy is continued tenaciously, all these
weaknesses will be overcome. Experience proves that guerrilla war will develop
to even greater proportions and that, in spite of the cruelty o the Japanese
and the many methods they have device to cheat the people, they cannot extinguish
guerrilla activities extinguish guerrilla activities in the three north-eastern
provinces.


The guerrilla experiences of China and of other countries that have been
outlined; prove that in a war of revolutionary nature such hostilities are
possible, natural and necessary. They prove that if the present anti-Japanese
war for the emancipation of the masses of the Chinese people is to gain ultimate
victory, such hostilities must expand tremendously.


Historical experience is written in iron and blood. We must point out that
the guerrilla campaigns being waged in China today are a page in history
that has no precedent. Their influence will not be confined solely to China
in her present anti-Japanese war but will be world-wide.

 

Chapter 4: Can Victory Be Attained By Guerrilla Operations?

 


Table of Contents: On Guerrilla Warfare





==========

## Can Victory be Attained by Guerrilla
  Operations







On Guerrilla Warfare — Ch 4




Mao Tse-tung

On Guerrilla Warfare



4. Can Victory Be Attained By Guerrilla Operations?



Guerrilla hostilities are but one phase of the war of resistance against
Japan and the answer to the question of whether or not they can produce ultimate
victory can be given only after investigation and comparison of all elements
of our own strength with those of the enemy. The particulars of such a comparison
are several. First, the strong Japanese bandit nation is an absolute monarchy.
During the course of her invasion of China, she had made comparative progress
in the techniques of industrial production and in the development of excellence
and skill in her army, navy, and airforce. But in spite of this industrial
progress, she remains an absolute monarchy of inferior physical endowments.
Her manpower, her raw materials, and her financial resources are all inadequate
and insufficient to maintain her in protracted warfare or to meet the situation
presented by a war prosecuted over a vast area. Added to this is the anti-war
feeling now manifested by the Japanese people, a feeling that is shared by
the junior officers and, more extensively, by the soldiers of the invading
army. Furthermore, China is not Japan's only enemy. Japan is unable to employ
her entire strength in the attack on China; she cannot, at most, spare more
than a million men for this purpose, as she must hold any in excess of that
number for use against other possible opponents. Because of these important
primary considerations, the invading Japanese bandits can hope neither to
be victorious in a protracted struggle nor to conquer a vast area. Their
strategy must be one of lightning war and speedy decision. If we can hold
out for three or more years, it will be most difficult for Japan to bear
up under the strain.


In the war, the Japanese brigands must depend upon lines of communication
linking the principal cities as routes for the transport of war materials.
The most important considerations for her are that her rear be stable and
peaceful and that her lines of communication be intact. It is not to her an 
advantage to wage war over a vast area with disrupted lines of communication.
She cannot disperse her strength and fight in a number of places, and her
greatest fears are these eruptions in her rear and disruption of her lines
of communication. If she can maintain communications, she will be able at
will to concentrate powerful forces speedily at strategic points to engage
our organized units in decisive battle. Another important Japanese objective
is to profit from the industries, finances, and manpower in captured areas
and with them to augment her own insufficient strength. Certainly, it is
not to her advantage to forgo these benefits, not to be forced to dissipate
her energies in a type of warfare in which the gains will not compensate
for the losses. It is for these reasons that guerrilla warfare conducted
in each bit of conquered territory over a wide area will be a heavy blow
struck at the Japanese bandits. Experience in the five northern provinces
as well as in Kiangsu, Chekiang and Anhwei has absolutely established the
truth of this assertion.


China is a country half colonial and half feudal; it is a country that is
politically, militarily, and economically backward. This is an inescapable
conclusion. It is a vast country with great resources and tremendous population,
a country in which the terrain is complicated and the facilities for
communication are poor. All theses factors favour a protracted war, they
all favour the application of mobile warfare and guerilla operations. The
establishment of innumerable anti-Japanese bases behind the enemy's lines
will force him to fight unceasingly in many places at once, both to his front
and his rear. He thus endlessly expends his resources.


We must unite the strength of the army with that of the people, we must strike
the weak spots in the enemy's flanks, in his front, in his rear. We must
make war everywhere and cause dispersal of his forces and dissipation of
his strength. Thus the time will come when a gradual change will become evident
in the relative position of ourselves and our enemy, and when that day comes,
it will be the beginning of our ultimate victory over the Japanese.


Although China's population is great, it is unorganized. This is a weakness
which must be then into account.


The Japanese bandits have merely to conquer territory but rapacious, and
murderous policy of the extinction of the Chinese race. We must unite the
nation without regard to parties and follow our policy of resistance to the
end. China today is not the China of old. It is not like Abyssinia. China
today is at the point of her greatest historical progress. The standards
of literacy among the masses have been raised; the
rapprochement of Communists and Nationalists has laid the
foundation for an anti-Japanese war front that is constantly being strengthened
and expanded; government, army and people are all working with great energy;
the raw material resources and the economic strength of the nation are waiting
to be used; the unorganized people are becoming an organized nation.


These energies must be directed toward the goal of protracted war so that
should the Japanese occupy much of our territory or even most of it, we shall
still gain final victory. Not only must those behind our lines organize for
resistance but also those who live in Japanese-occupied territory in every
part of the country. The traitors who accept the Japanese as fathers are
few in number, and those who have taken oath that they would prefer death
to abject slavery are many. If we resist with this spirit, what enemy can
we not conquer and who can say that ultimate victory will not be ours?


The Japanese are waging a barbaric war along uncivilized lines. For that
reason, Japanese of all classes oppose the policies of their government,
as do vast international groups. On the other hand, because China's cause
is righteous, our countrymen of all classes and parties are united to oppose
the invader; we have sympathy in many foreign countries including even Japan
itself. This is perhaps the most important reason why Japan will lose and
China will win.


The progress of the war for the emancipation of the Chinese people will be
in accord with these facts. The guerrilla war of resistance will be in accord
with these facts, and that guerrilla operations correlated with those of
our regular forces will produce victory is the conviction of the many patriots
who devote their entire strength to guerrilla hostilities.

 

Chapter 5: Organization For Guerilla Warfare

 


Table of Contents: On Guerrilla Warfare





==========

## Organization for Guerrilla Warfare







On Guerrilla Warfare — Ch 5




Mao Tse-tung

On Guerrilla Warfare



5. Organization For Guerilla Warfare



Four points must be considered under this subject. These are:


    How are guerrilla bands formed?

    How are guerrilla bands organized?

    What are the methods of arming guerrilla bands?

    What elements constitute a guerrilla band?


These are all questions pertaining to the organization armed guerrilla units;
they are questions which those who had no experience in guerilla hostilities
do not understand and on which they can arrive at no sound decisions; indeed,
they would not know in what manner to begin.


  How Guerrilla Units Are Originally Formed


The unit may originate in any one of the following ways:
 
  a) From the masses of the people.

  b) From regular army units temporarily detailed for the purpose.

  c) From regular army units permanently detailed.

  d) From the combination of a regular army unit and a unit recruited from
  the people.

  e) From the local militia.

  f) From deserters from the ranks of the enemy.

  g) From former bandits and bandit groups.


In the present hostilities, no doubt, all these sources will be employed.


In the first case above, the guerrilla unit is formed from the people. This
is the fundamental type. Upon the arrival of the enemy army to oppress and
slaughter the people, their leaders call upon them to resist. They assemble
the most valorous elements, arm them with old rifles or whatever firearms
they can, and thus a guerrilla unit begins. Orders have already been issued
throughout the nation that call upon the people to form guerrilla units both
for local defense and for other combat. If the local governments approve
and aid such movements, they cannot fail to prosper. In some places, where
the local government is not determined or where its officers have all fled,
the leaders among the masses (relying on the sympathy of the people and their
sincere desire to resist Japan and succor the country ) call upon the people
to resist, and they respond. Thus, many guerrilla units are organized. In
circumstances of this kind, the duties of leadership usually fall upon the
shoulders of young students, teachers, professors, other educators, local
soldiery, professional men, artisans, and those without a fixed profession,
who are willing to exert themselves to the last drop of their blood. Recently,
in Shansi, Hopeh, Chahar, Suiyuan, Shantung, Chekiang, Anhwei, Kiangsu, and
other provinces, extensive guerrilla hostilities have broken out. All these
are organized and led by patriots. The amount of such activity is the best
proof of the foregoing statement. The more such bands there are, the better
will the situation be. Each district, each county, should be able to organize
a great number of guerrilla squads, which, when assembled, form a guerrilla
company.


There are those who say: 'I am a farmer', or, 'I am a student'; 'I can discuss
literature but not military arts.' This is incorrect. There is no profound
difference between the farmer and the soldier. You must have courage. You
simply leave your farms and become soldiers. That you are farmers is of no
difference, and if you have education, that is so much the better. When you
take your arms in hand, you become soldiers; when you are organized, you
become military units.


Guerrilla hostilities are the university of war, and after you have fought
several times valiantly and aggressively, you may become a leader of troops
and there will be many well-known regular soldiers who will not be your peers.
Without question, the fountainhead of guerrilla warfare is in the masses
of the people, who organize guerrilla units directly from themselves.


The second type of guerrilla unit is that which is organized from small units
of the regular forces temporarily detached for the purpose. For example,
since hostilities commenced, many groups have been temporarily detached from
armies, divisions, and brigades and have been assigned guerrilla duties.
A regiment of the regular army may, if circumstances warrant, be dispersed
into groups for the purpose of carrying on guerrilla operations. As an example
of this, there is the Eighth Route Army, in North China. Excluding the periods
when it carries on mobile operations as an army, it is divided into its elements
and these carry on guerrilla hostilities. This type of guerrilla unit is
essential for two reasons. First, in mobile-warfare situations, the co-ordination
of guerrilla activities with regular operations is necessary. Second, until
guerrilla hostilities can be developed on a grand scale, there is no one
to carry out guerrilla missions but regulars. Historical experience shows
us that regular army units are not able to undergo the hardships of guerrilla
campaigning over long periods. The leaders of regular units engaged in guerrilla
operations must be extremely adaptable. They must study the methods of guerrilla
war. They must understand that initiative, discipline, and the employment
of stratagems are all of the utmost importance. As the guerrilla status of
regular units is but temporary, their leaders must lend all possible support
to the organization of guerrilla units from among the people. These units
must be so disciplined that they hold together after the departure of the
regulars.


The third type of unit consists of a detachment of regulars who are permanently
assigned guerrilla duties. This type of small detachment does not have to
be prepared to rejoin the regular forces. Its post is somewhere in the rear
of the enemy, and there it becomes the backbone of guerrilla organization.
As an example of this type of organization we may take the Wu Tat Shan district
in the heart of the Hopeh-Chahar-Shansi area. Along the borders of these
provinces, units from the Eighth Route Army have established a framework
or guerrilla operations. Around these small cores, many detachments have
been organized and the area of guerrilla activity greatly expanded. In areas
in which there is a possibility of cutting the enemy's lines of supply, this
system should be used. Severing enemy, supply routes destroys his lifeline;
this is one feature that cannot be neglected. If, at the time the regular
forces withdraw from a certain area, some units left behind, these should
conduct guerrilla operations in the enemy's rear. As an example of this,
we have the guerrilla bands now continuing their independent operations in
the Shanghai- Woosung area in spite of the withdrawal of regular forces.


The fourth type of organization is the result of a merger between small regular
detachments and local guerrilla units. The regular forces may dispatch a
squad, a platoon, or a company, which is placed at the disposal of the local
guerrilla commander. If a small group experienced in military and political
affairs is sent, it becomes the core of the local guerrilla unit. These several
methods are all excellent, and if properly applied, the intensity of guerilla
warfare can be extended. In the Wu Tat Shan area, each of these methods has
been used.


The fifth type mentioned above is from the local militia, from police and
home guards. In every North China province, there are now many of these groups,
and they should be formed in every locality. The government has issued mandate
to the effect that the people are not to depart from war areas. The officer
in command of the county, the commander of the peace-preservation unit, the
chief of police are all required to obey this mandate. They cannot retreat
with their forces but must remain at their stations and resist.


The sixth type of unit is that organized from troops that come over from
the enemy—the Chinese 'traitor' troops employed by the Japanese. It is
always possible to produce disaffection in their ranks, and we must increase
our propaganda efforts and foment mutinies among such troops. Immediately
after mutinying, they must be received into our ranks and organized. The
concord of the leaders and the assent of the men must be gained, and the
units rebuilt politically and reorganized militarily. Once this has been
accomplished, they become successful guerrilla units. In regard to this type
of unit, it may be said that political work among them is of utmost importance.


The seventh type of guerrilla organization is that formed from bands of bandits
and brigands. This, although difficult, must be carried out with utmost vigour
lest the enemy use such bands to his own advantages. Many bandit groups pose
as anti-Japanese guerrillas, and it is only necessary to correct their political
beliefs to convert them.


In spite of inescapable differences in the fundamental types of guerrilla
bands, it is possible to unite them to form a vast sea of guerrillas. The
ancients said, 'Tai Shan is a great mountain because it does not scorn the
merest handful of dirt; the rivers and seas are deep because they absorb
the waters of small streams.' Attention paid to the enlistment and organization
of guerrillas of every type and from every source will increase the
potentialities of guerrilla action in the anti-Japanese war. This is something
that patriots will not neglect.


  THE METHOD OF ORGANIZING GUERRILLA REGIMES


Many of those who decide to participate in guerrilla activities do not know
the methods of organization. For such people, as well as for students who
have no knowledge of military affairs, the matter of organization is a problem
that requires solution. Even among those who have military knowledge, there
are some who know nothing of guerrilla regimes use they are lacking in that
particular type of experience. The subject of the organization of such regimes
is not confined to the organization of specific units but includes all guerrilla
activities within the area where the regime functions.


As an example of such organization, we may take a geographical area in the
enemy's rear. This area may comprise many counties. It must be sub-divided
and individual companies or battalions formed to accord with the sub-divisions.
To this 'military area', a military commander and political commissioners
are appointed. Under these, the necessary officers both military and political,
are appointed. In the military headquarters, there will be the staff, the
aides, the supply officers, and the medical personnel. These are controlled
by the chief of staff, who acts in accordance with orders from the commander.
In the political headquarters, there are bureaus of propaganda organization,
people's mass movements, and miscellaneous affairs. Control of these is vested
in the political chairman.


The military areas are sub-divided into smaller districts in accordance with
local geography, the enemy situation locally, and the state of guerrilla
development. Each of these smaller divisions within the area is a district,
each of which may consist of from two to six counties. To each district,
a military commander and several political commissioners are appointed. Under
their direction, military and political headquarters are organized. Tasks
are assigned in accordance with the number of guerrilla troops available.
Although the names of the officers in the 'district' correspond to those
in the larger 'area', the number of the functionaries assigned in the former
case should be reduced to the least possible. In order to unify control,
to handle guerrilla troops that come from different sources, and to harmonize
military operations and local political affairs, a committee of from seven
to nine members should be organized in each area and district. This committee,
the members of which are selected by the troops and the local political officers,
should function as a forum for the discussion of both military and political
matters.


All the people in an area should arm themselves and be organized into two
groups. One of these groups is a combat group, the other a self-defence unit
with but limited military quality. Regular combatant guerrillas are organized
into one of three general types of units. The first of these is the small
unit, the platoon or company. In each county, three to six units may be
organized. The second type is the battalion of from two to four companies.
One such unit should be organized in each county. While the unit fundamentally
belongs to the county in it was organized, it may operate in other counties.
While in areas other than its own, it must operate in conjunction with local
units in order to take advantage of their manpower, their knowledge of local
terrain and local customs, and their information of the enemy.


The third type is the guerrilla regiment, which consists of from two to four
of the above-mentioned battalion units. If sufficient manpower is available,
a guerrilla a brigade of from two to four regiments may be formed.


Each of the units has its own peculiarities of organization. A squad, the
smallest unit, has a strength of from nine to eleven men, including the leader
and the assistant leader. Its arms may be from two to five Western-style
rifles, with the remaining men armed with rifles of local manufacture,
fowling-pieces, etc., spears, or big swords. Two to four such squads form
a platoon. This too has a leader and an assistant leader, and when acting
independently, it is assigned a political officer to carry on political
propaganda work. The platoon may have about ten rifles, with the remainder
of its four of such units from a company, which, like the platoon, has a
leader, an assistant leader, and a political officer. All these units are
under the direct supervision of the military commanders of the areas in which
they operate.


The battalion unit must be more thoroughly organized and better equipped
than the smaller units. Its discipline and its personnel should be superior.
If a battalion is formed from company units, it should not deprive subordinate
units entirely of their manpower and their arms. If in a small area, there
is a peace-preservation corps, a branch of the militia, or police, regular
guerrilla units should not be dispersed over it.


The guerrilla unit next in size to the battalion is the regiment. This must
be under more severe discipline than the battalion. In an independent guerrilla
regiment, there may be ten men per squad, three squad per platoon, three
platoons per company, three companies per battalion, and three battalions
to the regiment. Two of such regiments form a brigade. Each of these units
has a commander, a vice-commander, and a political officer.


In North China, guerrilla cavalry units should be established. These may
be regiments of from two to four companies, or battalions.


All these units from the lowest to the highest are combatant guerrilla units
and receive their supplies from the central government. Details of their
organization are shown in the tables.


All the people of both sexes from the ages of sixteen to forty-five must
be organized into anti-Japanese self-defence units, the basis of which is
voluntary service. As a first step, they must procure arms, then they must
be given both military and political training. Their responsibilities are
: local sentry duties, securing information of the enemy, arresting traitors,
and preventing the dissemination of enemy propaganda. When the enemy launches
a guerrilla-suppression drive, these units, armed with what weapons there
are, are assigned to certain areas to deceive, hinder, and harass him. Thus,
the defence units assist the combatant guerrillas. They have other functions.
They furnish stretcher-bearers to transport the wounded , carriers to take
food to the troops, and comfort missions to provide the troops with tea and
rice. If a locality can organize such a self-defence unit as we have described,
the traitors cannot hide nor can bandits and robbers disturb the peace of
the people. Thus the people will continue to assist the guerrilla and supply
manpower to our regular armies. 'The organization of self-defence units is
a transitional step in the development of universal conscription. Such units
are reservoirs of manpower for the orthodox forces.'


There have been such organizations for some time in Shansi, Shensi, Honan,
and Suiyuan. The youth organizations in different provinces were formed for
the purpose of educating the young. They have been of some help. However,
they were not voluntary, and confidence of the people was thus not gained.
These organizations were not widespread, and their effect was almost negligible.
This system was, therefore, supplanted by the new-type organizations,. Which
are organized on the principles of voluntary co-operation and non-separation
of the members from their native localities. When the members of these
organizations are in their native towns, they support themselves . Only in
case of military necessity are they ordered to remote places, and when this
is done, the government must support them. Each member of these groups must
have a weapon even if the weapon is only a knife, a pistol, a lance, or a
spear.


In all places where the enemy operates, these self-defence units should organize
within themselves a small guerrilla group of perhaps from three to ten men
armed with pistols or revolvers. This group is not required to leave its
native locality.


The organization of these self-defence units is mentioned in this book because
such units are useful for the purposes of inculcating the people with military
and political knowledge, keeping order in the rear, and replenishing the
ranks of the regulars. These groups should be organized not only in the active
war zones but in every province in China. 'The people must be inspired to
co-operate voluntarily. We must not force them, for if we do, it will be
ineffectual.' This is extremely important.


In order to control anti-Japanese military organization as a whole, it is
necessary to establish a system of military areas and districts along the
lines we have indicated.


  EQUIPMENT OF GUERRILLAS


In regard to the problem of guerrilla equipment, it must be understood that
guerrillas are lightly-armed attack groups, which require simple equipment.
The standard of equipment is based upon the nature of duties assigned; the
equipment of low-class guerrilla units is not as good as that of higher-class
units. For example, those who are assigned the task of destroying rail
communications are better equipped than those who do not have that task.
The equipment of guerrillas cannot be based on what the guerrillas want,
to even what they need, but must be based on what is available for their
use. Equipment cannot be furnished immediately but must be acquired gradually.
These are points to be kept in mind .


The question of equipment includes the collection, supply, distribution,
and replacement of weapons, ammunition, blankets, communication materials,
transport, and facilities for propaganda work. The supply of weapons and
ammunition is most difficult, particularly at the time the unit is established,
but this problem can always be solved eventually. Guerrilla bands that originate
in the people are furnished with revolvers, pistols, rifles, spears, big
swords, and land mines and mortars of local manufacture. Other elementary
weapons are added and as many new-type rifles as are available are distributed.
After a period of resistance, it is possible to increase the supply of equipment
by capturing it from the enemy. In this respect, the transport companies
are the easiest to equip, for in any successful attack, we will capture the
enemy's transport.


An armory should be established in each guerrilla district for the manufacture
and repair of rifles and for the production of cartridge, hand grenades and
bayonets. Guerrillas must not depend to much on an armory. The enemy is the
principal source of their supply.


For destruction of railway tracks, bridges, and stations in enemy-controlled
territory, it is necessary to gather together demolition materials. Troops
must be trained in the preparation and use of demolitions, and a demolition
unit must be organized in each regiment.


As for minimum clothing requirements, these are that each man shall have
at least two summer-weight uniforms, one suit of winter clothing, two hats,
a pair of wrap puttees, and blanket. Each man must have a pack or a bag for
food. In the north, each man must have an overcoat. In acquiring this clothing,
we cannot depend on captures made by the enemy, for it is forbidden for captors
to take clothing from their prisoners. In order to maintain high morale in
guerrilla forces, all the clothing and equipment mentioned should be furnished
by the representatives of the government in each guerrilla district. These
men may confiscate clothing from traitors or ask contributions from those
best able to afford them. In subordinate groups, uniforms are unnecessary.


Telephone and radio equipment is not necessary in lower groups, but all units
from regiment up are equipped with both. This material can be obtained by
contributions from the regular forces and by capture from the enemy.


In the guerrilla army in general, and at bases in particular, there must be a high standard of medical equipment. Besides
the services of the doctors, medicines must be procured. Although
guerrillas can depend on the enemy for some portion of their medical supplies,
they must, in general, depend upon contributions. If Western medicines
are not available, local medicines must be made to suffice.


The problem of transport is more vital in North-China than in the south,
for in the south all that are necessary are mules and horses. Small guerrilla
units need no animals, but regiments and brigades will find them necessary.
Commanders and staffs of units from companies up should be furnished a riding
animal each. At times, two officers will have to share a horse. Officers
whose duties are of minor nature do not have to be mounted.


Propaganda materials are very important. Every large guerrilla unit should
have a printing press and a mimeograph stone. They must also have paper on
which to print propaganda leaflets and notices. They must be supplied with
large brushes. In guerrilla areas, there should be a printing press or a
lead-type press.


For the purpose of printing training instructions, this material is of the
greatest importance.


In addition to the equipment listed above, it is necessary to have field-glasses,
compasses, and military maps. An accomplished guerrilla group will acquire
these things.


Because of the proved importance of guerrilla hostilities in the anti-Japanese
war, the headquarters of the Nationalist Government and the commanding officers
of the various war zones should do their best to supply the guerrillas with
what they actually need and are unable to get for themselves. However, it
must be repeated that guerrilla equipment will in the main depend on the
efforts of the guerrillas themselves. If they depend on higher officers too
much, the psychological effect will be to weaken the guerrilla spirit of
resistance.


  ELEMENTS OF THE GUERRILLA ARMY


The term 'element' as used in the title to this section refers to the personnel,
both officers and men, of the guerrilla army. Since each guerrilla group
fights in a protracted war, its officers must be brave and positive men whose
entire loyalty is dedicated to the cause of emancipation of the people. An
officer should have the following qualities: great powers of endurance so
that in spite of any hardship he sets an example to his men and be a model
for them; he must be able to mix easily with the people; his spirit and that
of the men must be one in strengthening the policy of resistance to the Japanese.
If he wishes to gain victories, he must study tactics. A guerrilla group
with officers of this calibre would be unbeatable. I do not mean that every
guerrilla group can have, at its inception, officers of such qualities. The
officers must be men naturally endowed with good qualities which can be developed
during the course of campaigning. The most important natural quality is that
of complete loyalty to the idea of people's emancipation. If this is present,
the others will develop; if it is not present, nothing can be done. When
officers are first selected from a group, it is this quality that should
receive particular attention. The officers in a group should be inhabitants
of the locality in which the group is organized, as this will facilitate
relations between them and the local civilians. In addition, officers so
chosen would be familiar with conditions. If in any locality there are not
enough men of sufficiently high qualifications to become officers, an effort
must be made to train and educate the people so these qualities may be developed
and the potential officer material increased. There can be no disagreements
between officers native to one place and those from other localities.


A guerrilla group ought to operate on the principle that only volunteers
are acceptable for service. It is a mistake to impress people into service.
As long as a person is willing to fight, his social condition or position
is no consideration, but only men who are courageous and determined can bear
the hardships of guerrilla campaigning in a protracted war.


A soldier who habitually breaks regulations must be dismissed from the army.
Vagabonds and vicious people must not be accepted for service. The opium
habit must be forbidden, and a soldier who cannot break himself of the habit should be dismissed. Victory in guerrilla war is conditioned upon
keeping the membership pure and clean.


It is a fact that during the war the enemy may take advantage of certain
people who are lacking in conscience and patriotism and induce them to join
the guerrillas for the purpose of betraying them. Officers must, therefore,
continually educate the soldiers and inculcate patriotism in them. This will
prevent the success of traitors. The traitors who are in the ranks must be
discovered and expelled, and punishment and expulsion meted out to those
who have been influenced by them. In all such cases, the officers should
summon the soldiers and relate the facts to them, thus arousing their hatred
and detestation for traitors. This procedure will serve as well as a warning
to the other soldiers. If an officer is discovered to be a traitor, some
prudence must be used in the punishment adjudged. However, the work of
eliminating traitors in the army begins with their elimination from among
the people.


Chinese soldiers who have served under puppet governments and bandits who
have been converted should be welcomed as individuals or as groups. They
should be well-treated and repatriated. But care should be used during their
reorientation to distinguish those whose idea is to fight the Japanese from
those who may be present for other reasons.

 

Chapter 6: The Political Problems Of Guerrilla Warfare

 


Table of Contents: On Guerrilla Warfare





==========

## The Political Problems of Guerrilla
  Warfare







On Guerrilla Warfare — Ch 6




Mao Tse-tung

On Guerrilla Warfare



6. The Political Problems Of Guerrilla Warfare



In Chapter 1, I mentioned the fact that guerrilla troops should have a precise
conception of the political goal of the struggle and the political organization
to be used in attaining that goal. This means that both organization and
discipline of guerrilla troops must be at a high level so that they can carry
out the political activities that are the life of both the guerilla armies
and of revolutionary warfare.


First of all, political activities depend upon the indoctrination of both
military and political leaders with the idea of anti-Japanism. Through them,
the idea is transmitted to the troops. One must not feel that he is anti-Japanese
merely because he is a member of a guerrilla unit. The anti-Japanese idea
must be an ever-present conviction, and if it is forgotten, we may
succumb to the temptations of the enemy or be overcome with discouragement.
In a war of long duration, those whose conviction that the people must be
emancipated is not deep rooted are likely to become shaken in their faith
or actually revolt. Without the general education that enables everyone to
understand our goal of driving out Japanese imperialism and establishing
a free and happy China, the soldiers fight without conviction and lose their
determination.


The political goal must be clearly and precisely indicated to inhabitants
of guerrilla zones and their national consciousness awakened. Hence, a concrete
explanation of the political systems used is important not only to guerrilla
troops but to all those who are concerned with the realization of our political
goal. The Kuomintang has issued a pamphlet entitled System of National
Organization for War, which should be widely distributed throughout
guerrilla zones. If we lack national organization, we will lack the essential
unity that should exist between the soldiers and the people.


A study and comprehension of the political objectives of this war and of
the anti-Japanese front is particularly important for officers of guerrilla
troops. There are some militarists who say: 'We are not interested in politics
but only in the profession of arms.' It is vital that these simple-minded
militarists be made to realize the relationship that exists between politics
and military affairs. Military action is a method used to attain a political
goal. While military affairs and political affairs are not identical, it
is impossible to isolate one from the other.


It is to be hoped that the world is in the last era of strife. The vast majority
of human beings have already prepared or are preparing to fight a war that
will bring justice to the oppressed peopled of the world. No matter how long
this war may last, there is no doubt that it will be followed by an unprecedented
epoch of peace The war that we are fighting today for the freedom of all
human beings, and the independent, happy, and liberal China that we are fighting
to establish will be a part of that new world order. A conception like this
is difficult for the simple-minded militarist to grasp and it must therefore
be carefully explained to him.


There are three additional matters that must be considered under the broad
question of political activities. These are political activities, first,
as applied to the troops; second, as applied to the people; and, third, as
applied to the enemy. The fundamental problems are: first, spiritual unification
of officers and men within the army; second spiritual unification of the
army and the people; of the army and the people; and, last, destruction of
the unity of the enemy. The concrete methods for achieving these unities
are discussed in detail in pamphlet Number 4 of this series, entitled
Political Activities in Anti-Japanese Guerrilla Warfare.


A revolutionary army must have discipline that is established on a limited
democratic basis. In all armies, obedience the subordinates to their superiors
must be exacted. This is true in the case of guerrilla discipline, but the
basis for guerrilla discipline must be the individual conscience. With
guerrillas, a discipline of compulsion is ineffective. In any
revolutionary army, there is unity of purpose as far as both officers and
men are concerned, and, therefore, within such an army, discipline is
self-imposed. Although discipline in guerrilla ranks is not as severe as
in the ranks of orthodox forces, the necessity for discipline exists. This
must be self-imposed, because only when it is, is the soldier able to understand
completely, why he fights and why he must obey. This type of discipline becomes
a tower of strength within the army, and it is the only type that can truly
harmonize the relationship that exists between officers and soldiers.


In any system where discipline is externally imposed, the relationship that
exists between officer and man is characterized by indifference of the one
to the other. The idea that officers can physically beat or severely tongue-lash
their men is a feudal one and is not in accord with the conception of
self-imposed discipline. Discipline of the feudal type will destroy internal
unity and fighting strength. A discipline self-imposed is the primary
characteristic of a democratic system in the army .


A secondary characteristic is found in the degree of liberties accorded officers
and soldiers. In a revolutionary army, all individuals enjoy political liberty
and the question, for example, of the emancipation of the people must not
only be tolerated but discussed, and propaganda must encouraged. Further,
in such an army, the mode of living of the officers and the soldiers must
not differ too much, and this is particularly true in the case of guerilla
troops. Officers should live under the same conditions as their men, for
that is the only way in which they can gain from their men the admiration
and confidence so vital in war. It is incorrect to hold to a theory of equality
in all things. But there must be equality of existence in accepting the hardships
and dangers of war, thus we may attain to the unification of the officer
and soldier groups a unity both horizontal within the group itself, and vertical,
that is, from lower to higher echelons. It is only when such unity is present
that units can be said to be powerful combat factors.


There is also a unity of spirit that should exist between troops and local
inhabitants. The Eighth Route Army put into practice a code known as 'Three
Rules and the Eight Remarks', which we list here:


Rules:


    All actions are subject to command.

    Do not steal from the people.

    Be neither selfish nor unjust.


Remarks:


    Replace the door when you leave the house.

    Roll up the bedding on which you have slept.

    Be courteous.

    Be honest in your transactions.

    Return what you borrow.

    Replace what you break.

    Do not bathe in the presence of women.

    Do not without authority search those you arrest.


The Red Army adhered to this code for ten years and the Eighth Route Army
and other units have since adopted it.


Many people think it impossible for guerrillas to exist for long in the enemy's
rear. Such a belief reveals lack of comprehension of the relationship that
should exist between the people and the troops. The former may be likened
to water the latter to the fish who inhabit it. How may it be said that these
two cannot exist together? It is only undisciplined troops who make the people
their enemies and who, like the fish out of its native element cannot live.


We further our mission of destroying the enemy by propagandizing his troops,
by treating his captured soldiers with consideration, and by caring for those
of his wounded who fall into our hands. If we fail in these respects, we
strengthen the solidarity of our enemy.

 

Chapter 7: The Strategy Of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan

 


Table of Contents: On Guerrilla Warfare





==========

## The Strategy of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan
  







On Guerrilla Warfare — Ch 7




Mao Tse-tung

On Guerrilla Warfare



7. The Strategy Of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan



It has been definitely decided that in the strategy of our war against Japan,
guerrilla strategy must be auxiliary to fundamental orthodox methods. If
this were a small country, guerrilla activities could be carried out close
to the scene of operations of the regular army and directly complementary
to them. In such a case, there would be no question of guerrilla strategy
as such. Nor would the question arise if our country were as strong as Russia,
for example, and able speedily to eject an invader. The question exists because
China, a weak country of vast size, has today progressed to the point where
it has become possible to adopt the policy of a protracted war characterized
by guerrilla operations. Although these may at first glance seem to be abnormal
or heterodox, such is not actually the case.


Because Japanese military power is inadequate, much of the territory her
armies have overrun is without sufficient garrison troops. Under such
circumstances the primary functions of guerrillas are three: first, to conduct
a war on exterior lines, that is, in the rear of the enemy; second, to establish
bases, and, last, to extend the war areas. Thus, guerrilla participation
in the war is not merely a matter of purely local guerrilla tactics but involves
strategical considerations.


Such war, with its vast time and space factors, establishes a new military
process, the focal point of which is China today. The Japanese are apparently
attempting to recall a past that saw the Yuan extinguish the Sung and the
Ch'ing conquer the Ming; that witnessed the extension of the British Empire
to North America and India; that saw the Latins overrun Central and South
America. As far as China today is concerned, such dreams of conquest are
fantastic and without reality. Today's China is better equipped than was
the China of yesterday, and a new type of guerrilla hostilities is a part
of that equipment. If our enemy fails to take these facts into consideration
and makes too optimistic an estimate of the situation, he courts disaster.


Though the strategy of guerrillas is inseparable from war strategy as a whole,
the actual conduct of these hostilities differs from the conduct of orthodox
operations. Each type of warfare has methods peculiar to itself, and methods
suitable to regular warfare cannot be applied with success to the special
situations that confront guerrillas.


Before we treat the practical aspects of guerrilla war, it might be well
to recall the fundamental axiom of combat on which all military action is
based. This can be stated: 'Conservation of one's own strength; destruction
of enemy strength.' A military policy based on this axiom is consonant with
a national policy directed towards the building of a free and prosperous
Chinese state and the destruction of Japanese imperialism. It is in furtherance
of this policy that government applies in military strength. Is the sacrifice
demanded by war in conflict with the idea of self-preservation? Not at all.
The sacrifices demanded are necessary both to destroy the enemy and to preserve
ourselves; the sacrifice of a part of the people is necessary to preserve
the whole. All the considerations of military action are derived from this
axiom. Its application is as apparent in all tactical and strategical conceptions
as it is in the simple case of the soldier who shoots at his enemy from a
covered position.


All guerrilla units start from nothing and grow. What methods should we select
to ensure the conservation and development of our own strength and the
destruction of that of the enemy? The essential requirements are the
six listed below:


    Retention of the initiative; alertness; carefully planned tactical attacks
    in a war of strategical defence; tactical speed in a war strategically
    protracted, tactical operations on exterior lines in a war conducts strategically
    on interior lines.

    Conduct of operations to complement those of the regular army.

    The establishment of bases.

    A clear understanding of the relationship that exits between the attack and
    the defence.

    The development of mobile operations.

    Correct command.


The enemy, though numerically weak, is strong in the quality of his troops
and their equipment; we, on the other hand, are strong numerically but weak
as to quality. These considerations have been taken into account in the
development of the policy of tactical offence, tactical speed, and tactical
operations on exterior lines in a war that, strategically speaking, is defensive
in character, protracted in nature, and conducted along interior lines. Our
strategy is based on these conceptions. They must be kept in mind in the
conduct of all operations.


Although the element of surprise is not absent in orthodox warfare, there
are fewer opportunities to apply it than there are during guerrilla hostilities.
In the latter, speed is essential. The movements of guerrilla troops must
be secret and of supernatural rapidity; the enemy must be taken unaware,
and the action entered speedily. There can be no procrastination in the execution
of plans; no assumption of a negative or passive defence; no great dispersion
of forces in many local engagements. The basic method is the attack in a
violent and deceptive form.


While there may be cases where the attack will extend over a period of several
days ( if that length of time in necessary to annihilate an enemy group ),
it is more profitable to launch and push an attack with maximum speed. The
tactics of defence have no place in the realm of guerrilla warfare. If a
delaying action is necessary, such places as defiles, river crossings, and
villages offer the most suitable conditions, for it is in such places that
the enemy's arrangements may be disrupted and he may be annihilated.


The enemy is much stronger than we are, and it is true that we can hinder,
distract, disperse, and destroy him only if we disperse our own forces. Although
guerrilla warfare is the warfare of such dispersed units, it is sometimes
desirable to concentrate in order to destroy an enemy. Thus, the principle
of concentration of force against a relatively weaker enemy is applicable
to guerrilla warfare.


We can prolong this struggle and make of it a protracted war only by gaining
positive and lightning-like tactical decisions; by employing our manpower
in proper concentrations and dispersions; and by operation on exterior lines
in order to surround and destroy our enemy. If we cannot surround whole armies,
we can at least partially destroy them, if we cannot kill the Japanese, we
can capture them. The total effect of many local successes will be to change
the relative strengths of the opposing forces. The destruction of Japan's
military power, combined with the international sympathy for China's cause
and the revolutionary tendencies evident in Japan, will be sufficient to
destroy Japanese imperialism.


We will next discuss initiative, alertness, and the matter of careful planning.
What is meant by initiative in warfare? In all battles and wars, a struggle
to gain and retain the initiative goes on between the opposing sides, for
it is the side that holds the initiative that has liberty of action. When
an army loses the initiative, it loses its liberty; its role becomes passive;
it faces the danger of defeat and destruction.


It is more difficult to obtain the initiative when defending on interior
lines than it is while attacking on exterior lines. This is what Japan is
doing. There are, however, several weak points as far as Japan is concerned.
One of these is lack of sufficient manpower for the task; another is her
cruelty to the inhabitants of conquered areas; a third is the underestimation
of Chinese strength, which has resulted in the differences between military
cliques, which, in turn, have been productive of many mistakes in the direction
of her military forces. For instance, she has been gradually compelled to
increase her manpower in China while, at the same time. the many arguments
over plans of operations and disposition of troops have resulted in the loss
of good opportunities for improvement of her strategical position. This explains
the fact that although the Japanese are frequently able to surround large
bodies of Chinese troops, they have never yet been able to capture more than
a few. The Japanese military machine is thus being weakened by insufficiency
of manpower, inadequacy of resources, the barbarism of her troops, and the
general stupidity that has characterized the conduct of operations. Her offensive
continues unabated, but because of the weaknesses pointed out, her attack
must be limited in extent. She can never conquer China. The day will come
— indeed already has in some areas — when she will be forced into
a passive role. When hostilities commenced, China was passive, but as we
enter the second phase of the war we find ourselves pursuing a strategy of
mobile warfare, with both guerrillas and regulars operating on exterior lines.
Thus, with each passing day, we seize some degree of initiative from the
Japanese.


The matter of initiative is especially serious for guerrilla forces, who
must face critical situations unknown to regular troops. The superiority
of the enemy and the lack of unity and experience within our own ranks may
be cited. Guerrillas can, however, gain the initiative if they keep in mind
the weak points of the enemy. Because of the enemy's insufficient manpower,
guerrillas can operate over vast territories, because he is a foreigner and
a barbarian, guerrillas can gain the confidence of millions of their countrymen;
because of the stupidity of enemy commanders, guerrillas can make full use
of their own cleverness. Both guerrillas and regulars must exploit these
enemy weaknesses while, at the same time, our own are remedied. Some of our
weaknesses are apparent only and are, in actuality, sources of strength.
For example, the very fact that most guerrilla groups are small makes it
desirable and advantageous for them to appear and disappear in the enemy's
rear. With such activities, the enemy is simply unable to cope. A similar
liberty of action can rarely be obtained by regular forces.


When the enemy attacks the guerrillas with more than one column, it is difficult
for the latter to retain the initiative. Any error, no matter how slight,
in the estimation of the situation is likely to result in forcing the guerrillas
into a passive role. They will then find themselves unable to beat oft the
attacks of the enemy.


It is apparent that we can gain and retain the initiative only by a correct
estimation of the situation and a proper arrangement of all military and
political factors. A too pessimistic estimate will operate to force us into
a passive position, with consequent loss of initiative; an overly optimistic
estimate, with its rash ordering of factors, will produce the same result.


No military leader is endowed by heaven with an ability to seize the initiative.
It is the intelligent leader who does so after a careful study and estimate
of the situation and arrangement of the military and political factors involved.
When a guerrilla unit, through either a poor estimate on the part of its
leader or pressure from the enemy, is forced into a passive position, its
first duty is to extricate itself. No method can be prescribed for this,
as the method to be employed will, in every case, depend on the situation.
One can, if necessary, run away. But there are times when the situation seems
hopeless and, in reality, is not so at all. It is at such times that the
good leader recognizes and seizes the moment when he can regain the lost
initiative.


Let us revert to alertness. To conduct one's troops with alertness is an
essential of guerrilla command. Leaders must realize that to operate alertly
is the most important factor in gaining the initiative and vital in its effect
of the relative situation that exists between our forces and those of the
enemy. Guerrilla commanders adjust their operations to the enemy situation,
to the terrain, and to prevailing local conditions. Leaders must be alert
to sense changes in these factors and make necessary modifications in troop
dispositions to accord with them. The leader must be like a fisherman, who,
with his nets, is able both to cast them and to pull them out in awareness
of the depth of the water, the strength of the current or the presence of
any obstructions that may foul them. As the fisherman controls his nets through
the lead ropes, so the guerrilla leader maintains contact with control over
his units. As the fisherman must change his position, so must the guerrilla
commander. Dispersion, concentration, constant change of position—it
is in these ways that guerrillas employ, their strength.


In general, guerrilla units disperse to operate:


    When the enemy is in over-extended defence, and sufficient force cannot be
    concentrated against him, guerrillas must disperse, harass him, and demoralize
    him.

    When encircled by the enemy, guerrillas disperse to withdraw.

    When the nature of the ground limits action, guerrillas disperse.

    When the availability of supplies limits action, they disperse.

    Guerrillas disperse in order to promote mass movements over a wide area. 


Regardless of the circumstances that prevail at the time of dispersal, caution
must be exercised in certain matters:


    A relatively large group should be retained as a central force. The remainder
    of the troops should not be divided into groups of absolutely equal size.
    In this way, the leader is in a position to deal with any circumstances that
    may arise.

    Each dispersed unit should have clear and definite responsibilities. Orders
    should specify a place to which to proceed, the time of proceeding, and the
    place, time, and method of assembly.


Guerrillas concentrate when the enemy is advancing upon them, and there is
opportunity to fall upon him and destroy him. Concentration may be desirable
when the enemy is on the defensive and guerrillas wish to destroy isolated
detachments in particular localities. By the term 'concentrate', we do not
mean the assembly of all manpower but rather of only that necessary for the
task. The remaining guerrillas are assigned missions of hindering and delaying
the enemy, of destroys isolated groups, or of conducting mass propaganda.


In addition to the dispersion and concentration of forces, the leader must
understand what is termed 'alert shifting'. When the enemy feels the danger
of guerrillas, he will generally send troops out to attack them. The guerrillas
must consider the situation and decide at what time and at what place they
wish to fight. If they find that they cannot fight, they must immediately
shift. Then the enemy may be destroyed piecemeal. For example; after a guerrilla
group has destroyed an enemy detachment at one place, it may be shifted to
another area to attack and destroy a second detachment. Sometimes, it will
not be profitable for a unit to become engaged in a certain area, and in
that case, it must move immediately.


When the situation is serious, the guerrilla must move with the fluidity
of water and the ease of the blowing wind. Their tactics must deceive, tempt,
and confuse the enemy. They must lead the enemy to believe that they will
attack him from the east and north, and they must then strike him from the
west and the south. They must strike, then rapidly disperse. They must move
at night.


Guerrilla initiative is expressed in dispersion, concentration, and the alert
shifting of forces. If guerrillas are stupid and obstinate, they will be
led to passive positions and severely damaged. Skill in conducting guerrilla
operations, however, lies not in merely understanding the things we have
discussed but rather in their actual application on the field of battle.
The quick intelligence that constantly watches the ever-changing situation
and is able to seize on the right moment for decisive action is found only
in keen and thoughtful observers.


Careful planning is necessary if victory is to be won in guerrilla war, and
those who fight without method do not understand the nature of guerrilla
action. A plan is necessary regardless of the size of the unit involved;
a prudent plan is as necessary in the case of the squad as in the case of
the regiment. The situation must be carefully studied, then an assignment
of duties made. Plans must include both political and military instruction;
the matter of supply and equipment, and the matter of co-operation with local
civilians. Without study of these factors, it is impossible either to seize
the initiative or to operate alertly. It is true that guerrillas can make
only limited plans, but even so, the factors we have mentioned must be
considered.


The initiative can be secured and retained only following a positive victory
that results from attack. The attack must be made on guerrilla initiative;
that is, guerrillas must not permit themselves to be maneuvered into a position
where they are robbed of initiative and where the decision to attack is forced
upon them. Any victory will result from careful planning and alert control.
Even in defence, all our efforts must be directed toward a resumption of
the attack, for it is only by attack that we can extinguish our enemies an
preserve ourselves. A defence or a withdrawal is entirely useless as far
as extinguishing our enemies is concerned and of only temporary value. as
far as the conservation of our forces is concerned. This principle is valid
both for guerrillas and regular troops. The differences are of degree only;
that is to say, in the manner of execution.


The relationship that exists between guerrilla and the orthodox forces is
important and must be appreciated. Generally speaking, there are types of
co-operation between guerrillas and orthodox groups. These are:



    Strategical co-operation.

    Tactical co-operation.

    Battle co-operation.


Guerrillas who harass the enemy's rear installations and hinder his transport
are weakening him and encouraging the national spirit of resistance. They
are co-operating strategically. For example, the guerrillas in Manchuria
had no functions of strategical co-operation with orthodox forces until the
war in China started. Since that time, their faction of strategical co-operation
is evident, for if they can kill one enemy, make the enemy expend one round
of ammunition, or hinder one enemy group in its advance southward, our powers
of resistance here are proportionately increased. Such guerrilla action has
a positive action on the enemy nation and on its troops, while, at the same
time, it encourages our own countrymen. Another example of strategical
co-operation is furnished by the guerrillas who operate along the P'ing-Sui,
P'ing-Han, Chin-P'u, T'ung-Pu, and Cheng-T'ai railways. This co-operation
began when the invader attacked, continued during the period when he held
garrisoned cities in the areas, and was intensified when our regular forces
counter-attacked, in an effort to restore the lost territories.


As an example of tactical co-operation, we may cite the operations at Hsing-K'ou,
when guerrillas both north and south of Yeh Men destroyed the T'ung-P'u railway
and the motor roads near P'ing Hosing Pass and Yang Fang K'ou. A number of
small operating base were established, and organized guerrilla action in
Shansi complemented the activities of the regular forces both there and in
the defence of Honan. similarly, during the south Shantung campaign, guerrillas
in the five northern provinces co-operated with the army's operation on the
Hsuchow front.


Guerrilla commanders in rear areas and those in command of regiments assigned
to operate with orthodox units must co-operate in accordance with the situation.
It is their function to determine weak points in the enemy dispositions,
harass them, to disrupt their transport, and to undermine their morale, If
guerrilla action were independent, the results to be obtained from tactical
co-operation would be lost and those that result from strategical co-operation
greatly diminished. In order to accomplish their mission and improve the
degree of co-operation, guerrilla units must be equipped with some means
of rapid communication. For this purpose, two way radio sets are recommended.


Guerrilla forces in the immediate battle area are responsible for close
co-operation with regular forces, Their principal functions are to hinder
enemy transport to gather information, and to act as outposts and sentinels.
Even without precise instructions from the commander of the regular forces,
these missions, as well as any others that contribute to the general success,
should be assumed.


The problem of establishment of bases is of particular importance. This is
so because this war is a cruel and protracted struggle. The lost territories
can be restored only by a strategical counter-attack and this we cannot carry
out until the enemy is well into China. Consequently, some part of our country
— or, indeed, most of it — may be captured by the enemy and become his
rear area. It is our task to develop intensive guerrilla warfare over this
vast area and convert the enemy's rear into an additional front. Thus the
enemy will never be able to stop fighting. In order to subdue the occupied
territory, the enemy will have to become increasingly severe and oppressive.


A guerrilla base may be defined as an area, strategically located, in which
the guerrillas can carry out their duties of training, self-preservation
and development. Ability to fight a war without a rear area is a fundamental
characteristic of guerrilla action, but this does not mean that guerrilla
can exist and function over a long period of time without the development
of base areas. History shows us many example of peasant revolts that were
unsuccessful, and it is fanciful to believe that such movements, characterized
by banditry and brigandage, could succeed in this era of improved communications
and military equipment. Some guerrilla leaders seem to think that those qualities
are present in today's movement, and before such leaders can comprehend the
importance of base areas in the long-term war, their mind must be disabused
of this idea.


The subject of bases may be better understood if we consider:


    The various categories of bases.

    Guerrilla areas and base areas.

    The establishment of bases.

    The development of bases.


Guerrilla bases may be classified according to their location as: first,
mountain bases; second, plains bases; and last, river, lake, and bay bases.
The advantages of bases in mountainous areas are evident. Those which are
now established are at Ch'ang P'o Chan, Wu Tai Shan, Taiheng Shan, Tai Shan,
Yen Shan, and Mao Shan. These bases are strongly protected. Similar bases
should be established in all enemy rear areas.


Plains country is generally not satisfactory for guerrilla operating bases,
but this does not mean that guerrilla warfare cannot flourish in such country
or that bases cannot be established there. The extent of guerrilla development
in Hopeh and west Shantung proves the opposite to be the case Whether we
can count on the use of these bases over long periods of time is questionable.
We can, however, establish small bases of a seasonal or temporary nature.
This we can do because our barbaric enemy simply does not have the manpower
to occupy all the areas he has overrun and because the population of China
is so numerous that a base can established anywhere. Seasonal bases in plains
country may be established in the winter when the rivers are frozen over,
and in the summer when the crops are growing. Temporary bases may be established
when the enemy is otherwise occupied. When the enemy advances, the guerrillas
who have established bases in the plains area are the first to engage him.
Upon their withdrawal into mountainous country, they should leave behind
them guerrilla groups dispersed over the entire area. Guerrillas shift from
base to base on the theory that they must be in one place one day and another
place the next.


There are many historical examples of the establishment of bases in river,
bay, and lake country, and this is one aspect of our activity that has so
far received little attention. Red guerrillas held out for many years in
the Hungtze Lake region. We should establish bases in the Hungtze and Tai
areas and along rivers and watercourses in territory controlled by the enemy
so as to deny him access to, and free use of, the water routes.


There is a difference between the terms base area and guerrilla area. An
area completely surrounded by territory occupied by the enemy is a 'base
area'. Wu Tai Shan, and Taiheng Shan are examples of base areas. On the other
hand, the area east and north of Wu Tai Shan (the Shansi-Hopeh-Chahar border
zone) is a guerrilla area. Such areas can be controlled by guerrillas only
while they actually physically occupy them. Upon their departure, control
reverts to a puppet pro-Japanese government. East Hopeh. for example, was
at first a guerrilla area rather than a base area. A puppet government functioned
there. Eventually, the people, organized and inspired by guerrillas from
the Wu Tai mountains, assisted in the transformation of this guerrilla area
into a real base area. Such a task is extremely difficult, for it is largely
dependent upon the degree to which the people can be inspired. In certain
garrisoned areas, such as the cities and zones contiguous to the railways,
the guerrillas see unable to drive the Japanese and puppets out. These areas
remain guerrilla areas. At other times, base areas might become guerrilla
areas due either to our own mistakes or to the activities of the enemy.


Obviously, in any given area in the war zone, any one or three situations
may develop: The area may remain in Chinese hands; it may be lost to the
Japanese and puppets or it may be divided between the combatants. Guerrilla
leaders should endeavour to see that either the first or the last of these
situations is assured.


Another point essential in the establishment of bases is the co-operation
that must exist between the armed guerrilla bands and the people. All our
strength must be used to spread the doctrine of armed resistance to Japan,
to arm the people, to organize self-defence units, and to train guerrilla
bands. This doctrine must be spread among the people, who must be organized
into anti-Japanese groups. Their political instincts must be sharpened and
their martial ardour increased If the workers, the farmers, the lovers of
liberty, the young men, the women, and the children are not organized, they
will never realize their own anti-Japanese power. Only the united strength
of the people can eliminate traitors, recover the measure of political power
that has been lost, and conserve and improve what we still retain.


We have already touched on geographic factors in our discussion of bases,
and we must also mention the economic aspects of the problem. What economic
policy should be adopted? Any such policy must offer reasonable protection
to commerce and business. We interpret 'reasonable protection' to mean the
people must contribute money in proportion to the money they have. Farmers
will be required to furnish a certain share of their crops to guerrilla troops.
Confiscation, except in the case of business run by traitors, is prohibited
.


Our activities must be extended over the entire periphery of the base area
if we wish to attack the enemy's bases and thus strengthen and develop our
own. This will afford us opportunity to organize, equip, and train the people,
thus furthering guerrilla policy as well as the national policy of protected
war. At times, we must emphasize the development and extension of base areas;
at other times, the organization, training, or equipment of the people.


Each guerrilla base will have its own peculiar problems of attack and defence.
In general, the enemy, in an endeavour to consolidate his gains, will attempt
to extinguish guerrilla bases by dispatching numerous bodies of troops over
a number of different routes. This must be anticipated and the encirclement
broken by counter-attacks As such enemy columns are without reserves, we
should plan on using our main forces to attack one of them by surprise and
devote our secondary effort to continual hindrance and harassment. At the
same time, other forces should isolate enemy garrison troops and operate
on their lines of supply and communication. When one column has been disposed
of, we may turn our attention to one of the others. In a base area as large
as Wu Tat Shan, for example, there are four or five military sub-divisions.
Guerrillas in these sub-divisions must co-operate to form a primary force
to counterattack the enemy, or the area from which he came, while a secondary
force harasses and hinders him.


After defeating the enemy in any area, we must take advantage of the period
he requires for reorganization to press home our attacks. we must not attack
an objective we are not certain of winning. We must confine our operations
to relatively small areas and destroy the enemy and traitors in those places.


When the inhabitants have been inspired, new volunteers accepted trained,
equipped, and organized, our operations may be extended to include cities
and lines of communication not strongly held. We may hold these at least
for temporary (if not for permanent ) periods. All these are our duties in
offensive strategy. Their object is to lengthen the period that the enemy
must remain on the defensive. Then our military activities and our organization
work among the masses of the people must be zealously expanded; and with
equal zeal, the strength of the enemy attacked and diminished. It is of great
importance that guerrilla units be rested and instructed. During such times
as the enemy is on the defensive, the troops may get some rest and instruction
may be carried out.


The development of mobile warfare is not only possible but essential. This
is the case because our current war is a desperate and protracted struggle.
If China were able to conquer the Japanese bandits speedily and to recover
her lost territories, there would there would be no question of long-term
war on a national scale. Hence there would no question of the relation of
guerrilla hostilities into mobile warfare of an orthodox nature, both the
quantity and quality of guerrilla must be improved. Primarily, more men must
join the armies; then the quality of equipment and standards of training
must be improved. Political training must be emphasized and our organization,
the technique of handling our weapons, our tactics — all must be improved.
Our internal discipline must be strengthened. The soldiers must be educated
politically. There must be a gradual change from guerrilla formations to
orthodox regimental organization. The necessary bureaus and staffs, both
political and military, must be provided. At the same time, attention must
be paid to the creation of suitable supply, medical, and hygiene units. The
standards of equipment must be raised and types of weapons increased.
Communication equipment must not be forgotten. Orthodox standards of discipline
must be established.


Because guerrilla formations act independently and because they are the most
elementary of armed formations, command cannot be too highly centralized.
If it were, guerilla action would be too limited in scope. At the same time,
guerrilla activities, to be most effective, must be co-ordinated, not only
in so far as they themselves are concerned, but additionally with regular
troops operating in the same areas. This co-ordination is a function of the
war zone commander and his staff.


In guerrilla base areas, the command must be centralized for strategical
purposes and decentralized for tactical purposes. Centralized strategical
command takes care of the general management of all guerrilla units, their
co-ordination within war zones, and the general policy regarding guerrilla
base areas. Beyond this, centralization of command will result in interference
with subordinate units, as, naturally, the tactics to apply to concrete
situations can be determined only as these various situations arise. This
is true in orthodox warfare when communications between lower and higher
echelons break down. In a word, proper guerrilla policy will provide for
unified strategy and independent activity.


Each guerrilla area is divided into districts and these in turn are divided
into sub-districts. Each sub-division has its appointed commander, and while
general plans are made by higher commanders, the nature of actions is determined
by inferior commanders. The former may suggest the nature of the action to
be taken but cannot define it. Thus inferior groups heave more or less complete
local control.

 

Next: Appendix

 


Table of Contents: On Guerrilla Warfare





==========

## Dialectical Materialism








DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM


April - June, 1938

[This text includes about two thirds of the first chapter, and about one
fifth of the first six sections of the second chapter of Mao's
'Pien-Cheng-fa wei--wu-lun (chiang-shou t'i-kang)' ('Dialectical
materialism-notes of lectures'), as published in K'ang-chan ta-hsueh, nos.
6 to 8, April to June 1938.] 
  

CHAPTER I


  
  IDEALISM AND MATERIALISM


  1. THE STRUGGLE BETWEEN TWO ARMIES IN PHILOSOPHY


The whole history of philosophy is the history of the struggle and the
development of two mutually opposed schools of philosophy -- idealism and
materialism. All philosophical currents and schools are manifestations of
these two fundamental schools.

All philosophical theories have been created by men belonging to a definite
social class. The ideas of these men have moreover been historically determined
by a definite social existence. All philosophical doctrines express the needs
of a definite social class and reflect the level of development of the productive
forces of society and the historical stage in men's comprehension of nature
. . .

The social origins of idealism and materialism lie in a social structure
marked by class contradictions. The earliest appearance of idealism was the
product of the ignorance and superstition of savage and primitive man. Then,
with the development of the productive forces, and the ensuing development
of scientific knowledge, it stands to reason that idealism should decline
and be replaced by materialism. And yet, from ancient times to the present,
idealism not only has not declined, but, on the contrary has developed and
carried on a struggle for supremacy with materialism from which neither has
emerged the victor. The reason lies in the division of society into classes.
On the one hand, in its own interest, the oppressing class must develop and
reinforce its idealist doctrines. On the other hand, the oppressed classes,
likewise in their own interest, must develop and reinforce their materialist
doctrines. Both idealism and materialism are weapons in the class struggle,
and the struggle between idealism and materialism cannot disappear so long
as classes continue to exist. Idealism, in the process of its historical
development, represents the ideology of the exploiting classes and serves
reactionary purposes. Materialism, on the other hand, is the world view of
the revolutionary class; in a class society, it grows and develops in the
midst of an incessant struggle against the reactionary philosophy of idealism.
Consequently, the history of the struggle between idealism and materialism
in philosophy reflects the struggle of interests between the reactionary
class and the revolutionary class…. A given philosophical tendency is
in the last analysis a manifestation in a particular guise of the policy
of the social class to which the philosophers belong.

The distinguishing characteristic of Marxist philosophy -- i.e., dialectical
materialism -- is its effort to explain clearly the class nature of
all social consciousness (including philosophy). It publicly declares a resolute
struggle between its own proletarian nature and the idealist philosophy
of the propertied class. Moreover, it subordinates its own special and
independent tasks to such general tasks as overthrowing capitalism, organizing
and building a proletarian dictatorship, and edifying a socialist society.

  2. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IDEALISM AND MATERIALISM.


Wherein lies the basic difference between idealism and materialism? It lies
in the opposite answers given by the two to the fundamental question in
philosophy, that of the relationship between spirit and matter ( that of
the relationship between consciousness and existence). Idealism considers
spirit (consciousness, concepts, the subject) as the source of all that exists
on earth, and matter (nature and society, the object) as secondary and
subordinate, Materialism recognizes the independent existence of matter as
detached from spirit and considers spirit as secondary and subordinate..

  3. THE SOURCE OF THE GROWTH AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF IDEALISM.


Idealism see matter as the product of the spirit. This is turning the real
world upside down. Where is the source of the growth and the development
of such a philosophy?

As mentioned above, the earliest manifestation of idealism was brought about
by the superstition and ignorance of primitive, savage man. But with the
development of production, the separation between manual labour and intellectual
labour was responsible for ranking idealism first among currents of philosophical
thought. With the development of the productive forces of society, the division
of labour made its appearance; the further development of the division of
labour saw the emergence of persons devoting themselves entirely and exclusively
to intellectual labour. But when the productive forces are still weak, the
division between the two does not reach the stage of complete separation.
Only after classes and private property appear and exploitation becomes the
foundation of the existence of the ruling class do great changes occur.
Intellectual labour then becomes the exclusive privilege of the ruling class.
while manual labour becomes the fate of the oppressed classes. The ruling
class begins to examine the relationship between themselves and the oppressed
classes in an upside-down fashion: It is not the labourers who furnish
them with means for existence, but rather they who supply the labourers with
these means. Hence, they despise manual labour and develop idealist conceptions.
To eliminate the distinction between manual labour and intellectual labour
is one of the preconditions for eliminating idealist philosophy.

The social root that makes possible the development of idealist philosophy
lies principally in the fact that this kind of philosophical consciousness
is the manifestation of the interests of the exploiting class ... The final
decline of idealism will come with the elimination of classes, after the
establishment of a communist society.

The source that enables idealism to develop and deepen and gives it the strength
to struggle with materialism must be sought in the process of human knowing..
When men think, they must use concepts. This can easily cause our knowledge
to be split into two aspects: reality, which is of an individual and
particular character; and concepts, which are of a general character... In
the nature of things, the particular and the general are inseparably linked;
once separated, they depart from objective truth... To separate the general
from the particular, and to view the general as objective reality and the
particular merely as the form in which the general exists— this is the
method adopted by all idealists. All idealists put consciousness, spirit,
or concepts in place of objective reality existing independently from human
consciousness... They cannot point out the materialist truth according to
which consciousness is limited by matter, but believe that only consciousness
is active, whereas matter is only an inert composite entity. Urged on moreover
by their own class nature, the idealists then use every method to exaggerate
the activity of consciousness, developing this aspect unilaterally... Idealism
in economics exaggerates beyond measure a nonessential aspect of exchange,,
raising the law of supply and demand to the status of the fundamental law
of capitalism... Idealist historians regard heroes as the makers of history.
Idealist politicians regard politics as omnipotent. Idealist military leaders
practice the methods of desperate combat [p'ing-ming-chu-i-ti tso-chan].
Idealist revolutionaries advocate Blanquism. The diehards say that the
only way to revive our nation is to restore the old morality. All this results
from exaggerating subjective factors beyond measure...

Pre-Marxist materialism (mechanistic materialism) did not stress the thought
process in the development of knowledge, but regarded thought merely as the
object of action, as the mirror that reflects nature... Only dialectical
materialism correctly shows the active role of thought, and at the same time
points out the limitation imposed upon thought by matter. It points out that
thought arises from social practice and at the same time actively shapes
practice. Only this kind of dialectical theory of the unity of knowledge
and action can thoroughly vanquish idealism.

  
  4. THE ORIGIN OF THE INCEPTION AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF MATERIALISM


The recognition that matter exists independently and apart from consciousness
in the external world is the foundation of materialism. Man created this
foundation through practice...

Obliged to submit to natural forces, and capable of using only simple tools,
primitive man could not explain the surrounding phenomena and hence sought
help from spirits. This is the origin of religion and idealism.

But in the long-range process of production, man came into contact with
surrounding nature, acted upon nature, changed nature, and created things
to eat, to live in, and to use, and adapted nature to the interests of man
and caused man to believe that matter has an objective existence.

In the social existence of humanity, reciprocal relationships and influences
arise between individuals. In a class society there is moreover a class struggle.
The oppressed class considers the circumstances and estimates its strength,
and then makes its plans. When they succeed in the struggle, the members
of this class are convinced that their views are not the product of fantasy,
but the reflection of the objectively existing material world. Because the
oppressed class fails when it adopts the wrong plans and succeeds by correcting
its plans it learns to understand that it can achieve its purpose only when
its subjective plans rest upon the accurate understanding of the material
nature of the objective world and the fact that the objective world is governed
by laws.

The history of science furnishes man with proof of the material nature of
the world and of the fact that it is governed by laws and helps man to see
the futility of the illusions of religion and idealism and to arrive at
materialist conclusions.

In sum, the history of man's practice comprises the history of his struggle
with nature, the history of the class struggle, the history of science. Owing
to the necessity to live and struggle, men have thought about the reality
of matter and its laws, have proved the correctness of materialism, and have
found the necessary intellectual tool for their struggle— materialist
philosophy. The higher the level to which social production develops, the
greater the development of the class struggle, and the more scientific
knowledge reveals the ‘secretes’ of nature, the greater the development
and consolidation of materialist philosophy. Thus man can be delivered gradually
from the dual and crushing oppression of nature and society. .  

CHAPTER II


  
  DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM


  
  1. DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM IS THE REVOLUTIONARY ARM OF THE PROLETARIAT


The Chinese proletariat, having assumed at the present time the historical
task of the bourgeois-democratic revolution, must make use of dialectical
materialism as its mental-arm... The study of dialectical materialism is
even more indispensable for the cadres who lead the revolutionary movement,
because the two erroneous theories and methods of work of subjectivism and
mechanism frequently subsist among the cadres, and as a result frequently
cause the cadres to go against Marxism, and lead the revolutionary movement
on to the wrong path. If we wish to avoid or correct such deficiencies, the
only solution lies in conscious study and understanding of dialectical
materialism, in order to arm one's brain anew.

  2.  THE RELATION BETWEEN THE OLD PHILOSOPHICAL HERITAGE AND DIALECTICAL
  MATERIALISM


After the May 4th Movement of 1919, as a consequence of the conscious appearance
of the Chinese proletariat on the political stage, and the rise in the scientific
level of the country, a Marxist philosophical movement arose and developed
in China. In its first period, however, the level of understanding of materialist
dialectics within the materialist current of thought was rather weak, and
mechanistic materialism influenced by the bourgeoisie, as well as the
subjectivism of Deborin, were its principal components. Following the defeat
of the revolution in 1927 the level of understanding of Marxism and Leninism
progressed, and the thinking of materialist dialectics gradually developed.
Just recently, because of the severity of the national and social crisis,
and also because of the influence of the movement for liquidating deviations
in Soviet philosophy, a broad movement of materialist dialectics has
developed in China's intellectual circles.

Because of the backwardness of China's social development the dialectical
materialist philosophical currents developing in China today do not result
from taking over and reforming our own philosophical heritage, but from the
study of Marxism-Leninism. However, if we wish to ensure that dialectical
materialist thought shall penetrate profoundly in China and continue to develop,
and shall moreover give firm direction to the Chinese revolution and lead
it to final victory in the future, then we must struggle with all the old
and rotten philosophical theories existing in China on the ideological front
throughout the whole country, raise the flag of criticism and in this way
liquidate the philosophical heritage of ancient China. Only thus we can attain
our goal.

  
  3. THE UNITY OF WORLD VIEW AND METHODOLOGY IN DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM


Dialectical materialism is the world view of the proletariat. At the same
time it is the method of the proletariat for taking cognizance of the surrounding
world, and the method of revolutionary action of the proletariat. It is the
unity of world view and methodology….

  
  4. THE QUESTION OF THE OBJECT OF MATERIALIST DIALECTICS -- WHAT DO MATERIALIST
  DIALECTICS SERVE TO STUDY?


Marx, Engels and Lenin all explained materialist dialectics as the theory
of development...

Under the heading of the object of philosophy we must still solve another
problem, namely the problem of the unity of dialectics, logic and epistemology.
. .

Materialist dialectics is the only scientific epistemology, and it is also
the only scientific logic. Materialist dialectics studies the origin and
development of our knowledge of the outside world. It studies the transition
from not knowing to knowing and from incomplete knowledge to more complete
knowledge; it studies how the laws of the development of nature and society
are daily reflected more profoundly and more extensively in the mind of humanity.
This is precisely the unity of materialist dialectics with epistemology...

The essence of the concept of development consists in regarding laws as the
reflection in and transplanting to our minds (moreover further elaborated
in our minds) of the manifestations of the movement of matter...

Only by using materialism to arrive at a solution of the problem of the relations
between existence and thought, only by taking one's stand on the theory of
the reflection, can one arrive at a thorough solution to the problems of
dialectics, logic and epistemology….

  
  5. ON MATTER


The very first condition for belonging to the materialist camp consists in
recognizing the independent existence of the material world, separate from
human consciousness -- the fact that it existed before the appearance of
humanity, and continues to exist since the appearance of humanity, independently
and outside of human consciousness. To recognize this point is a fundamental
premise of all scientific research.

How shall we demonstrate this? The proofs are extremely numerous. Humanity
is constantly in contact with the external world and must, moreover, struggle
fiercely against the pressure and resistance of the outside world (nature
and society). Moreover, we not only must, but can overcome this pressure
and resistance. All of these real circumstances of the social practice of
humanity, as manifested in the historical development of human society, are
the best proof [of the existence of the material world ]. China does not
doubt the objective existence of Japanese imperialism which has invaded our
country, nor of the Chinese people themselves. The students of the Anti-Japanese
Military-Political University also do not doubt the objective existence of
this university and of the students themselves...

If we consider this thing known as consciousness in the light of thoroughgoing
materialism ( that is to say in the light of materialist-dialectics), then
what we call consciousness is nothing else but a form of the movement of
matter, a particular characteristic of the material brain of humanity; it
is that particular characteristic of the material brain which causes the
material processes outside consciousness to be reflected in consciousness.
From this we see that when we distinguish matter from consciousness and when,
moreover we oppose them one to another, this is only conditional that is
to say, it has meaning only from the standpoint of epistemology.. …
… ….

In a word, matter is everything in the universe. 'All power belongs to Ssu-Ma-
I.' We say, ‘All power belongs to matter.' This is the source of the
unity of the world.

  
  6. ON MOVEMENT (ON DEVELOPMENT)


The first fundamental principle of dialectical materialism lies in its view
of matter... This principle of the unity of the world has already been explained
above in discussing matter.

The second fundamental principle of dialectical materialism lies in its theory
of movement (or theory of development). This means the recognition that movement
is the form of the existence of matter, an inherent attribute of matter,
a manifestation of the multiplicity of matter. This is the principle of the
development of the world. The combination of the principle of the development
of the world with the principle of the unity of the world, set forth above,
constitutes the whole of the world view of dialectical materialism. The world
is nothing else but the material world in a process of unlimited
development…

Dialectical materialism's theory of movement is in opposition first of all
with philosophical idealism and with the theological concepts of religion.
The fundamental nature of all philosophical idealism and religious theology
derives from their denial of the unity and material nature of the world;
and in imagining that the movement and development of the world takes place
apart from matter, or took place at least in the beginning apart from matter,
and is the result of the action of spirit, God, or divine forces,
The German idealist philosopher, Hegel, held that the present world results
from the development of the so-called 'world idea'. In China the philosophy
of the Book of Changes, and the metaphysics of the Sung and Ming, all put
forward idealist views of the development of the universe. Christianity says
that God created the world, Buddhism and all of China's various fetishist
religions attribute the movement and development of all the myriad phenomena
(Wan Wu) of the universe to spiritual forces. All of
these doctrines which think about movement apart from matter are fundamentally
incompatible with dialectical materialism...

Dialectical materialism... considers that rest or equilibrium are merely
one element of movement, that they are merely one particular circumstance
of movement... A sentence popular with the metaphysical thinkers of ancient
China, 'Heaven does not change and the Way also does not change,' corresponds
to... a theory of the immobility of the universe. . . In their view, the
basic nature of the universe and of society was eternally unchanging. The
reason why they adopted this attitude is to be found primarily in their class
limitations. If the feudal landlord class had recognized that the basic nature
of the universe and of society is subject to movement and development, then
most certainly they would have been pronouncing in theory a death sentence
on their own class. The philosophies of all reactionary forces are theories
of immobilism. Revolutionary classes and the popular masses have all perceived
the principle of the development of the world, and consequently advocate
transforming society and the world; their philosophy is dialectical materialism..

The causes of the transformation of matter is to be found not without, but
within. It is not because of the impulsion of external mechanical forces,
but because of the existence within the matter in question of two components
different in their nature and mutually contradictory which struggle with
one another, thus giving an impetus to the movement and development of the
matter. As a result of the discovery of the laws of such movement and
transformation, dialectical materialism is capable of enlarging the principle
of the material unity of the world, extending it to the history of nature
and society. Thus, not only it is possible to investigate the world
considered as matter in perpetual movement, but the world can also be
investigated as matter endlessly in movement from a lower form to a higher
form. That is to say, it is possible to investigate the world as development
and process.

Dialectical materialism investigate the development of the world as a progressive
movement from the inorganic to the organic, and from thence to the highest
form of the movement of matter (society).

What we have just discussed is the theory of the movement of the world, or
the principle of the development of the world in accordance with dialectical
materialism. This doctrine is the essence of Marxist philosophy. If the
proletariat and all revolutionaries take up this consistently scientific
arm, they will then be able to understand this world, and transform the world.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## We Are for Roosevelt and Against Chamberlain 








WE ARE FOR ROOSEVELT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  WE ARE FOR ROOSEVELT  AND AGAINST CHAMBERLAIN

January 20, 1939

[Extracted from Mao's Preface to the English edition of ‘On Protracted
War', dated 20 January 1939.]
  

... The great war of resistance now being waged by China is not merely the
affair of China it is also the affair of the world. In the democratic countries
such as England, America, and France, there are broad popular masses including
all the progressive people from the various social strata who sympathize
with China's war of resistance and oppose the invasion of China of Japanese
imperialism. It is only a reactionary faction that opposes China' s war of
resistance. . . In this great war of resistance we rely first of all on China's
own strength to vanquish the enemy... But at the same time, we need outside
aid. Our enemy is a world-wide enemy, and the war of resistance waged by
China is a war of resistance of a world-wide character. History has already
shown that a viewpoint attempting to isolate this war is erroneous. In all
the democratic countries, such as England and America, there still exists
an isolationist viewpoint whose adherents do not understand that if China
is defeated, England, America, and the other countries will not be able to
go on enjoying their own tranquility. This erroneous viewpoint is not attuned
to the needs of the times. For the others, to aid China is to aid themselves
-- this is the only concrete verity at the present time... China is pursuing
her war amidst many difficulties, but the flames of a war among the great
powers of the world are coming closer every day and no country can remain
aloof. We are in agreement with President Roosevelt’s proclamation regarding
the defence of democracy. We are, on the other hand, resolutely opposed to
the policy of concessions to the fascist states in the West, practiced by
Chamberlain. Up to this day, Chamberlain has also displayed a cowardly attitude
towards Japan. I hope that the popular masses of England and America will
arise and act positively to admonish their governments and make them adopt
a new policy of resistance to wars of aggression — for the good of China
and also for the good of England and America themselves .



Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## To Be Attacked by the Enemy is Not a Bad Thing but a Good Thing








TO  BE  ATTACKED  BY  THE  ENEMY IS  NOT  A  BAD  THING BUT  A  GOOD
  THING



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  TO BE ATTACKED BY THE ENEMY IS NOT A BAD THING BUT A GOOD THING

[On the Third Anniversary of the Founding of the Chinese
people's
Anti-Japanese Military and Political College]

May 26, 1939



Why is it that the Anti-Japanese Military and Political College has become
famous all over the country and even enjoys some reputation abroad? Because,
of all the anti-Japanese military institutes, it is the most revolutionary,
the most progressive, and the best fighter for national liberation and social
emancipation. This, I think, is also the reason why visitors to Yenan are
so keen on seeing it.

The college is revolutionary and progressive because both its staff members
and teachers and its courses are revolutionary and progressive. Without this
revolutionary and progressive character, it could never have won the praise
of revolutionary people at home and abroad.

Some people attack the college; they are the country's capitulationists and
die-hards. This only goes to show that the college is a most revolutionary
and progressive one, or otherwise they would not attack it. The vigorous
attacks by the capitulationists die-hards testify to its revolutionary and
progressive nature and add to its lustre. It is a glorious military institute
not only because the majority of the people support and praise it, but also
because the capitulationists and die-hards strenuously attack and slander
it.

I hold that it is bad as far as we are concerned if a person, a political
party, an army or a school is not attacked by the enemy, for in that case
it would definitely mean that we have sunk to the level of the enemy. It
is good if we are attacked by the enemy, since it proves that we have drawn
a clear line of demarcation between the enemy and ourselves. It is still
better if the enemy attacks us wildly and paints us as utterly black and
without a single virtue; it demonstrates that we have not only drawn a clear
line of demarcation between the enemy and ourselves but achieved a great
deal in our work.

In the past three years, the Anti-Japanese Military and Political College
has made a great contribution to the country, to the nation and to society
by training tens of thousands of promising, progressive and revolutionary
young students. It will certainly go on making its contribution to the country,
the nation and society, because it will continue to train such young students
in large numbers. In speaking of the college, people often compare it to
the Whampoa Military Academy [1] before the Northern
Expedition. In fact, there are points of both similarity and difference between
the two institutes. The similarity is the presence of Communists among the
teachers and students in both. The difference is that, while the chief leaders
and the majority of the students at the Whampoa Military Academy were members
of the Kuomintang the entire leadership of the Anti-Japanese Military and
Political College is in the hands of the Communist Party and the vast majority
of the students are communist or communist-inclined. For this reason, the
Anti-Japanese Military and Political College of today cannot but be more
revolutionary and more progressive than was the Whampoa Military Academy
of the past, and it will certainly make a greater contribution to national
liberation and social emancipation.

The educational policy of the college is to cultivate a firm and correct
political orientation, an industrious and simple style of work, and flexible
strategy and tactics. These are the three essentials in the making of an
anti-Japanese revolutionary soldier. It is in accordance with these essentials
that the staff teach and the students study.

The progress and development of the college over the past few years have
been accompanied by certain shortcomings. It has grown, but difficulties
have arisen too. The main difficulty is the shortage of funds, teachers and
teaching materials. But led by the Communist Party, the college does not
fear any difficulties and will certainly overcome them. There are no such
things as difficulties for Communists, for they can surmount them.

It is my hope and the hope of the people of the whole country that the college
will eliminate its shortcomings and become still more progressive after its
third anniversary.

Teachers, staff members and students of the college, let us redouble our
efforts!


NOTES

1. The Whampoa Military Academy, located at Whampoa near
Canton, was established by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in 1924 with the help of the Chinese
Communists and the Soviet Union. At the time, it was run jointly by the
Kuomintang and the Communist Party. At one time or another Chou En-lai, Yun
Tai-ying, Hsio Chu-nu, Hsiung Hsiung and other comrades did political and
other works in the academy. They trained large numbers of cadres in a
revolutionary spirit for the revolutionary armed forces; these cadres included
many members of the Communist Party and the Communist Youth League. However,
the head of the academy was Chiang Kai-shek. Using his position, he pushed
aside the Communists, built up his own following and finally, after the
Counter-Revolutionary coup d'etat of April 12, 1927, turned the academy into
a Counter-Revolutionary organization.



Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Second Imperialist War








THE SECOND IMPERIALIST WAR



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE SECOND IMPERIALIST WAR

September 14, 1939

[Extracted from a lecture to the Party Cadres in Yenan, 14 September,
l939, reported in ‘Chieh-fang’ No. 85, 30 September, 1939.]
  

. . The new world economic crisis, which began in 1937, has in recent years
penetrated into so-called 'peaceful' states such as England, France, and
America; it is also developing in Germany, Japan, and Italy. This economic
crisis has also brought a grave political crisis in its wake. The people
are discontented with capitalism and with the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.
Whether it be in the states that became fascist a long time ago, or in the
states where they are taking advantage of the war to carry out fascination,
this political crisis, this popular discontent are daily becoming more acute.
On the other hand, the socialist Soviet Union has been strengthened to the
point where it can no longer be invaded. Under these conditions, the bourgeoisie
of each of the imperialist states realizes that without a vast war, without
transforming the limited war into a total war, without demolishing its
imperialist friends, it cannot escape either the economic crisis or the political
crisis, nor can it escape its own death.

These are the calculations of the bourgeoisie of all the countries of the
world on the eve of its death. The authors of these calculations have no
idea that in this way — by making use of a war to divide up the world
anew in order to escape from the economic and political crisis and to avoid
their own death — they cannot fail to create an even greater economic
and political crisis and to hasten the day of their death. They are like
a mad dog, they are already mad, the capitalist system has made them altogether
mad, they cannot do otherwise than hurl themselves pell-mell against their
enemies and against the walls of the world. Such is the reality of life today
in all the capitalist countries of the world. A fight between mad dogs —
such is the present imperialist war.

  1. THE AIMS OF THE WAR


'War is the continuation of politics.' The nature of imperialism is predatory,
and even in periods of 'peace' there is no instance when the policy of the
imperialist states is not predatory. But when the predatory policy of certain
imperialist states encounters the obstacle of certain other imperialist states
and cannot break through this obstacle by peaceful means, then these states
use warlike means to break through this obstacle so that they may pursue
their predatory policies.. The aim of the Second Imperialist War is similar
to that of the First Imperialist War. It consists in dividing up the world
anew, that is to say, in dividing up anew the colonies, semi-colonies, and
spheres of influence, in pillaging the peoples of the world, and in establishing
their domination over the peoples of the world. . . Apart from aims of this
kind, are there any other aims? Are there any good aims? There are none whatever.
Whether it be Germany, Italy, or Japan, whether it be England, America, or
France, all the imperialist states participating directly or indirectly in
the war have only a Counter-Revolutionary, an imperialist goal — pillaging
the people. The 'lasting peace' of Japanese imperialism, the 'self determination
of peoples' of Hitler, the 'opposition to National Socialism' of Chamberlain,
the 'aid to Poland' of Daladier — all these come down to a single
word: pillage. Merely because it sounds good and to fool the people,
they order their secretaries to invent a few synonyms, that is all.

  2. THE NATURE OF THE WAR


The nature of the war is basically determined by the political aims of the
war. All wars are divided into two categories. As Comrade Stalin has said,
they are divided into: (1) Just wars, the aim of which is not pillage but
liberation, and (2) Unjust wars of pillage. By its nature, the Second Imperialist
War like the First Imperialist War, belongs to the second category. The two
sides in the present war, in order to fool the people and mobilize public
opinion, both proclaim with utter shamelessness that they themselves are
just and those on the other side unjust. In reality all of this is nothing
but a farce and sham. Only Wars of national liberation and wars of popular
liberation, as well as wars undertaken by socialist countries to support
these two kinds of liberation movements, are just wars. Many people are confused
about the present war. According to them Germany is certainly unjust, whereas
England and France are democratic and anti-fascist states, and Poland, for
her part, is waging a national war of self-defence. They therefore believe
that on the whole, the Anglo-Franco-Polish side has after all a slightly
progressive character. This is altogether muddled conception, arising from
the fact that people have not clearly understood either the aims of the war
or the peculiarities; that characterize the first and the second stages of
the war.

  3. THE PECULIARITIES OF THE FIRST STAGE OF THE WAR


A portion of the imperialist states, the fascist states of Germany, Italy,
and Japan, were waging wars of aggression like mad dogs, violating the interests
of all small and weak peoples, violating the interests of all democratic
countries, and unleashing a fascist menace within each democratic country.
At this time the people of the whole world demanded that aggression be resisted
and that democracy be defended; they demanded that another part of the
imperialist states, the so-called democratic states of England, America,
and France, intervene against these wars of aggression and that they allow
the people to retain a small residue of democracy. The Soviet Union made
known many times that she was ready to establish a joint front against aggression
with all these so-called democratic states. If these so-called democratic
states had intervened at the time against the aggressors, if a war had broken
out to prevent aggression, if for example it had been possible together with
the Soviet Union to aid the armies of the Spanish Government in their effort
to stop the German and Italian aggressors, and to aid China in her effort
to stop the Japanese aggressors, then such an action, such a war, would have
been just, would have had a progressive character. But these so-called democratic
states did not intervene; they adopted a policy of 'non-intervention' . Their
aim was to bring about a situation in which the two sides—the side of
the aggressors and the side of the victims of aggression—would be ravaged
by war, after which they would intervene to fish in troubled waters. . .
Nevertheless, at this time, apart from the circumstances that German, Italian,
and Japanese imperialism were waging unjust wars of pillage, and that the
so-called democratic states were allowing them to continue, there was another
circumstance, there were also wars of national liberation.

  4. OUR REVOLUTIONARY POLICY DURING THE FIRST STAGE OF THE WAR


There is not the slightest doubt that the revolutionary policy of this stage
has as its goal the organization of a united front against aggression of
the people of the country that is the victim of aggression... At the same
time, this policy does not ignore the organization by the Soviet Union
and the governments of all the democratic countries of the struggle to prevent
new aggression... Even after Munich, because of the anger aroused among the
broad masses of the English and French people and even among the left wing
of the bourgeoisie by the defeat of Spain and the disappearance of
Czechoslovakia, there was a possibility of compelling the Chamberlain and
Daladier governments to abandon their policy of non-intervention and to organize,
with the Soviet Union, a common front against aggression...

  5. THE RUPTURE OF THE ANGLO-FRANCO-SOVIET NEGOTIATIONS AND THE BEGINNING
  OF THE SECOND STAGE OF THE WAR.


The bourgeoisie of the so-called democratic states fear on the one hand that
the fascist states may violate their interests; but they fear the development
of the revolutionary forces even more. They fear the Soviet Union, they fear
the liberation movements of the peoples of their own countries, they fear
the liberation movements in the colonies and semi- colonies. Consequently,
they rejected a genuine united front against aggression and a genuine war
against aggression involving the participation of the Soviet Union, and they
organized by themselves a united counter-revolutionary front, they undertook
by themselves a robbers' war of pillage.

The Anglo-Franco-Soviet negotiations lasted from 15 April to 23 August .
. . but from beginning to end, England and France refused to recognize the
principle of equality and reciprocity. They wanted the Soviet Union to guarantee
their security but they were absolutely unwilling to guarantee the security
of the Soviet Union or of the small countries of the Baltic…… In
addition, they would not allow the Soviet Army to cross Poland to
fight the aggressor. Naturally, the Soviet Union was not willing to conclude
a treaty like that proposed by England and France, which would not have been
adapted to revolutionary aims but only to counter-revolutionary aims... This
is the basic reason for the rupture of the Anglo-Franco-Soviet negotiations.
At this point, Germany abandoned her anti-Soviet position and in fact was
ready to abandon the so-called 'anti-Comintern Pact’, she recognized
the inviolability of the Soviet frontier and so the German-Soviet Non-aggression
Treaty was concluded. The absolute lack of sincerity of England and France
in their negotiations with the Soviet Union, their absolute refusal genuinely
to oppose aggression, the way in which they decided to break off the Three
Power Negotiations, proves nothing less than that Chamberlain had already
decided on war. Consequently, if the great war broke out, it was not only
Hitler but Chamberlain who wanted to fight, for if he had really wanted to
avoid the war, he could have done so only with Soviet participation...

  
  6. THE PECULIARITIES OF THE SECOND STAGE OF THE WAR


At the present time, now that war has broken out, the situation has undergone
a fundamental change. The distinction that existed in the past between the
fascist states and the democratic states has lost all meaning. At the present
time, if one wishes to distinguish between things of different natures, there
are only the following two categories: (1) all the countries that are waging
an imperialist war of pillage as well as all the countries that are in reality
supporting this war; and (2) those who are waging not wars of pillage but
just wars of national liberation and popular liberation, as well as the countries
that support these war.... Today England had become the most reactionary
country in the world, and the Number One anti-Soviet, anticommunist,
anti-democratic, and anti-popular leader, the enemy of all small peoples,
is none other than Chamberlain...

  7. OUR REVOLUTIONARY POLICY DURING THE SECOND STAGE OF THE WAR.


In conformity with the peculiarities of the second stage of the war, what
should the revolutionary policy of the proletariat be, and especially of
the Communist Party?

In my opinion, it should be the following:

1. In all the imperialist countries participating in the war, we must call
on the people to oppose the imperialist war, make clear the imperialist nature
of both warring camps, treat them all as the same kind of robbers. In particular,
we must oppose English imperialism, this robber chief, incite the people
not to allow themselves to be deceived by the imperialist robbers, carry
out propaganda among the people, in order that they may transform the imperialist
war into a revolutionary civil war, establish a united popular front against
the imperialist war. . .

2. In all the neutral countries, such as America, the members of the Communist
Party should reveal to the people the imperialist policy of the bourgeois
government, with calls itself neutral but in reality aids the war and seeks
to enrich itself in the war...

3. In all the colonial and semi-colonial countries, the policy to follow
is that of the national united front, either to resist the invader (as in
China), or to oppose the mother country (as in the case of India), in order
to attain national independence... In all the colonies of countries participating
in the war we must oppose the actions of the traitors to the nation who support
the war waged by the mother country, oppose the mobilization of the people
of the colony to participate in the war on the front of the other country,
remind the people of the colony of the misery they suffered during the First
Imperialist War. In the colonial and semi-colonial countries, if we do not
oppose the traitors to the nation there is no hope for the movement of national
liberation.

  8. THE PERSPECTIVES OF THE WAR


Wars between imperialisms and mutual weakening of imperialisms.. constitutes
a favourable condition for movements of popular liberation in all countries,
for movements of national liberation in all countries, for China’s war
of resistance, for the building of communism, in the Soviet Union. From this
standpoint, the darkness that reigns in the world is only provisional and
the future of the world is bright. Imperialism will surely perish, and the
liberation of the oppressed people and of the oppressed nations will surely
be achieved.

 


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Youth Needs Experience








YOUTH NEEDS EXPERIENCE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  YOUTH NEEDS EXPERIENCE


October 5, 1939

[This is the complete text of a message dated 5 October, 1939, published
as an unnumbered page at the beginning of Chung-kuo ch'ling-vin wel-hsuan,
Chung-kuo Ch'ing-nien She, 1940.]
  

The young people — whether or not they be members of the Communist Party
— who join the ranks of the revolutionary movement, bringing new blood
and enthusiasm, are all very precious. Without them, the ranks of the revolution
could not develop and the revolution could not triumph. But lack of experience
is the natural failing of our young comrades. Now revolutionary experience
comes from personal participation in revolutionary struggle. If one begins
working at the grass roots, if, for several years, one does work that is
genuine, not false, then experience will come to those who do not have it.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Economic and Financial Problems in the Anti-Japanese War









ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR (1)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


December 1942

[This is a report delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung at a conference of senior
cadres of the Shensi-Kansu-Niagsia Border Region. The years 1941 and 1942
were the hardest for the Liberated Areas in the war of Resistance Against
Japan. The savage attacks by the Japanese invaders and the encirclement and
blockade by the Kuomintang created enormous financial difficulties for the
Liberated Areas. Comrade Mao Tse-tung pointed out that in order to overcome
these difficulties it was necessary for the Party to exert itself in leading
the people in developing agriculture and other branches of production, and
he called upon the government and other organizations, the schools and the
army in the Liberated Areas to produce as much as possible for their own
support. Comrade Mao Tse-tung's 'Economic and Financial Problems' and his
articles 'Spread the Campaigns to Reduce Rent, Increase Production and Support
the Government and Cherish the people’ in the Base Areas' and 'Get
Organized!' formed the Party's basic programme for leading the production
campaign in the Liberated Areas. Comrade Mao Tse-tung here severely criticizes
the mistaken notion of concentrating on public revenue and expenditure
to the neglect of economic development, and the wrong working style of making
demands on the people without mobilizing and helping them to develop production
and surmount difficulties, and he set forth the Party's correct policy of
"developing the economy and ensuring supplies". With this policy great successes
were achieved in the production campaign which was unfolded in the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and in the Liberated Areas behind the
enemy lines. It not only enabled the armed forces and the people of the Liberated
Areas successfully to tide over the most difficult period of the war, but
also provided the Party with a rich store of experience for guiding economic
construction in later years. The first Chapter of this report was published
in the 'Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung',
Volume 3, pp. 111-116.] 


  
  1. A BASIC SUMMARY OF OUR PAST WORK


The general policy guiding our economic and financial work is to develop
the economy and ensure supplies. But many of our comrades place one-sided
stress on public finance and do not understand the importance of the economy
as a whole; engrossed in matters of revenue and expenditure as such they
cannot find solutions to any problem hard as they try. The reason is that
an outmoded and conservative notion is doing mischief in their minds. They
do not know that while a good or a bad financial policy affects the economy,
it is the economy that determines finance. Without a well-based economy it
is impossible to solve financial difficulties, and without a growing economy
it is impossible to attain financial sufficiency. The financial problem in
the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region is that of supplying funds for the
living and operating expenses of tens of thousands of troops and civilian
personnel, in other words, the problem of supplying funds for waging the
war. These funds come partly from taxes paid by the people and partly from
production carried on by the tens of thousands of troops and civilian personnel
themselves. We shall simply be resigning ourselves to extinction unless we
develop both the private and the public sectors of the economy. Financial
difficulties can be overcome only by down-to-earth and effective economic
development. To neglect economic development and the opening up of sources
of finance, and instead to hope for the solution of financial difficulties
by curtailing indispensable expenditures, is a conservative notion which
cannot solve any problem.

In the last five years we have passed through several stages. Our
worst difficulties occurred in 1940 and 1941, when, the Kuomintang created
friction by its two anti-Communist drives. For a time we had a very acute
scarcity of clothing, cooking oil, paper and vegetables, of footwear for
our soldiers and of winter bedding for our civilian personnel. The Kuomintang
tried to strangle us by cutting off the funds due to us and imposing an economic
blockade; we were indeed in dire straits. But we pulled through. Not only
did the people of the Border Region provide us with grain but, in particular,
we resolutely built up the public sector of our economy with our own hands.
The government established many industries to meet the needs of the Border
Region, the troops engaged in an extensive production campaign and expanded
agriculture, industry and commerce to supply their own needs, and the tens
of thousands of people in the various organizations and schools also developed
similar economic activities for their own support. This self-supporting economy,
which has been developed by the troops and the various organizations and
schools, is a special product of the special conditions of today. It would
be unreasonable and incomprehensible in other historical conditions, but
it is perfectly reasonable and necessary at present. It is by such means
that we have been overcoming our difficulties. Do not these indisputable
historical facts prove the truth that supplies can be ensured only through
economic development? While we still face many difficulties, the foundation
of the public sector of our economy has already been laid. In another year,
by the end of 1943, this foundation will be even firmer.

Developing the economy is the correct line, but development does not mean
reckless or ill-founded expansion. Some comrades who disregard the specific
conditions here and now are setting up an empty clamour for development,
for example, they are demanding the establishment of heavy industry and putting
forward plans for huge salt and armament industries, all of which
are unrealistic and unacceptable. The Party's line is the correct line for
development; it opposes outmoded and conservative notions on the one hand
and grandiose, empty and unrealistic plans on the other. This is the
Party’s struggle on two fronts in financial and economic work.

While we must develop the public sector of our economy we should not forget
the importance of help from the people. They have given us grain, 90,000
tan in 1940, 200,000 in 1941 and 160,000 in 19421
[1], thus ensuring food
for our troops and civilian personnel. Up to the end of 1941, the grain output
of the public sector of our agriculture was meagre and we relied on the people
for grain. We must urge the army to produce more grain, but for a time we
shall still have to rely mainly on the people. Although the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region is in the rear and has not suffered direct war damage it has
only 1,500,000 inhabitants, a small population for so large an area, and
the provision of such large quantities of grain is not easy. Besides, the
people transport salt for us or pay a salt transport levy, and in 1941 they
purchased five million yuan worth of government bonds; all of which
represents no small burden. To meet the needs of the War of Resistance and
national reconstruction, the people must shoulder such burdens, the necessity
of which they very well realize. When the government is in very great
difficulties, it is necessary to ask the people to bear a heavier burden,
and they understand that too. But while taking from the people we must at
the same time help them to replenish and expand their economy. That is to
say, appropriate steps and methods must be adopted to help the people develop
their agriculture, animal husbandry, handicrafts, salt industry and commerce,
so that they gain at the same time as they give and, moreover, gain more
than they give; only thus can we sustain a long war against Japan.

Disregarding the needs of the war, some comrades insist that the government
should adopt a policy of "benevolence". This is a mistake. For unless we
win the war against Japan such "benevolence" will mean nothing to the people
and will benefit only the Japanese imperialists. Conversely, although the
people have to carry rather heavy burdens for the time being, things will
get better for them as the difficulties confronting the government and the
troops are overcome, the War of Resistance is sustained and the enemy is
defeated; and this is where the true benevolence of the revolutionary government
lies.

Another mistake is "draining the pond to catch the fish", that is, making
endless demands on the people, disregarding their hardships and considering
only the needs of the government and the army. That is a Kuomintang mode
of thinking which we must never adopt. Although we have temporarily added
to the people's burden, we have immediately set to work building the public
sector of our economy. In the years 1941 and 1942 the army, the government
and other organizations and the schools met most of their needs by their
own efforts. This is a wonderful achievement without precedent in Chinese
history, and it contributes to the material basis of our invincibility. The
greater our self-supporting economic activities, the more we shall be able
to lighten the people's tax burdens. In the first stage from 1937 to 1939
we took very little from them; during this stage they were able to build
up considerable strength. In the second stage, from 1940 to
1942, the burden on the people was increased. The third stage will
begin in 1943. In the next two years, 1943 and 1944, if the public
sector of our economy continues to grow and if all or most of our troops
in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region are in a position to engage in
farming, then by the end of 1944 the people's burden will again be lightened,
and they will again be able to build up strength. This is a possibility which
we should prepare to turn into actuality.

We must refute all one-sided views and advance the correct slogan of our
Party, "Develop the economy and ensure supplies." With regard to the relation
between public and private interests, our slogans are "Give consideration
to both public and private interests" and "Give consideration to both troops
and civilians." We consider only such slogans to be correct. We can guarantee
our financial needs only by expanding both the public and the private sectors
of our economy in a realistic and practical way. Even in difficult times
we must take care to set a limit to taxation so that the burdens, though
heavy, will not hurt the people. And as soon as we can, we should lighten
the burdens so that the people can build up strength.

The Kuomintang die-hards regard construction in the Border region as a hopeless
undertaking and the difficulties here as insurmountable; they are expecting
the Border Region to collapse any day. It is not worth arguing with such
people; they will never see the day of our "collapse" and we shall unquestionably
grow more and more prosperous. They do not understand that under the leadership
of the Communist Party and the Border Region revolutionary government the
masses always give their support to the Party and government. And the Party
and the government will always find ways to get over economic and financial
difficulties, however serious. In fact we have already pulled through some
of our recent difficulties and will soon overcome others. We encountered
difficulties many times greater in the past and surmounted them all.
With intense fighting going on every day, our base areas in northland and
central China are now facing much greater difficulties than the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, but we have already held out for
five and a half years in these areas and can certainly continue to do so
till victory. For us, there is no ground for pessimism; we can conquer any
difficulty.

After the present conference of senior cadres of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region we shall put into effect the policy of "better troops and simpler
administrations"[2].
It must be carried out strictly, thoroughly and universally, and not
perfunctorily, superficially, or partially. In carrying it out we must attain
the five objectives of simplification, unification, efficiency, economy and
opposition to bureaucracy. These five objectives have a very important bearing
on our economic and financial work. Simplification will reduce nonproductive
expenditures and increase our income from production, it will not only have
a direct and healthy effect on our finance but will lighten the people's
burdens and benefit them economically. In our economic and financial set-up,
we must overcome such evils as disunity, assertion of independence, lack
of co-ordination, and must establish a working system which is unified and
responsive to direction and which permits the full application of our policies
and regulations. With the establishment of such a unified system working
efficiency will rise. All our organizations, and particularly those engaged
in economic and financial work, must pay attention to thrift. By practicing
thrift we can cut out a great deal of unnecessary and wasteful expenditure,
which amounts possibly to tens of millions of yuan. Finally, people engaged
in economic and financial work must overcome surviving bureaucratic practices,
some of which, such as corruption and graft, over-elaborate organization,
meaningless "standardization" and red tape, are very serious. If we fully
attain these five objectives in the Party the government and the army, our
policy of "better troops and simpler administration" will achieve its purpose,
our difficulties surely be overcome, and we shall silence the gibes about
our approaching "collapse".

Below, we shall discuss separately various objectives of financial and economic
work, concretely summarize experience in past work, and put forward the general
policies for work that should be carried out in 1943.

Next section


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On the Development of Agriculture








ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR (2)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


  
  2. ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF AGRICULTURE


The general strategy for economic and financial work in the Border Region
is to develop the economy and ensure supplies. This being the case, the first
and most important questions are:  ‘How has our economic work
been done in the past?’, ‘What are the successes?', 'What are the
shortcomings?’, and, ‘What should be our strategy henceforth?'
.

The economy of the Border Region is divided into the two large sectors, the
public and the private. The private sector of our economy consists of all
agriculture, industry, and commerce undertaken by private individuals. The
public sector of our economy consists of the agriculture, industry, and commerce,
undertaken by the government, troops, official organizations and schools.
The functions and relationship of these two sectors are such that the private
sector provides the livelihood of the 1,400,000 people of the Border Region.
At the same time through taxation, it assists the government and troops,
and supports the sacred cause of the War of Resistance and the reconstruction
of the country. The public sector provides the bulk of the living and operating
expenses of several tens of thousands of Party members, government-workers
and soldiers, thus reducing the amount taken from the people and building
up their resources so that these can be obtained in future urgent need. The
principles used here are 'Give consideration to both public and private
interests' and 'Give consideration to both troops and civilians' .

If our Party and government do not pay attention to mobilizing the people
and helping them to develop agriculture, industry, and commerce, their life
cannot be improved, and the needs of the War of Resistance cannot be met.
As a result there will be trouble between the troops and the people. And
if we cannot settle the minds of the troops and the people, it is pointless
to consider anything else. Therefore the most important task is for the Party
and the government to concentrate great efforts on building up the people's
economy.

However, relaying on the taxes handed over by the people alone cannot meet
the needs of the War of Resistance and the reconstruction of the country.
This is particularly true of the Border Region where the area is large and
the population sparse, and where there has long been a large contradiction
between the taxes paid by the people and the expenditure of the government.
Therefore, we must also concentrate great efforts on managing the public
sector of the economy. This is an extremely great responsibility borne by
our government, troops, official organizations and schools. In the past few
years we have had great successes in this work. In 1943 we must achieve even
greater successes so as directly to meet the needs of the War of Resistance
and the reconstruction of the country. The more the public sector of the
economy grows, the more the burden carried by the people can be reduced.
This is another way of building up the resources of the people. And the
instrument which unites and reconciles the private and public sectors is
the currency.

The Private sector comprises agriculture, animal husbandry, handicrafts,
cooperative undertakings, the salt industry, and commerce. Here I shall first
deal with agriculture.

The agriculture of the Border Region was depressed during the period of the
land revolution. At that time there was much uncultivated land in Yan'an,
Ansai, Bao’an, Ganquan, Huachi and the three eastern counties, etc.
On the border between Huachi and Bao’an, there was an area called
Erjiachuan, which was more than 200 li long, yet only twenty or thirty
households lived there. As early as the Tongzhi period (1862-74 ) there was
no one living in Wuyasi and Zhangjiacha in Bao’an county. Fucunchuan
in Ganquan county, and Jinpenwan and Machichuan in Yan'an county had for
the most part ceased to be cultivated. Cotton-planting had ceased throughout
the Border region. The decline in animal husbandry was very great. Only
400,000-500, 000 head of sheep remained and 100,000 oxen and donkeys. Textiles,
the transport of salt, and other subsidiary undertakings had all been disrupted
in the same way. In particular the textile industry had almost completely
disappeared. By 1938, only 70,000 packs of eating salt were exported. All
this shows how depressed the agriculture of the Border Region was at that
time. Agriculture was only speedily restored and developed after the Central
Red Army came to the Border Region and civil war ceased, after the local
bandits were cleaned up and the peasants were given security, after the 'left'
economic policy was corrected and a mild taxation policy was adopted, and
after the Party and government's call for the development of agriculture
had greatly raised the enthusiasm of the peasants for production.

Table 1.1 gives the statistics for livestock, cotton-planting and opening
up of uncultivated lands in the past four years.




Table 1.1 Agricultural activity 1939-42


Year
Area of new land opened (mu)
Area of cotton planted (mu)
Livestock


Oxen
Donkeys
Sheep


1939
1,002,774
3,767
150,892
124,935 1
1,171,366


1940
698,989
15,177
193,238
135,054
1,723,037


1941
390,087
39,087
202 914
137,001
1,724,203


1942
281,413
94,405
--
--
--


Total
2,373,263
--
--
--
--



Explanation:

(1) The statistics for the livestock of Jiaxian and Mizhi counties have not
been included; the 1939 figures for livestock include the 1940 total for
seven of the counties.

(2) The figure for the area of new land cultivated is for the amount of new
land opened each year. The figures for cotton planted and for livestock are
the annual totals for the whole of the Border Region.

These statistics show that year by year the cultivated land of the Border
Region has expanded, the acreage of cotton planted has grown, and the amount
of livestock has increased. Moreover. the real totals are more than those
shown in the statistical table. As a result much of the formerly uncultivated
land has become productive. For example, there are now more than a hundred
households in Erjiachuan and all the land of the area has been cultivated.
Wuyasi and Zhangjiacha are now both fully inhabited. In the past, all eleven
districts in Yan'an county had unused land. At preset only Jinpen and Liulin
districts, half the Central district and one township in Yaodian district
have uncultivated land. In 1939, there were only about 300,000 mu
of ploughed land in Yan’an. In 1942, there were 699,538 mu. There
used to be a lot of uncultivated land in the counties of Ansai, Anding, Yanchuan,
and Yanchang. Now there is very little. Before 1940 the Border Region bought
grain from Luochuan county and east of the yellow River. Now, not only, is
it unnecessary to buy grain from outside, there is even some surplus grain
which is exported to the region of Yulin. Some people have moved here from
other areas, livestock has increased, but we do not feel a shortage of grain.
In the light of all these facts there is no longer any doubt that the Border
Region can be self-supporting in grain.

Cotton-growing has not only again reached its pre-revolutionary peak, but
has also developed. For example, the districts of Yongping, Yongsheng and
Yuju in Yanchuan county did not previously grow cotton. Now they have all
started growing it. The same is true of Yan'an. The profit from cotton is
greater than the profit from grain. The return from 1 mu of cotton
is on average 700 yuan or more, whereas if grain were planted the
return would only be 200 yuan. The ratio is thus 3:1. In 1939, the area planted
to cotton was only just over 3,700 mu. In 1942 it was more than 94,000
mu, and the quantity produced reached 1,400,000 jin. This was
a great achievement. However the amount needed by the Border Region is 3
million jin. This is our future task.

The increase in livestock has also been very rapid. For example, in 1937
there were only about 8,000 sheep in Yan'an. Now there are more than 60,000.
In 1937 there were only 70,000 sheep in Huachi, now there are more than 120,000.
Before the land revolution, there were only five flocks of sheep in Zhangjiahe
of Third township, Dongyang district, Yanchuan county. (There was no grazing
land and there could only be thirty to fifty head in each flock. ) Now there
are thirteen flocks. Oxen and donkeys have increased by almost two-thirds
since the time of the civil war. As a result in 1940 and 1941 we were able
to export 500,000 packs of salt. If it were not for the increase in oxen
and donkeys, this salt would have been very difficult to move out.

However, the development of agriculture has not been even Those areas with
relatively all-round development and rather more successes include the counties
under direct administration and the Longdong sub-region, in particular Yan'an,
Ansai, Ganquan, Huachi, Quzi and the three eastern counties. This is because
they have a lot of land, few people, and the climate is quite good. These
counties also have the biggest share in the subsidiary work of salt transport
and at the same time, the largest amount of public expenditure. The area
that has not developed is the special military area [Jingbeiqu], because
it has a large population and the land is limited. There is no possibility
of enlarging the ploughed area. They have had some success there in the gradual
restoration of household spinning and weaving work. Moreover, there has been
some emigration to the Yan'an area, which has eased the distribution of
population and land.

The speed of development has also varied. Development was faster before 1940,
particularly in the years 1939 and 1940. In these two years 1,700,000
mu of new land were opened up. In 1940, the number of sheep increased
by nearly 600,000, and oxen and donkeys by over 50,000. But in 1941 and 1942
only about 600,000 mu of land were opened up. This is only one-third
of the previous two years. There were fewer sheep in 1941 over 1940, and
the number of oxen and donkeys only increased by 10,000 (in reality there
was a reduction). However, in these two years cotton-growing and textiles
both developed.

The above outlines the development of agriculture in the Border Region. Now
I want to say a few words about how this development took place.

Before the civil war ended, agriculture was in decline. Afterwards it developed.
How did this development come about? Apart from the arrival of the Central
Red Army, the cleaning up of the local bandits, and the realization of peace
so that the peasants could live and work securely, there were the following
six reasons.

(1) The 'left' mistakes in economic policy were corrected and the policies
to build up the resources of the people were implemented. Although the peasants
had obtained a share of land, they were afraid to develop production because
of the 'left' economic policy. In addition, because agriculture was disrupted
both before and after the revolution, the base was very weak and hindered
growth. The Central Committee corrected the left policy and thus put an end
to the peasants' tendency to fear developing production. The peasants were
then willing to buy more implements, and the rich peasants dared to take
on tenants [an huozi] and long-term labourers [au changgong]. The milder
policies restored confidence and helped the extension of production. At the
same time the high price for grain and the great profit in subsidiary
undertakings stimulated the peasants' zeal to produce, and made agriculture
develop rapidly. This laid the basis for the levy of 200,000 tan of
grain tax and 26 million jin of hay tax in 1941.

(2) Calls were made for the development of production. The Production
Mobilization Conference for cadres held by the Central Committee (1939),
the Second Party Congress of the Border Region (1939), the first meeting
of the Border Region Council (1941) and the first agricultural exhibition,
all called for the development of production. These calls played a major
role in promoting growth. They first aroused the cadres, and then through
them penetrated deeply to the masses, mobilizing men, women, old, young,
and even loafers [er liuzi] to take part in production. They increased the
labour force, and finally destroyed the peasants' fear of developing production.
Thus the amount of new land opened up in 1939 was more than 1 million
mu, and real imports of livestock were also greatest in that year.

(3) The immigration policy. A major reason for the enlargement of cultivated
land by 2,350,000 mu in the past four years has been that those
regions with large amounts of land have absorbed large numbers of immigrants,
and increased their population. For example, in 1937 Yan'an (including
Yan’an city) only had a population of 34,000. Now its population is
roughly 70,000. Because of this, cultivated land in this county has increased
from around 300,000 mu to roughly 700,000 mu. In 1936 Ansai
only had a population of about 20,000. Now it has a population of more than
40,000. Ganquan originally had about 8,000 people. Now it has more than 14,000.
In 1938 Yanchang only had a population of 25,000. Now it has more than 32,000.
Yanchuan had the least amount of uncultivated land, but between 1938 and
the present its population has increased by over 10,000. Huachi only had
a population of 35,000 in 1938. Now it has a population of more than 40,000.
Other places such as Bao’an, Anding, Jingbian, and the counties of the
Longdong and Guanzhong sub-regions have also increased their population.
These immigrants came mostly from Hengshan, Yulin, Shenmu, and Fugu, and
secondly from the special military area. They all came voluntarily and were
not organized by the government, They were willing to come because there
was land and they were treated well. The various counties organized the existing
householders to give help with grain tools, and cave houses, etc. At the
same time the rich peasants took on tenants, which also helped the immigrants.
The increase in immigrants not only enlarged the area cultivated, but also
increased livestock, and stimulated commerce. Therefore the immigrants were
one of the factors in the development of agriculture.

(4) The policy of incentives. Immigrants do not pay grain tax for three years,
and their other obligations are reduced. If some of the peasants’ planting
cotton do not make as much profit as those planting grain, the government
pays compensation. If livestock is purchased from outside the Border Region,
there is a reduction in grain tax by a fixed amount in the first year. In
addition, there were the rewards to labour heroes given at the two agricultural
exhibitions, which also brought about great results. For example, Wu Manyou
and Mao Kehu of Yan’an and Due Fafu of Ganquan were rewarded at the
first agricultural exhibition. Now they have become very good, rich peasants.
They all pay more than 5 tan of grain tax (in the Border Region 1
tan is 300 jin). Moreover, they have encouraged other peasant
householders in the villages to develop production. All these things have
promoted the development of agriculture, in particular of grain and cotton.

(5) The reduction in the wastage of labour power, and the better adjustment
in the use of labour power. Because we were busy fighting during the civil-war
period, we did not pay attention to production and the land was neglected.
After peace was established, there were frequent exercises and guard duties
by the self-defence army [ziweijun] and many kinds of meetings. Therefore,
each month each able-bodied man missed at least three working-days. Later
this kind of wastage was reduced. Furthermore, before 1941 not much grain
tax was collected, there was little tax grain transport duty, and the amount
of work missed was comparatively limited. In recent years in rural areas,
contract-labour teams [zhagong] and exchange-labour teams [biangong] have
developed and made better adjustment in the use of labour power. We have
mobilized loafers to take part in production. The number of women joining-in
production has also increased. All these things have helped the development
of Border Region agriculture.

(6) The policy of agricultural credit. Formerly there was no agricultural
credit but this was offset by the mild taxation policy. Now that grain tax
has increased and particularly as 80 per-cent of peasant households must
pay it, those households (roughly one-third) lacking oxen, agricultural,
tools, and food grain must be helped with credit. Moreover, a supply of credit
is very necessary for certain kinds of agriculture that must be developed
(like cotton-planting), for agricultural subsidiaries (like spinning and
weaving), and for certain regions which need more development. Although only
4 million yuan credit was given in 1942, of which merely 1,500,000
yuan was for oxen, over 2,600 oxen and nearly 5,000 agriculture
implements were bought and cotton-planting also expanded. It cannot be denied
that this was a great help. But because finances are limited and we can only
lend according to the government's financial strength, we still cannot provide
enough credit to match the needs of the peasant households. However, a little
is always better than nothing, and it does give some help.

The above are several of the major factors in the development of agriculture;
below I shall discuss several major lessons to be drawn from our work.

(1) Act according to the conditions of the area and the season. Agricultural
regions and seasons are different and methods of development are also different.
For example, there is no uncultivated land in the special military area (apart
from a small amount in Qingjian). The cultivated land area cannot be enlarged.
Sheep-herding is limited by the pasture lands available. There is also a
lack of pack-animals for the transport of salt. The policy of rent reduction
has not yet been thoroughly implemented. Because of these things, grain
production has not increased in those areas, and with the exception of spinning
and weaving, subsidiary undertakings have not developed. Although improved
techniques such as more frequent hoeing of weeds, greater use of manure,
and more deep ploughing were introduced there long ago, we should still carry
out more investigation of the situation, and at the right time do our utmost
to increase production. However, if we were to employ these improved techniques
in areas where land is plentiful population sparse, and working methods
primitive, they would not be very effective because they all need an increase
in labour power. From the point of view of the peasants of the latter kind
of area, deep ploughing is not as good as planting more land. Applying more
manure is not as good as opening up more uncultivated land. Planting more
land is especially good in areas with low rainfall. Therefore, in these areas
the call to improve agricultural methods is in general ineffective at the
present time. To really increase production in these regions the most important
thing for the moment is to rely on opening up unused land. If in the six
years from 1937 to 1942 the increase in ploughed land was roughly 3 million
mu then the amount harvested in 1942 was at least 500,000 tan
more than in 1936, which is equivalent to 250,000 tan of hulled grain
(each tan is 300 jin). If we estimate the grain production
of the Border Region in 1942 to be 1,500,000 tan of hulled grain,
then over six years, the increase in grain production through the increase
of ploughed land is approximately one-sixth of the total. Some of this increase
in cultivated land is new land opened up by immigrants, and some is expansion
of land farmed by the original households. All this shows us that in directing
agriculture, we must adopt different methods in different regions. In one
region we should make deep ploughing the key, and in another enlarging the
area ploughed. We must also make distinctions with respect to timing. At
a time when there is unused land that can be cultivated, we should mainly
encourage the opening up of new land. When uncultivated land has been exhausted,
then we must turn to encouraging deep ploughing. We must not only make these
distinctions between large regions, we must also make them within a county,
a district and sometimes even within a township. For example, if certain
villages in a township have rather a lot of unused land, we should encourage
the opening up of unused land there. If in other villages there is little
or no unused land, we should encourage deep ploughing. While there is still
uncultivated land in a township, we should encourage the opening up of land.
When all the lands have been opened up, we should encourage deep ploughing.
Although we have had some successes in the past few years in our work, much
has been too empty and generalized. Many of our comrades still do not know
how to investigate objective circumstances minutely, nor do they know how
to put forward concrete proposals to provide the conditions for increasing
production in different regions, and, at different times. Slogans put forward
in the past for deep ploughing, opening new lands, water conservancy, and
increasing production by 400,000 tan or 200,000 tan, in reality
contained much subjectivism. Many peasants were not interested or influenced
by them. From this we may conclude that in future we must carry out deep,
factual investigation, and solve problems in terms of concrete times, places,
and conditions.

(2) As yet the peasants in a large number of areas still pay heavy rents
and heavy interest rates, and the policy of reducing these has not been
thoroughly implemented. On the one hand peasants must bear the burden of
paying rent and interest to the landlords, and on the other they must pay
grain tax and money tax to the government. They get too little for themselves,
which dampens their enthusiasm to produce. Thus there is no possibility of
increasing production. From this we may conclude that we must conscientiously
implement the decrees to reduce rent and interest rates.

(3) As a result of the increase in Braid tax, and the newly levied hay tax,
sheep tax, and salt-transport requirement, the peasants' enthusiasm for
production has diminished. In the two years 1941 and 1942 the peasants paid
a large amount of grain tax, hay tax and salt tax, and during these years
they expanded the area of ploughed land by only 600, 000 mu, merely
60 per cent of the increase in 1939. Livestock did not increase in 1941,
and sheep even declined (of course epidemics had some effect). Immigration
also dropped. In 1942 only 4, 843, households came. Moreover, 3,527 old
households moved out, the reason mainly being that they feared further burdens.
Another reason was that the amount of grain tax collected increased progressively
according to the amount harvested and not according to the area of land worked.
This method, although rational in terms of sharing the burden equally, hindered
the growth of investment in agriculture. It lowered the peasants' enthusiasm
to invest in the land because for the same land a good harvest meant paying
out a lot and a poor harvest meant paying out little or even nothing. If
taxation was based on the area of land worked, this point could be corrected.
The enthusiasm of the middle and rich peasants could be raised, and there
would be no detriment to the poor peasants. From this we may conclude that
there must be limits to the grain tax and hay tax, and at the same time we
must improve the methods of taxation so as to promote agricultural production.

(4) Policies should be thoroughly implemented. For example, we stipulated
that for three years we would not take grain tax from new immigrants or from
those planting cotton, but in fact we have 'welcomed' grain tax from immigrants,
and we have levied one-half of the grain tax for land planted to cotton.
We originally stipulated that when livestock was bought from areas outside
the Border Region we would reduce grain tax by a definite amount for the
first year, but this has also not yet been implemented. In addition regulations
for giving rewards for increased production have not been fully carried out.
All these things not only affect the authority of the government but also
diminish the enthusiasm of the peasants. From this we may conclude that
henceforward everything pertaining to the decrees announced by the government
must be resolutely implemented.

(5) More equitable adjustment in the use of labour power and other methods
helpful to peasants, such as exchange-labour teams, contract-labour teams
and so forth, have a strong influence on agricultural growth. However, with
the exception of some counties like Yan'an, we have still not done enough
to organize and promote them. There are certainly many comrades among the
county cadres who are actively striving to put ideas to the people, and who
have originated many good methods for mobilizing the masses to develop
production. They have created many model examples. However, many other comrades
are not like this. They lack the spirit of factual investigation and enthusiastic
effort. They lack creativity. They feel that there is no work that they can
do for agriculture, or they do not know how to set-to. Therefore they only
raise empty slogans like 'spring ploughing' or 'autumn harvest'. They remain
passive, and let the peasants do things as they like. The government simply
keeps a record of what is done. But in fact there are many things to be done.
Many good methods can be thought up. For example, during spring ploughing
in 1942 some of the peasants in Yan'an felt very discouraged. Instances of
moving out, splitting up the family, and selling livestock in preparation
for reducing production occurred. From the point of view of the comrades
who lack enthusiasm and creativity, these phenomena would be insoluble and
it would be best to accept fate and let such bad things happen. But the comrades
from Yan'an were not like this. They were neither passive nor bureaucratic
They were able to grasp the key to the problem and adopt active methods.
They overcame the difficulties. At that time, the Party and government did
much propaganda work, and gave help with grain, cave houses, and agricultural
tools. Afterwards not only did production not decline, but cultivated land
increase by 80,000 mu. This example proved that there is much
work in agriculture that ran and should be done by the local Party committees
and the local government. Moreover, so long as they grasp the key
points and find a method, then when they act they can be effective. From
this we may conclude that cadres must be active to overcome difficulties,
they must unite with the masses, and according to the needs of the masses
create vigorous methods to solve their problems. They definitely cannot be
passive and bureaucratic.

In order to give our comrades a clear-cut standpoint on this extremely important
question of uniting closely with the masses and conscientiously solving their
difficulties, I here specially reproduce for reference the reports of the
comrades of Yan'an county on how they handled the problem of opening up unused
land, how they handled the problem of refugees, and how they handled the
problem of loafers.

What follows is the original report.

  
  HOW WAS YAN'AN COUNTY'S PLAN TO OPEN UP 80,000 MU OF UNUSED LAND IN
  1942 COMPLETED?


(1) We relied on the labour power of immigrant refugees to open up uncultivated
land.

There were 25,428 refugees in the period of 1940 to 1942. On the basis of
five of them equalling one labour power, there were 5,086 labour powers.
Each labour power can open up 10 mu of new land in one year,
giving a total of 50,860 mu. (Ten mu is the average
figure for the land opened up by refugees in the past three years. In 1942
the land opened up by each labour power was more than this. )

(2) We relied on the labour power of original households and animals to open
up unused land, totaling 29,399 mu.

The original households had 10,616 labour powers. The work could be done
with each labour power opening up less than 3 mu.

(3) However, the organization of labour power is a major task. This year
we adopted methods of collective labour, such as contract-labour teams and
exchange-labour teams. We also organized women and loafers to take
part in production.

Altogether we organized 487 contract-labour teams. We also drew 4,939 good
labour powers into collective labour (exchange-labour teams). This was almost
one-third of the total number of labour powers (according to statistics for
this spring, there were 15,702 labour powers in the whole county), which
meant that out of every three people one took part in collective labour.
The method of Contract labour was to form a group of eight to ten good workers
from a village and establish a foreman [gongtou]. Then they opened up new
land and hoed weeds either for themselves or for others. Sometimes the foreman
took part in physical labour, in which case he received pay valued at two
labour days per day worked. If he did not take part, he only received pay
valued at one labour day per day. Those forming contract-labour teams were
either entirely from the local village, or came from outside, or were organized
with people from outside the village together with peasant from the village.

The peasants were very pleased that we organized loafers to take part in
production. It increased their enthusiasm for work.

More and more women joined in production each year. In particular refugee
women took part in opening up uncultivated land, and even more of them in
hoeing. There were thirty-nine in Liulin district this year. The refugee
women of Third township in Chuankou district did not have any hoes. They
went to the mountains and waited until others were tired and resting, then
they took up the hoes and began opening-up land. When the others had finished
their rest they handed back the hoes and waited again.

(4) We relied on production plans for each peasant household. In 1942, this
county laid emphasis on determining production plans for each peasant household
based on discussions with that household and with its agreement. The government
printed a standard form to record plans including such things as opening
up new lands, hoeing weeds, and so forth. When a plan was determined, it
was posted up in the home of each family so that afterwards the government
could examine the production plan of each household according to the form.
When determining peasant household plans we had to pay attention to the following
points:

  i) The production circumstances of the previous year.
  
  ii) The conditions for the increase of production in the current year.
  
  iii) The amount of labour power (human and animal).
  
  iv) Obtaining the agreement of the man concerned.
  
  v) The need for constant examination and supervision of work.


(5) The effect of agricultural credit was important, in particular the 100,000
yuan credit given to refugees for agricultural tools. When
the refugees arrived they did not have a thing. To open up unused land, first
a mattock was needed to clear away the scrub and then a hoe to break the
land. After agricultural credit was issued and the problem of tools was solved
the refugees' desire to open up new land was very strong. In six days they
were able to open up 3 mu. In 1942 agricultural credit was
given rather late. The earlier credit is given the sooner more land can be
opened up. (Note: do not violate the agricultural season.)

(6) During spring ploughing, mobilization work had to be reduced as much
as possible. The peasants were allowed the time to open up new land and to
take part in production.

(7) The government had a tight grasp on the work of opening-up unused land.
Only three months were available for this. With a hundred-day plan, each
day opening up 800 mu, it was necessary to have a labour force
of 1,600. This was one-tenth of the laborer force of the whole county. By
19 April we had only opened up 15,000 mu. This was still far
short of completing the task, and already two-thirds of the time had gone.
Therefore beginning on 20 April, after a rainfall, there was a twenty-day
assault. In the twenty days more than 50 per cent of the whole task was
completed. Between 10 March and 19 April, 15,000 mu of land
was opened up. This was 18.7 per cent of the work. In the twenty day assault,
46,442 mu of land was opened up, which was 58 per cent of the
work.

In the assault the best districts were the following:

Luilin district: the ratio of new land opened up during the period
of assault to that opened up before was 1,294.4:100.

Yaodian district: the ratio was 1,184.4:100.

Chuankou district: the ratio was 432.1:100.

Altogether the county government held two meetings of district heads to inspect
the work, and issued three directives. The cadres of the county government
went down to the districts and townships more than three times.

The districts checked up on the work of the townships up to seven or eight
times in some cases, and three times at the very least. The townships also
checked up many times on the work of the villages.

The tight grasp of the leadership and the strict check-ups played a decisive
role in the completion of the task.

  HOW TO SOLVE THE PROBLEM OF REFUGEES TAKING PART IN PRODUCTION


  (1) [Table 1.2 refers to] Statistics on the flow of refugees into
Yan'an county in recent years.

Putting it simply, the number of households more than doubled, and the number
of people just about doubled.

The refugees who came settled mainly in Chuankou, Liulin, Jinpen. and Yaodian
districts. In these districts there was a lot of unused land.





Table 1.2 The flow of refugees into Yan’an county
(Yan'an City excluded), 1938-42



Year

Households

Number of people



1938

239

1,200



1939

533

1,976



1940

1,137

6,090



1941

5,040

14,207



1942

1,050

6,237



Total

8,009

29,704



Comparison with 1937


 

Households

Number of people



1937

7, 703

32, 705


Increase during 5 years

8, 009

29,704


Percentage increase

103.9%

90.8%




(2) Statistics on how the government helped the refugees solve problems
in production after they had come (Table 1.3).

(3) The methods for solving refugees' difficulties in production were:

(i) There was a lot of land. We proposed that the ownership of publicly-owned
uncultivated land should go to those who opened it up. If the owner of
privately-owned unused land did not open it up, we let refugees do so. The
three-year exemption from tax was an incentive.

Table 1.3 Allocation of State aid to refugees, 1940-42


 

1940

1941

1942

Total


Allocation of land (in mu)

10,220.00

3,451.00

6,335.00

20,006.00


Grain (in tan)

669.9

495.00

458.48

1,623.38


Seeds (in tan)

40.18

8.2

47.37

95.75


Agricultural tools (items)

424.00

2,133.00

427.00

2,984.00


Oxen

979.00

82.00

212.00

1,273.00




Notes:

(a) In 1942, 13,555 jin of sweet potatoes [yangyu] were given
up the refugees in addition, and on 273 occasions they were helped with oxen.

(b) Agricultural tools were ploughshares, rakes and hoes.

(ii ) The problem of a place to live. In the beginning they lived in old
cave houses or broken-down cave houses. Many of the others who came afterwards
were joining friends, relatives, or people of other social relationships.
They lived in the cave houses of those friends or relatives. Having settled
down, they dug out their own cave house. In other cases one person came in
the first year and dug out the cave house. In second year the family came
and moved into the house.

(iii) We made arrangements among the peasants for grain to eat. We proposed
that if 1 tou of grain was borrowed before spring, after autumn
1 tou and 3 sheng should be repaid. This was
a profit of 30 per cent. It encouraged the original households to lend grain
and the government guaranteed repayment. Another method was to urge the original
households to hire help [diao fenzi], to take on share-cropping tenants
[an zhuangjia] and to contract short-term labour [lan gong] from among the
refugees. Conditions were decided voluntarily by both sides. Allowing
the original households to exploit a little was not a problem because
when the refugees first came they did not have a thing. Although they were
exploited, we could not let them starve.

Statistics for this year (1942) [are shown in Table 1.4].

Table 1.4 Households reliant upon employers for 
food grain in 1942




Hired help [diao fenzi]

359 households



Share-cropping tenants
[an zhuangjia]

466 households



Short-term contract labour
[lan gong]

184 households



Total

1,009 households




These households relied on their employers for food grain. However, the hired
helpers [diao fenzi] could only get supplies for themselves. Hired farmhands
and short-term contract labourers were able to get food grain for their family
members as well. There were 650 households of the latter kind. At a rate
of three people per household, this was altogether 1,950 persons. If we add
on the 359 hired helpers, the full total was 2,309 people relaying on their
employers for grain. If they had asked for aid from the government, at a
rate of 5 tou per man per year the amount of grain needed would
have been 1,154.5 tou. What a large amount this would have
been! Therefore on the basis of mutual agreement between employer and employee,
the hiring of farmhands, helpers, and short-term contract labourers solved
many great problems. It not only solved the problem of food grains. It also
enlarged production and increased the supply of grain. Taking each household
as one labour power, there were 1,009 labour powers altogether. One labour
power could produce 2 tan of grain, so in total they could
increase grain production by 2,018 tan. After consumption this
still left a surplus of 863.5 tan. By the following year these
people were in a position to carry out production by themselves.

(iv ) The peasants were urged to help the refugees with seed and land
to work. Seed was repaid after autumn, and a rent paid for land with the
government as guarantor.

(v) The institution of credit for agricultural implements for refugees was
very effective in solving the problem of supplying tools to open up new lands.
If arrangements for any problem (food grain, supply of agricultural implements,
etc.) were not good, the opening up of unused lands could have been
impeded. Therefore it was necessary to solve each problem rapidly and at
the correct time. A delay of one day reduces the amount of land opened up.

(vi) As for the problem of burdens on the refugees, we resolutely carried
out the decisions of the government of the Border Region on treating them
well. For three years we made no demands on them, and instead the
government helped them solve all kinds of difficulties. This year the government
cadres of the county, districts, and townships saved 10 tan
of grain for issue to the refugees. While solving the problem of grain for
refugees to eat, Third township in Central district made great efforts to
reduce their burdens.

(4) Why did the refugees want to come to Yan'an?

(i) We have really solved the difficulties of referees. The solution of the
refugee food-grain problem in 1940 had a particularly wide influence. In
Chuankou district alone 300 tan of grain was supplied. Therefore
many more refugees came in the year 1941.

(ii) Although government calls had a great impact, the effect of the
refugees themselves telling their own friends, relations and other social
acquaintances of the good treatment they received was even greater. We found
that very few refugees who came to us had refugee certificates issued by
Suide sub-region. This was because they feared that after having accepted
settling-in funds or registration cards from there, they would not be free
or they would become public property. They preferred to get money through
their own personal relationships.

(5) Opinions concerning future immigrant refugees:

(i) Get more to come by encouraging refugees to use their social connections.

(ii) The government at county and district levels should conscientiously
solve problems for them.

(iii) The government of the Border Region should issue some grain and funds
to help them, with repayment after autumn.

(iv) Persist in carrying out the decisions to treat refugees favourably.


  HOW TO MOBILIZE LOAFERS TO TAKE PART IN PRODUCTION


(1) Statistical summary [given in Table 1.5].


Table 1.5 Mobilization of loafers, 1937-42




Year

Original number of loafers

Number joining in production

Number not yet taking part in production


1937

1,629

299

1,330


1938

1,246

578

668


1939

543

120

423


1940

359

175

184


1941

184

126

58


1942

145

40

105




Note:

The chief reason for the increase in loafers in 1942 was that in 1941 Jinpenwan
was taken from Gulin county and placed under the administration of this county.
According to statistics, that district had forty-three idlers.

(i) In Panlong district, a certain spirit medium beat his 'three mountains'
knife[3] into a hoe.
He told the masses he would not swindle people again and would work hard
in future.

(ii) At Lijiaqu in Third township of Chuankou district, Hui San and Gao Wu
were each given the task of opening up 6 mu of uncultivated
land this spring. They completed this and even exceeded it by 2
mu. At Tianujiagelao in Fourth township, Yang Yingcheng was
given the job of opening up 6 mu. He opened up 9
mu.

(iii) In Liulin district this year, seven men were reformed and joined in
production. In Wuyang district twelve men were investigated. After a struggle,
nine of them took part in production. In Fengfu district there were eight
men. At Ganguyi in Yaodian district eight men were organized in two groups
to go to Zhangjiakou to open up new land.

(iv) At Nanyigou of Third township in Fengfu district, Bai Fenyu was a shaman
before 1936. By 1941 he had an ox and hired a man. He had 200 sheep and had
become the village head. He paid 10.2 tan grain tax, 200
jin salt tax, and 50(1 jin hay tax. This year he has got another
ox and hired a helper. He has expanded production and his prospects are very
good.

(v) Because the government mobilized them to take part in production, the
loafers of Panlong district said: 'If things go wrong this year government
men will be even more strict with us'. For example, Li Dejin from Lijiabian
in Fourth township used to smoke opium. This year he has opened up 6
mu of new land and also stopped smoking. In the whole district
there were twenty-seven loafers. They have written guarantees that they will
do well in production, and as a result twenty of them are very good.

(vi) At Liujiaping in Mudan district there is a man (name unknown) with extremely
bright prospects now that the government has mobilized him to join-in production.
Later he sought out one of the government personnel and treated him very
w ell saying "The government was right to get us to take part in production'.
Gao Yucheng from the same district used to be a It at en He did not farm
and he did not cut firewood. Winter and summer, wearing a ragged old
cotton-padded jacket he would curl up on the cold Rang. Each day he would
smoke one-fifth of an ounce [er qian] of opium. His wife and children cried
from cold and hunger. After the revolution and educated by the government,
he has become the production director of Fourth township. Everybody praises
his method of work. He is a labour hero. Moreover he keeps a close watch
on loafers. He forces then to make production plans. Every five days he goes
up into the hills to supervise them. Under his direction Liu Guai and Yan
Fenghe have each planted 24 mu of land this year.

(2) Our methods of mobilization are:

(i) Doing propaganda, educational, and persuasive work to get them to take
part in production. Having got some grain in their prospects improve.

(ii) The government gives them definite production tasks, such as opening
up uncultivated land (see examples above) . They are inspected at regular
intervals. Moreover special people in the villages are designated to supervise
their production.

(iii) Urging the masses to struggle against them, and to force them to join
production. This year in the two villages, Jinpenhe and Yunshansi in Third
township, Panlong district, production competitions were organized. In this
situation, Chang Degong, a loafer in Jinpenhe, was forced by the villagers
to go up into the hills to open up new land. He has opened up 3 mu.
At the moment he is preparing to plant 15 mu.

(iv) Organizing the loafers in collective labour. The loafers are concentrated
in the district town and organized into tea. Is to open up new land. After
they Bet rid of the opium-smoking habit, they can go home. The land opened
up and farmed is given to whoever does the work.

(v) The government solved some of the loafers' production difficulties.

(3) Results.

The masses were very pleased that the government made the loafers take part
in production. The masses opposed them very much because they did no work
at all, paid no grain tax, and caused trouble every time there was mobilization
work. As for the loafers themselves, after they obtained some real results
from production, they realized that the government was acting for their
betterment. The above examples clarify this point. As for those who were
extremely stubborn and refused to change, some even running away when the
government tried to mobilize them, on their return they joined in a little
light productive labour. In this county no loafers have become bandits.

We have not referred to this report of the leading comrades of the Party
and government of Yan'an county without purpose. The spirit of the comrades
of Yan'an county is entirely the spirit of Bolsheviks. Their attitude is
enthusiastic, and there is not the slightest passivity in their thoughts
and in their actions. They are not at all afraid of difficulties, and are
able vigorously and firmly to overcome them all. Look how responsible they
are towards their work: 'In 1942 agricultural credit was given rather late.
The earlier credit is given the sooner more land can be opened up!' 'It was
a necessary to solve each problem rapidly and at the correct time: A delay
of one day reduces the amount of land opened up!' 'Determine the production
plans of each peasant household.' 'The tight grasp of the leadership and
the strict check-ups played a decisive role in the completion of the task.'
How vastly different and hoar much better is this spirit than that of those
timid people who draw back, full of sighs when they meet difficulties, and
of those who are not conscientious in their work and try to get by and neglect
things! Imbued with such spirit, there is not one thing that the comrades
of Yantan did not handle realistically and practically. They have a full
understanding of the feelings, needs, and concrete circumstances of all the
people of Yan'an county. They are completely united with the masses. They
carry out extremely good investigation and research, and thus they have learned
the Marxist art of leading the massed. They are entirely without subjectivism,
sectarianism, and the Party 'eight-legged essay'. How does this compare with
those subjectivists who do not solve problems according to the demands of
the masses but according to their own subjective imagination? And with those
bureaucrats who do no investigation and research work at all end, though
they work for many years, have no idea of whet is going on beneath them?
In there not a world of difference between them? We hope all the comrades
of the Border Region will have this spirit of the comrades of Yan'an, this
attitude towards their work, this one-ness with the masses, this willingness
to carry out investigation work, and thus also learn the Marxist art of leading
the masses to overcome difficulties so as to make our work successful whatever
is undertaken. Quite a few of the comrades of the various counties of the
Border Region are like or more or less like the comrades of Yan'an. We hope
that the model experience of these comrades can quickly spread to all counties,
districts, and townships.

The above is a summary of agricultural work in the Border Region in the past.
What follows are the tasks for the year 1943.

The major demand on agriculture is to increase the production of grain and
cotton (subsidiary undertakings will be discussed elsewhere). In the light
of the present need for grain and cotton and also in order to strive for
some grain and cotton for export it is still necessary for us to mobilize
the peasant masses to increase the production of hulled grain by 200,000
tan and to increase the production of cotton by 1,600,000 jin.
Is there any hope that this can be achieved? In the six years between 1937
and 1942, it is estimated that roughly 3 million mu of uncultivated
land was opened up and the production of grain increased by 500,000
tan. Well then, is it possible in the next few years once again on
the basis of opening up new land and other methods to increase the production
of grain by 400, 000 tan equivalent to 200, 000 tan of hulled grain?
In the years between 1939 and 1942 the land planted to cotton exceeded 90,000
mu and the raw cotton produced reached 1,100,000 jin. Well
then in the next few years is it possible to increase the land planted to
cotton by more than 100, 000 mu, and the cotton produced by more than,
60,000 jin?

We consider that all this is entirely possible.

If the peasants are able to increase the production of hulled grain by 20,000
tan then even if they hand over 200,000 tan of grain
tax as in 1941, they will still only have to give the government the amount
of increase. They themselves will be able to keep an amount equal to the
entire previous harvest. As for cotton, even if in future we levy some in
tax, the peasants will still be able to keep the largest part of the harvest,
and e problem of cotton cloth supply for the Border Region can be solved.

What are the policies which will effectively attain the above targets and
not remain just empty words? According to our past experience the following
eight policies must be implemented: (1) the reduction of rent and the reduction
of interest rates, (2) an increase in the opening up of uncultivated land,
(3) an increase in the planting of cotton; (4) not violating the agricultural
seasons; (5) better adjustment in the use of labour power: (6) an increase
in agricultural credit; (7) improvement in technical skill; (8) implementing
progressive taxation. In what follows I shall deal with each of these eight
points separately.

Our first agricultural policy is the reduction of rent and the reduction
of interest rates. Approximately one-half of the 1,400,000 people of the
Border Region have received a share of land. The remainder have not yet done
so, such as those in the Suide-Mizhi special military area, Longdong sub-region,
Fuxian county and many places in Sanbian sub-region and so forth. In these
regions we should carry out the reduction of rent and interest rates in
accordance with government decrees. This is an extremely important policy
for increasing the peasants' enthusiasm for production. After rent and interest
rates have been reduced, the peasants' burdens from the landlords are less
and the amount they can keep themselves is increased. Thus their enthusiasm
for production is greatly raised and they can produce more. The Northwest
Bureau [Xibei Ju] has already made concrete arrangements with the Border
Region Government over this policy and I will not speak more of it here.

Our second agricultural policy is to increase the amount of uncultivated
land opened up. Peasants in areas where there is a lot of uncultivated land
consider that deep ploughing is not as good as opening up new land. We should
therefore organize the peasants in the counties, districts, and townships
where such land exists to develop it as a means of increasing the production
of grain. Besides land freshly cultivated by the original households, we
must mainly rely on encouraging immigrants to come and develop unused land.
At present the conditions are right for getting immigrants. The various counties
should do a large amount of organizational work. According to circumstances
they should determine specific tasks for the new and old households separately.
Like Yan'an county they should make specific sowing and planting plans for
each household. Such plans should include both the opening up of new land
and the planting of cultivated land. For 1943 the planned increase in production
of grain for the entire Border Region has been fixed as 80,000
tan of hulled grain. This should be achieved through the people
and the troops opening new lands and improving agricultural methods.

Our third agricultural policy is to increase the planting of cotton. The
entire Border Region needs 3 million jin of cotton. If on average
each mu of land can yield a net total of 20
jin of raw cotton, we only need 150,000 mu of
land for cotton. If each mu can only yield a net total of 15
jin or even less, we shall need 200,000 mu. We
should prepare our cotton-land according to the latter estimates. But because
households planting cotton for the first time lack experience and faith,
even if we expand the area planted to cotton, the harvest will not live up
to expectations. Therefore it is not possible to attain the full target for
cotton production in a single year and we should increase cotton land by
56,000 mu in 1943. Together with the previous 94,000
mu, the total will be 150,000 mu making it possible
to increase production to 2,250,000 jin. There is no problem
over land and seed for planting this area of cotton, but there is a great
shortage of cotton-ginning equipment. If each ginning machine can gin 60
jin of cotton per day on average, we need 300 machines in order
to be able to gin 3 million jin of cotton in half a year. In
1943 there will be 2,250,000 jin of cotton to be ginned. For
this we need more than 200 machines. However, at present there are only a
hundred or so broken and old machines of which only fifty can be used every
day. If we attempt to gin 2 million jin of cotton on fifty
machines we will need two whole years. Therefore solving the problem of ginning
the cotton is a vitally necessary part of the policy of expanding the planting
of cotton. A further point is that up to the present the peasants of the
Border Region have still not learned to press cotton-seed oil. With 2 million
jin cotton we will also get 4 million of cotton seed. Each
100 jin can produce 12 jin of cotton-seed oil.
If we can solve the problem of pressing the oil, then the returns to the
peasants growing cotton will increase. Their enthusiasm for growing cotton
will also rise. In relation to the above needs, in 1943 the government should
do the following work to expand the planting of cotton: (1) Allocate
the planting of cotton to peasant households with suitable land so as to
make a total of 150,000 mu. Help the households planting cotton
with seed, manure and techniques. Those who have difficulties with draught
animals and implements should be given credit. (2) Construct cotton-ginning
machines and spare parts, and supply them to the peasants planting cotton.
Help them to repair old machines. At the same time organize them to buy
cotton-ginning machines from outside areas, helping with credit. In these
ways solve the problem of ginning the cotton. (3) Do research into methods
of pressing cotton-seed oil so that the peasants planting cotton will be
able to extract 480,000 jin of oil from the 4 million
jin of seed (each jin is worth 15 yuan,
a total value of 7,200,000 yuan). (4) Organize joint public and private
cotton cooperatives to undertake work such as cotton-ginning, making up into
bundles, selling, pressing oil and so forth. (5) Give rewards to peasants
good at growing cotton and introduce good methods of planting cotton and
ginning so as to increase the enthusiasm of the peasants growing cotton and
to raise the amount and quality of the cotton.

Our fourth agricultural poling is not to violate the agricultural seasons.
That is, in busy agricultural seasons we should allow the peasants to cease
all meetings and mobilization work which is not related to agriculture. Under
the present circumstances in the Shaan-Kan-Ning Border Region, in busy
agricultural seasons we should stop all meetings and mobilization of the
peasant masses outside of their agricultural work, so as to economize on
labour and animal power, and let it all be used for agricultural production.
Essential meetings and mobilization should be carried out during gaps in
the work. The previous mistake of holding too many meetings and too much
mobilization must be corrected.

Our fifth agricultural policy is better adjustment in the use of labour power.
To this end there are the following methods: incentives to immigrants, mutual-aid
labour, mobilization of women, mobilization of loafers, emphasizing support
for families with kin serving as soldiers in the War of Resistance, granting
leave of absence to take part in the War of Resistance, granting leave of
absence to take part in production, obtaining help from the troops, and so
forth. All of these assist in adjusting the use of labour power.

As regards incentives to immigrants, we must rely on cooperation between
the government and the people. The methods to be employed are as follows.
(1) the Party and government of the Suide-Mizhi special military area should
be responsible for organizing immigrants with a total of 5,000 labour powers
to go to the directly administered counties to open up unused land. However,
the basic principle must be voluntary participation, and all kinds of propaganda
and organizational work should be done. (2) The government should set aside
some grain for lending to immigrants who need help. It should also provide
credit for agricultural implements and fully carry out preferential treatment
by waiving grain tax for three years. (3) The old households should be encouraged
to help the new households by lending grain, giving up some cultivated land,
lending out cave houses, and so forth. In these loans the peasant doing the
lending should be permitted to charge some interest, with the rate freely
decided by the two parties. (4) Peasant households with a good basis should
be organized to take on the poorest immigrants as tenants [huozhong]. The
amount of rent should not be excessively low, so that the old households
will be happy to take them on. (5) Immigrants from outside should be encouraged
to come by old households who have contact with outside areas. Each county
in the frontier areas should have a special person responsible for their
reception. He should tell them about regions where there is land to be opened
up so that they can go there and settle down. For example recently 600 refugees
from Henan came to Longdong sub-region; they should be welcomed in this way.

Mutual-aid labour means that within one village or among several villages
the peasant households not only plough and plant their land independently
but in busy seasons also carry out mutual aid. For example, on a voluntary
basis five, six seven or eight households can become one group. Those that
have labour power can supply labour power. Those that have animal power can
supply animal power. Those that have a lot can supply a lot, those that have
little can supply a little. In rotation and collectively they can plough
hoe, and harvest for each household in the group, and they can settle accounts
in autumn. Work can be repaid by equal amounts of work. Those who supply
more can receive supplementary wages from those who supply less, according
to the wage rate of the village. This method is called mutual-aid labour.
The mutual-aid cooperatives and ploughing teams previously set up throughout
the Kiangsi Soviet were all organized according to this method. In villages
with a large population, several small teams can join together into a mutual-aid
cooperative. The teams have a team head and a deputy head. Cooperatives have
a cooperative head and a deputy cooperative head. Adjustment in the use of
labour can also take place between cooperatives. These, then are the labour
cooperatives of the peasant masses. They are extremely effective. Not only
do they mean that peasant households which lack labour power can plant, hoe
and harvest at the correct time, but also those households which do not lack
labour power can, through collective labour, get even more profit from their
planting, hoeing and harvesting. This method is entirely beneficial and has
no drawbacks. We should promote it widely. The system of exchange-labour
teams which some areas in the Border Region have already implemented is the
same method. Each county should strive to organize mutual-aid cooperatives
and greatly expand collective labour by the peasants. Apart from this, there
are contract-labour teams. These are also welcomed by the peasants of the
Border Region. The method is not one of mutual aid but a kind of hired-labour
organization for the busy agricultural seasons. Several people or even more
form a group and collectively work for the people who hire them. When they
have finished working for one household they go to another. It is another
method of adjusting the use of labour power. All areas should help those
who come from outside to do contract labour by helping them to find work
to do and so forth.

As for mobilizing women to take part in production, although many of the
women of the Border Region have bound feet, they are still a large labour
force second only to the men. They can take part in various kinds of
supplementary agricultural work such as planting vegetables, sowing seeds,
hoeing weeds, feeding livestock, taking food to the fields, drawing water,
and gathering the harvest, etc. There are also some who can take part in
basic labour. They have generally done these things in the past. In future
we should spread propaganda and encouragement widely, stimulating their
enthusiasm for labour so as to raise agricultural production. Comrades in
the leading organs of Party and mass organizations for women have as yet
not found the orientation for their work. They feel there is nothing that
they can do. In fact their first task should be that of looking into and
helping the women of the Border Region to play a wider role in productive
labour, so that all those women who can take part in labour go to the production
front and together with the men solve the great problem of how to increase
production. There are sill a large number of women in the Border Region who
have not untied their bound feet. This is a great hindrance to labour and
production. We should use the two methods propaganda and compulsion so that
within a few years we make them untie their bound feet. Henceforth no one
is permitted to bind the feet of young girls, no matter who they are.

As for mobilizing loafers to take part in productive labors, we have already
had some remarkable successes over the past few years. After the various
counties did this work, the number of loafers greatly decreased. However,
in those regions where they still exist we should use both persuasion and
compulsion to mobilize all of them to go to the production front during 1943.
The experience of Yan'an county in this work is good, Bolshevik experience.
Mobilizing loafers to take part in production not only increases the labour
force but also reduces the number of bad people doing bad things. It is supported
by the people and strengthens social peace.

When emphasizing support for families with members working in the War of
Resistance, we have in the past put support for families with civilian personnel
in first place and support for families with kin serving as soldiers in the
War of Resistance second. This is entirely wrong. Now we should reverse this
and put support for families with kin serving as soldiers in the War of
Resistance first. The system of substitute cultivation [daigengzhi] should
first be applied conscientiously for those family dependents of soldiers
in the army resisting Japan who lack labour power (making no distinction
between our own army and friendly armies). Secondly it should be applied
to those dependants of workers in the Party and government who truly lack
labour power. In those areas where labour cooperatives [exchange-labour teams]
have been successfully organized, the solution of this problem can be entrusted
to the cooperative.

Granting leave of absence to take part in production means that in the busy
agricultural seasons Party and government officials in the Border Region
whose families have difficulties are each year permitted to return home on
two occasions, each time for several days, so that they can take part in
family based agricultural production. The primary and secondary school of
the Border Region should also stop classes in the busy agricultural seasons,
letting the students and local teachers return home to help production. This
is another method of adjusting the use of labour.

The armed forces assisting in production means that each busy agricultural
season the troops of the Border Region spend several days helping the peasants
in the areas around where they are stationed with the ploughing, hoeing and
harvesting. Moreover they do not receive any payment (they eat their own
food). On the one hand this can help adjust the use of labour power, and
on the other hand it can strengthen the relationship between the army and
the people. The political work departments of the army should plan this work.

If all the above seven ways of adjusting the use of labour power are well
implemented, they will be of great help to agricultural production in the
Border Region. Among them the most important is the mutual-aid cooperative,
which should be realized generally throughout the whole Border Region.

Our sixth agricultural policy is to increase agricultural credit. In 1942
the government issued credit for draught animals, cotton-planting, water
conservancy work and so forth. This was greatly appreciated by the peasants
and helped some of them to overcome their difficulties. One-third of the
peasants of the Border Region lack draught animals and agricultural implements.
This is an extremely: important problem. If we want agriculture to develop,
helping this huge number of peasant masses to solve their difficulties is
a very important policy. One way of doing this is to increase agricultural
credit. In 1942 under the sponsorship of the Border Region Bank, 1,580,000
yuan of credit for draught animals and agricultural implements
was issued to 8,025 peasant households in the seven counties, Yan'an, Ganquan,
Fuxian, Ansai, Zichang, Gulin and Zhidan. Together with capital of more than
1,030,000 yuan amassed by the peasants themselves, this bought
2,672 draught animals, and 4,980 pieces of agricultural equipment. Over 100,000
mu of new land was opened up and grain production increased
by an estimated 26,000 odd tan. In addition, the three counties
Yanchang, Yanchuan and Gulin issued 1,530 yuan of credit for
planting cotton and for cotton-seedlings. The area planted to cotton grew
by over 51,000 'a and could produce an estimated increase of 870,000 Jin
of cotton. In view of the achievements through agricultural credit in 1942,
a further 17 million yuan should be lent in 1943 in addition
to re-lending the 3,110,000 yuan. Of this, 14 million
yuan should be credit for agricultural implements and draught
animals and 3 million yuan should be for planting cotton. Based
on the experience in issuing credit in 1942, methods for credit in 1943 Should
pay attention to the following points:

(1) Credit should be given in those regions which have a lot of unused land
to new and old immigrants and old households of poor peasants who have
labour-power but lack implements, draught animals and grain, and to peasant
households which have planted a lot of land but have no money with which
to hire labour for hoeing.

(2) After trials by the Commodities Bureau [Wuzi Ju]. we should introduce
loans in kind, buying draught animals and suitable implants from outside
or assisting peasant households themselves to purchase them. Only in this
way can we truly increase the draught animals and agricultural implements
in the Border Region. Otherwise the peasants can only buy implements and
animals from the rich peasants and landlords of the Border Region with their
Border Region currency. This merely has the function of adjusting the ownership
of animals and tools within the Border Region and does not increase the total
stock of animals and implements.

(3) Agricultural credit for next year has already been increased. We should
also alter the policy used this year of concentrating issue of credit in
the counties around Yan'an. We should issue a suitable amount to the Sui-Mi,
Longdong, Sanbian, and Guanzhong sub-regions. But this should not
be done on an egalitarian basis. Instead it should be issued in a planned
way to those counties, districts and peasant households where there is a
lot of unused land, where the need for funds is greatest, and where there
can be profitable production.

(4) The organization for issuing credit must be improved. That is to
say, credit must be issued through district and township governments,
and cooperatives which have the trust of the masses. Therefore the cadres
of the districts and townships must be made to recognize the great significance
of agricultural credit in the development of agriculture. They must not look
upon it as a disaster-relief system. They may not adopt a policy of egalitarian
distribution nor an irresponsible attitude.

(5) The formalities for issuing credit must be simple. Use the local methods
for giving credit with which the peasants are already familiar. There is
no need for formalities such as the 'letter of request for credit', etc.

(6) Of the total agricultural credit of 20,110,000 yuan set
aside 8 million yuan specially as credit for cotton and wheat
seedlings, The households which borrow this can repay in kind after the cotton
and wheat harvest. Although these funds are specified as funds for cotton
and wheat seedlings, the peasants should be able to use them freely. Such
credit is of mutual benefit to public and private interests. The
government gets repayment in kind and the peasants can reduce exploitation
through paying high interest rates on loans.

(7) The issue of credit should not violate the agricultural seasons. The
Finance Department [Caiting] and the Border- Region Bank should make
rapid plans so as to issue half of the entire total of credit before
the end of the lunar year this year, that is about 10 million
yuan.

Our seventh agricultural policy is to improve agricultural techniques. Improving
techniques means carrying out research into things that are feasible, starting
from the existing agricultural techniques and the peasants' production skills
in the Border Region. The aim is to help the peasants improve the mayor processes
in the production of grain and cotton and to increase production. Some
improvements are very possible. We have already had quite a lot of experience.
It is wrong to lack faith and enthusiasm on this point. However, there is
no basis for boasting of the possibility of great improvement, or for considering
that we can realize modernized, large-scale agricultural techniques in the
Border Region.

How should we implement this policy? We consider that the following things
should be done:

(1) We should build effective water conservancy projects. Jingbian provides
an example. In Yangquiaopan, Changcheng district, Jingbian county there are
25,000 mu of land that can be irrigated. They have already
irrigated 5,000 mu. In 1943 they want to carry out further
construction. According to the Jingbian comrades, 1 mu of dry
land only yields 1 tou of hulled grain. However 1
mu of irrigated land can be planted three times per year. The
first planting is spring wheat which yields 8 tou, equal to
4 tou of hulled grain. The second planting is black beans,
yielding 4 tou equal to 2 tou of hulled grain.
The final planting is turnips, yielding 2,000 jin. Each
is worth 0.3 yuan and the total value is 600 yuan.
On the basis of each tou of hulled grain being worthy of
150 yuan, this is the equivalent of 4 tou of
hulled grain. These three things give a total equivalent of 1 tan
of hulled grain. This is ten times the yield of dry land Therefore
the peasants of Jingbian often proudly say, 'Plant wheat first and then black
beans. The black bean forest contains turnips too.' The major problems in
constructing irrigated land are those of the distribution of land rights,
of mobilizing manpower, of organizational leadership, and of building ditches
and dykes. If one of these four is not right then nothing can be achieved.
In 1942 the comrades of Jingbian led the peasants to construct six dykes
in Tuwan and Yangquiaopan. etc. After the dykes they built ditches, channeling
in the water to irrigate the land. First of all they solved the question
of land rights by dividing the new irrigated land between landlords and peasants
at ratios of 70 per cent to 30 per cent, 60 per cent to 40 per cent, or half
and half. This aroused the enthusiasm of the peasant masses. According to
the comrades from Jingbian: 'So long as the problem of land rights is solved,
it is easy to call on the peasants. For example, we constructed ten irrigated
areas. Over a hundred new households came in addition to the existing 200
peasant households and of these more than thirty came from other districts.'
They also say: 'Government funds are very important in the construction of
irrigated land. However we must mainly rely on the organization of manpower
and on unutilized capital. In Jingbian we built 5,000 mu of
irrigated land in 1942. Altogether we used 28,560 labour days, which is an
average of 5.7 per mu. The total funds were 858,000
yuan. Of this 210,000 yuan came from public funds
and 648,000 yuan from unutilized capital absorbed. Of course
a large proportion of these resources was made up by the ordinary folk giving
their labour instead of cash.'

As regards organization and leadership, the Jingbian comrades Say:

'We adopted the following two methods of leadership when building irrigated
Land. First we organized water conservancy committees of three to five men
from good peasants in the locality. These were responsible for balancing
equitably the use of labour, tools, and so forth. However, it was often difficult
for them to solve problems of property rights and water-use rights, hindering
the implementation of water-conservation work. Therefore it was necessary
to have a second method whereby the government delegated cadres to assist
in leadership and to solve difficult disputes among the masses. Cadres from
the Water Conservancy Bureau [shuili Ju] and a further three
delegated by the county government took partial control of construction at
the ten sites.'

The comrades of Jingbian have also decided that in 1943 they will continue
by constructing 4,000 mu of irrigated land in Yangquiaopan.
However since there were originally only sixty households there and in 1942
only about forty new households came in, the total of a hundred or sixty
households still leaves a problem of labour power. They have therefore decided
to appeal for a hundred households to come in 1943. At present they have
already begun to dig out cave houses and to prepare dwellings. 'Settling
a hundred immigrant households is a heavy task. Since most of them came from
Hengshan and many will be refugees, they will need a lot of credit if we
are to succeed. If the immigrants arrive, together with the labour power
already in the area there will be no difficulty in constructing, 4,000
mu in 1943.' As well as this the comrades of Jingbian have
also built a kind of ' water-logged land' [Shuimandi]. Water-logged
lands are 'large pieces of flat land surrounded on three sides by high mountains
and on the fourth side by a deep gully [tian qou]. Some
are 2,000 to 3,000 mu and some are 200 to 300
mu. The soil of such land is very good but on top of it is
piled sand and gravel which obstructs the seedlings and spoils the quality
of the soil'. The method of constructing water-logged land is 'to build a
solid dyke along the side of the gully on top of which sand willows
[shaliu] and pea-trees [ningtiozi] (in
winter this supplies food for the sheep) are planted. This dyke prevents
the water that runs off the mountains during the course of the year from
flowing away through the gully. It all lies on the land. The mud is very
thick. It is extremely fertile and has a high water-content. It is very good
for planting crops. Furthermore, each year the area expands and the mountain
gullies become flat land. Thus the productive area is increased'. The yield
of this water-logged land is more than double that of dry land. 'Five
mu of dry land yields 1 tan of grain but 5
mu of water-logged land can yield 2 or 3 tan. The comrades
of Jingbian only discovered how to build this water-logged land during the
mobilization for the spring ploughing in 1942. Therefore it has as
yet only been tried out in two places totaling 1,000 mu. They
are preparing to construct such lands in a good many places in 1943 and the
total area will be over 13,000 mu. They say 'In the entire
county from 50,000 to 60,000 mu of water-logged land can be
built'. I have given the example of Jingbian in detail to prove that the
case for building water conservancy works is far from hopeless. Conditions
for doing so exist in several places. In particular the conscientious and
practical spirit of the comrades of Jingbian provides an effective model
for the various counties. Although the water-conservancy conditions in other
counties cannot be the same as those in Jingbian, by relying on the leadership
of the Party and government and the efforts of the people some water conservancy
can be started in those places where conditions are really right. In 1943
the government should set aside 2 million yuan as funds
for carrying aft water conservancy works in the Yangquiaopan area of Jingbian,
the Huluhe area of Fuxian and so forth.

(2) We should popularize the use of superior-quality seeds. If we have good
seeds we can get a bigger harvest even without increasing labour and manure.
For example the Guanghua agricultural station has already successfully tried
out the 'Wolf's tail' seed. It has a high yield, is resistant to insects
and birds, and can be planted anywhere. There? sweet-potato yield is also
higher than average. We should encourage the peasants to plant them. First
each county should select one or two districts and order some peasants to
carry out tests. If they find the soil and climate suitable, then such seeds
can be popularized so as to increase production.

(3) We should encourage the opening up of new land and the turning over of
the earth during autumn, as this can reduce insect pests and promote the
aeration of the soil. It can also conserve the water content and increase
the harvest of the following year.

(4) After popularizing the organization of mutual-aid cooperatives we should
encourage the peasants to increase the number of times they hoe weeds. The
purpose of hoeing weeds is not only to get rid of weeds and to help the seedling,
but also to conserve water and resist drought. If we increase the number
of times we undertake hoeing, we can increase the amount of harvest even
if we do not use much manure.

(5) In the summer and winter of 1943 the five sub-regions should separately
hold exhibitions organized by the Reconstruction Department
[Jianting] and five special offices [zhuanshu]. In
the light of the experience of the two previous agricultural exhibitions
in the Border Region, we should improve the layout, introduce and promote
the achievements of model-peasants, and popularize an agricultural production
movement in the labour style and skills of Wu Manyou. In 1943 the agricultural
exhibition of the sub-regions should include the achievements of the troops,
the official organizations and schools in agricultural production. This will
encourage their agricultural production and will also promote unity between
the troops and the people.

(6) In 1943 the Liberian Daily and Border Region Masses
Dally should widely promote the Wu Manyou production movement so
that many more Wu Manyous will be created within the five sub-regions.

(7) The primary and secondary schools of the Border Region should
run general agricultural knowledge classes and edit textbooks for winter-study
containing practical information on Border Region agriculture with the aim
of improving agriculture and increasing production.

(8) the Reconstruction Department should call a meeting of experts to
get down to research on the 'willow-root' water which flows from
the hilltops, so as to deal with it in a scientific manner and to
prevent people from contracting 'limping sickness' after drinking it. If
this problem can be salved then much fertile land in the neighborhood
of the hills can be put under the plough and become good arable land.

Our eighth agricultural policy is to implement progressive agricultural taxation.

In the past agricultural taxation was in the form of national salvation grain
tax. Although it was levied on progressive principles, the amount levied
each year was not standard. The amount levied per family varied from year
to year. In 1941 there were cases of taxes being apportioned out [tanpai].
Although an assessment method [pinquizhi] was instituted in 1942
as being more equitable, there were still inequalities . The most important
failing was that the amount of tax was not fixed. This dampened the enthusiasm
of the peasants for production. We propose that in 1943 the government should
examine and register the land held by the people, and thereby construct a
simple progressive agricultural tax. The amount of tax should be decided
according to the amount of land, its quality, and so forth. In this way the
peasant will be able to calculate the amount of tax themselves according
to the amount and quality of the land they farm. Once the peasants can do
this, they can work out the ratio between income and expenditure for the
family for the entire year. They can then set-to and produce with greater
enthusiasm for production. This will guarantee an increase in the production
of grain. Moreover, inequalities will not arise when the government levies
the tax. After carrying out the preparatory work in 1943, we can implement
progressive taxation in 1944. Counties where preparation is completed early,
can carry it out on a trial basis in 1943.

Reduction of rent and of interest rates, an increase in opening up new lands,
popularizing the planting of cotton, not violating agricultural seasons,
better adjustment in the use of labour power, an increase in agricultural
credit, improvements of agricultural techniques, and preparation for implementing
a progressive tax — these eight items are the effective agricultural
policies which we can and meat carry out in 1943. With the exception of the
progressive tax for which we can make preparations and which can be tried
out in a few counties, the other seven items should be implemented immediately.
Many of them should commence during the winter of 1942. Otherwise the time
will be lost and they will become empty words.

The above is a summary of our work as regards agriculture in the private
sector and our strategy for 1943. What follows is a discussion of closely
related agricultural subsidiary undertakings such as animal husbandry and
handicrafts.

Previous section       
               Next
  section


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On the Development of Animal Husbandry








ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR (3)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


  3. ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY


The three major subsidiary undertakings of the peasants of the Boarder Region
are animal husbandry, salt transport. and textiles. It is well known that
the breeding of cows and donkeys plays a decisive role in agriculture and
salt transport. The breeding of sheep is closely related to the supply of
bedding and clothing. Last year the peasants of the Border Region harvested
more than 1 million jin of wool. Including sheep exported the
estimated value was more than 20 million yuan which is proof
of the importance of sheep. The greatest enemies of livestock are the many
diseases and the lack of fodder. If we do not solve these two problems, there
can be no development. In the first place the destructive power of disease
is very great. For example in the Spring of 1941, more than 20,000 Sheep
died in an epidemic in Jingbian. In 1942 more than 16,000 died at the same
cause in Dingbian. In the summer of 1941, more than 500 cows died of cattle
plague in Yan'an. In the summer and autumn of 1942, 574 cows died in Zhidan.
This shows how disease is the great enemy of the livestock of the Border
Region. Secondly. the lack of fodder also greatly hinders the raising of
livestock. In the spring of 1941 when 20,000 sheep died in Jingbian, most
of the 30,000 lambs also died. Besides the epidemic, an important factor
was the lack of fodder. At the same time over 2,000 cows and horses died
of hunger there. Another keenly-felt difficulty in recent years is the lack
of fodder supplies on salt-transport routes, which greatly hinders the transport
of salt.

Our task is to protect livestock and increase breeding. In order to attain
these goals we should implement the following policies.

Prevention of disease.  The important thing here is for the county
and district governments to call meetings of local veterinarians and old
experienced peasants to do research into simple methods of preventing and
curing animal diseases, and to encourage the use of these methods among peasant
families with livestock. This is a very simple thing to effect. Secondly,
the Reconstruction Department should order its agricultural station to increase
veterinary equipment, to do research into animal diseases in the Border Region,
to produce large amounts of serum and vaccine, arid to propagate and implement
effective methods of prevention and cure.

Popularize the planting of grass for animal pasture.   Most of
the animals of the Border Region are put out to pasture. Where the pasture
is not good, disease easily arises. Therefore we should widely promote the
planting of alfalfa [musu], particularly on and near the salt-transport
routes. This will benefit both the transport of salt and the development
of animal husbandry. In 1942 the government originally planned to plant 30,000
mu of alfalfa, but ultimately only 23,000 mu
were planted because there were not enough seeds. In 1943 the county governments
should transport more seeds from Guanzhong and issue them to the peasants
in areas where planting is planned. They should also encourage the peasants
to buy some themselves. In addition they should mobilize the peasants to
cut large quantities of grass in the autumn and to store it up for winter
use. This will not only avoid illness induced by animals eating cold grass
but also stop the peasants from selling animals because of lack of winter
fodder. We should look to the experience of Jingbian in this respect. Warned
by the great loss of livestock in the spring of 1941, the comrades in Jingbian
have done much work in tine past two years. They have appealed to the peasants
to plant alfalfa, create fields for pasture, cut autumn grass, plant willow
trees, and dig up grass roots as means of providing fodder. First of all
their called upon the peasants to plant over 2,000
mu of alfalfa in 1942. Most of the seed was issued by the
government, and the peasants were very enthusiastic. They are once again
preparing to issue some credit for seeds to the peasants in 1943, and they
are specially calling upon the peasants themselves to prepare seeds. As a
way of encouraging them to plant large amounts of alfalfa, they are giving
rewards to those who do very well. Secondly, they prepared more than 4,000
mu of pasture fields in 1942. The grass on this pasture land
is mainly reed grass [luwei]. This flourishes in the ponds
and large marshes in the desert land bordering an Mongolia. Each mu
yields more than 500 jin. The pasture fields that existed
before the revolution were later destroyed and the cows and sheep wandered
around at will. Now they are mobilizing the masses to restore them. It does
not take a lot of labour, and cutting the grasses after autumn prepares for
winter use. Thirdly, in the mountainous areas of Jingbian there is a lot
of reed grass, white grass [baicao]. bing grass [bingcao], desert
bushes, and so forth. These are of great help for the livestock, if they
are harvested in autumn. In 1941 the masses were organized to gather 5 million
jin. In 1942 they again mobilized each man to cut 100
jin. As yet they have not worked out the latter total. Fourthly,
they encouraged the masses to plant willow-trees, sand-willows, and pea-trees.
The leaves and twigs can be fed to camels and sheep which is another way
of providing fodder. At the same time this supplies fuel which pleases the
masses The duty of the government is to supply seeds and encourage planting.
Fifthly, in Jingbian the animals eat both the leaves and the roots of the
white grass and bing grass. During spring ploughing the strongest men in
Jingbian plough the land in the morning, dig-up roots in the afternoons,
and feed the livestock in the evening. The woman and children spend the whole
day digging-up roots. Each person can clean-up more than 100
jin, and this plays an important part in this supply of fodder.
However, the government must make good arrangements since,
as there are many people digging, there are arguments over land rights. The
landless refugees make it even more difficult. According to the Jingbian
comrades:

  'With these methods we solved many problems for the people. Of course the
  grass grew well in 1942 because there was a good rainfall. However, animal
  husbandry also developed because of the above five methods for providing
  fodder. In 1942 over 60,000 lambs survived throughout the county and there
  were very few deaths. With the exception of a few areas, there was a great
  reduction in the loss through disease of fully-grown sheep, and cows, donkeys,
  horses and so forth. Excluding sheep, the livestock of Jingbian requires
  30 million jin of fodder per year. We can get at least 10 million
  jin with the above five methods.


Fodder is a life-and-death question for livestock. We hope that the comrades
in the various counties will make a plan for fodder in 1943.

Ban the slaughter and export of female animals.   The slaughter
of all cattle is forbidden and old cattle can only be killed after inspection.

Improve animal breeds.  We should investigate experience in
cross-breeding, select good breeds of donkeys and sheep, and popularize them
among the people. This should be done first of all in Ganquan and Yan'an
and then spread to other counties. Besides this the government should purchase
tanyang sheep from Yanchi. These should be issued for breeding
to peasant families with many sheep. Each tanyang ram can be
mated with twenty ewes. The wool of this sheep is extremely fine and
soft, and each sheep yields 2 jin per year.

If we can conscientiously implement the above methods. there can be even
greater expansion of livestock in the Border Region. I hope the Reconstruction
Department and the comrades in the various counties will pay attention to
this.

Previous section       
               Next
  section


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On the Development of Handicrafts








ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR (4)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


  4. ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF HANDICRAFTS


Handicrafts in the Border Region exist in two forms. The majority are subsidiary
family undertakings and a proportion are independent handicrafts. The largest
is the spinning and weaving undertaken by women. However. for many years
past a large proportion of local yarn and local cloth has been displaced
by foreign yarn and foreign cloth. Only recently. because of our encouragement,
has there been some resurgence. Even so the peasants of the Border Region
still want to take their surplus products, skins , and salt-transport trade
to outside regions in exchange for large amounts of foreign yarn and foreign
cloth. Their own spinning and weaving industry is still far from sufficient
to supply their own needs. I shall therefore take textiles as the key popular
handicraft for discussion here. In addition I shall deal with silk and
oil-pressing, ignoring others for the moment. 

  
  SPINNING AND WEAVING


The people, the troops, and official personnel need 250,000 bolts of coarse
cloth per year (each bolt is 2 feet 4 inches wide and 100 feet long [Chinese
measurement].) Of this, the amount required by the troops and official personnel
is roughly 50,000 bolts, and that by the people 200,000 bolts. What is the
present supply? The seven publicly-run textile mills produce approximately
11,000 bolts per year. The seven large and small textile cooperatives run
by the people produce roughly 18,000 bolts per year. There are no statistics
for the amount of local cloth produced by the women at home, but it is estimated
to be around 30,000 bolts per year. Public and private annual production
totals 100,000 bolts, 150,000 bolts less than the amount needed. That is
easy to say, we can already supply 40 per cent of our needs, which is a great
achievement. But we are still 60 per cent short, and meeting this is our
future task. This task is very great. and we shall need several years to
complete it. But it can be done if we rely on, improve and expand the existing
textile enterprises run by the government and by the people. If we have the
raw cotton, we can in a planned way encourage the women to spin yarn and
to weave cloth made half of local yarn and half of foreign yarn. Gradually
we can reduce the import of foreign yarn, until eventually we reach the position
where we use only our own yarn to weave cloth. In this way we can solve the
problem.

As regards weaving, the responsibility rests first with the publicly-run
mills. In 1942 publicly-run textile mills were capable of producing 11,000
bolts of cloth. This could supply almost half of the needs of the troops
and official personnel. In a few more years we can be completely self-sufficient.
Second, we must encourage women to weave cloth as a popular industry. In
the Suide sub-region the women can already produce more than 30, 000 bolts
per year. However, the widths and lengths are not uniform. The people do
not like to buy it. They still prefer imported cloth. If improvements can
be made, there are good prospects for increasing the production of cloth.
Third, the people's cooperatives can already produce 18,000 bolts per year.
This can be further developed. We must rely on the combination of these three
forms to provide the cloth required by the Border Region. However in the
first place the greatest problem is the supply of yarn. At 12
jin of yarn per bolt, we need 3 million jin to
weave 250,000 bolts of coarse cloth entirely from local yarn. If we use a
mixture of half local yarn and half foreign yarn, we will need 1,500,000
jin of local yarn and 150,000 bundles of foreign yarn. At present
the cloth woven by publicly-run mills and the people's cooperatives is made
from this mixture of half local and half foreign yarn. However, there is
still not enough local yarn. We must greatly expand the amount of spinning
done by the people, and improve the quality of the yarn. Therefore it is
extremely important for the Border Region to gradually expand handicraft
spinning and weaving among the people, to increase the quantity, and too
improve the quality.

How should we gradually solve these problems? In the light of past experience,
we propose the following methods.

(1) First we should reorganize and expand spinning and weaving among the
people in the counties of the Suide special military area. The way to do
this is, under the direction of the special office of the military area,
to unite the efforts of the commodities Bureau and the Daguang Yarn Factory
of 359 Brigade, issuing raw cotton to women and ordering them to produce
more local yarn to supply the yarn needs of the publicly-run cloth factories.
This method was effectively implemented in 1942. It should be continued and
expanded in 1943. Apart from supplying yarn to the publicly-run cloth factories,
the people of the special military area may weave cloth themselves. The
Commodities Bureau can determine measurements and quality, and guarantee
a market. That is, the cloth can be purchased by the Commodities Bureau either
for its own use or for selling among the people. Next, the government should
invest 1 million yuan in order to increase the quantity of
local yarn. Based on the experience of the Southern District Cooperative
of Yan'an county which organized spinning by women in 800 households, lending
funds to 3,000 households in Yan'an and Ansai will increase the number of
spinning-machines in the two counties by 3,000 in 1943. Organizing spinning
by women in 1,000 households in Qingyang and Quzi counties will increase
the number of spinning-machines by 1,000. These credit funds can be handled
by the Commodities Bureau, which can issue raw cotton and spinning-machines.
It can purchase the local yarn produced to supply the needs of the publicly-run
factories. Next, in order to increase cloth production the government should
invest a further 1 million yuan either as loans or as share
capital in the existing cloth-weaving cooperatives run by the people as a
means of expanding their undertakings.

Here we should consider the plan for Yan'an county. In their Plan for
Production and Construction in 1943, the comrades in Yan'an say:

In 1943 we shall increase the number of women able to spin and weave by 40,000.
Estimating that they will be able to spin 18 jin of yarn each
in a year (11/2 jin per month ), this gives a total of 72,000
jin. In addition, there were already 1,000 women able to spin
in 1942. Each year one of these can spin 20 jin, giving a total
of 20,000 jin. The two groups can together spin 92,000
jin, which can be woven into 8,363.6 bolts of cloth. However,
this is still 4,886.4 bolts short of our needs. He plan to solve this problem
within two or three years, and to achieve complete self-sufficiency. The
population of this county is 64,000 (excluding the city of Yan'an). Of these,
42,000 are adults. Each adult needs one-quarter of a bolt of coarse cloth
per year (a suit of plain clothes requires 11 feet of cloth and half a suit
of padded clothes requires 14 feet of cloth, a total of 25 feet; each bolt
of coarse cloth is 100 feet long). Their total requirement is therefore 10,500
bolts. The 22,000 young people each need half the quantity of cloth required
by an adult. A bolt of cloth is enough for eight and their total requirement
is 2,750 bolts. The annual requirement for the whole county is thus 13,250
bolts.

The 92,000 jin of yarn spun in 1943 will be woven into 8,366.6
bolts of coarse cloth. This requires 56 looms (each loom can weave 150 bolts
of coarse cloth per year ) . In 1942 there were twelve looms in the villages
and factories of this county. Thus we must expand the number in the village
by forty-four during 1943 using the cooperative structure. There are three
methods for doing this. The first is investment (i) in incentive awards to
encourage women to spin, 50,000 yuan (ii) in producing 5,000
jin of raw cotton at 100 yuan per
jin, 500,000 yuan, and (iii) in expenses for
spinning and weaving-equipment, 1,000 spinning-wheels at 100
yuan each, 100,000 yuan, and 44 looms at 1,000
yuan each, 44,000 yuan. The total required for
the above items is 694,000 yuan. Second, looms in the villages
should be set up by the peasants organizing themselves into partnerships.
The government can help them overcome their difficulties by training skilled
workers, or by investing capital for looms and so forth. Third, for every
2 jin of raw cotton issued, 1 jin of yarn should
be collected. The cotton cloth woven in the villages may be used by the peasants
themselves. The Gaodan Yarn Spinning Factory should play the leading role
in encouraging women to spin, and in training workers.

This plan by the comrades in Yan'an is really worth looking at. If the people
of Yan'an, who lack experience of spinning and weaving, are able with the
encouragement of the Party and government to become fully self-sufficient
in yarn and cloth within two or three years, other counties without experience
should also be able to solve the problem within a similar or slightly longer
period. We hope that the comrades in the various counties will all make such
a plan. As for the various counties where the peasants have experience, such
as the special military area, the problem should be solved even more easily.
According to the calculations of the comrades in Yan'an, adults make up
two-thirds of the population and children one-third. One bolt of cloth is
enough for four Adults or eight children. Therefore, the yearly cloth requirement
for the 1,400,000 population of the Border Region is not 200,000 bolts but
337,500. According to the opinions of the comrades in Yan'an a large quantity
like this can be provided within two or three years. In sum, by relying on
the masses setting-to and on the leadership of the Party and the government
any difficulty can be overcome.

(2) The Reconstruction Department should do research into the people's
experiences in spinning in order to improve the quality of local yarn so
as to prepare to produce Border Region cloth entirely from local yarn, gradually
reducing and ultimately stopping the import of foreign yarn. If the quality
of yarn cannot be improved then we cannot suspend dealings in foreign yarn.

(3) Improve the woolen goods made by the publicly-run factories. Using woolen
goods in place of some of the cotton clothing and bedding used by the army
is a way of reducing the consumption of cotton cloth.

(4) In 1943 official personnel should set a personal example and wear local
cloth without exception. At the same time they should encourage the people
to use more local cloth and less foreign cloth. According to the situation
in the development of local cloth, the Commodities Bureau can gradually limit
the import of foreign cloth.

The above methods will help us gradually to solve the great problem of
self-sufficiency in cotton cloth. Although it can only be done gradually,
it is nevertheless entirely possible. We must resolutely implement all methods
for doing so.

  
  COTTON - SEED OIL


In 1942 the peasants of the counties planting cotton harvested around 3 million
jin of cotton seeds capable of giving 360,000
jin of oil, and, with the expansion in cotton-planting, from
5 to 6 million Jin of seed can be obtained next year which
can further increase the quantity of oil. We should prevent all this being
wasted. Cotton-seed oil is edible but the peasants of the Border Region are
still not accustomed to it. If the government does not promote it, they will
not extract the oil. Therefore the government of the Border Region should
invest 300,000 yuan and, through the governments of the counties
where cotton is planted. encourage the peasants to experiment with pressing
cotton-seed oil. After the experiments succeed, it can be widely promoted.
The oil can be bought by the government. This will not only provide edible
oil but also at present oil prices of 30 yuan per
jin give the peasants an income of 10,800,000
yuan from 360,000 jin of oil.

  
  SILK


In the counties of Suide, Qingjian, Anding, Yanchuan, Gulin and so forth
many peasants rear silkworms. It is a relatively large subsidiary undertaking.
For example, in Anding alone there were 3,585 peasant households rearing
silkworms during 1942. They harvested 23.662 jin of silkworm
cocoons, at a value of 600,000 yuan.

Our sewing and repair industry needs silk thread and our woolen-blanket industry
needs silk edging. We. can also use silk thread for the woof when weaving
cotton cloth as a means of reducing the import of foreign yearn. Therefore,
we should develop the silk production of the Border Region. The way to do
this is for the government to issue 300,000 yuan in credit
to the peasant families to expand the rearing of silkworms. Credit should
be given especially to those peasant households which have a good record
in rearing silkworms. Moreover, the commodities Bureau should buy the peasants'
silk through the local cooperatives and order woven-silk articles from the
peasants in order to promote the expansion of the silk industry.

The total investment in the above three undertakings, spinning and weaving,
oil-pressing, and silk, is 2,600,000 yuan (yarn spinning 1
million, cloth-weaving 1 million, oil-pressing 300,000 and silk 300,000).
Although these funds are not great, they can stimulate the people to progress
a little in solving the urgent needs of the moment. In 1943 when we have
even more experience, we should consider increasing the amount of capital.
Spinning and weaving are particularly important. Unless the people set-to
and the public sector helps, the problem cannot be solved as a whole.

Here I have only taken up spinning and weaving, oil-pressing, and silk. Other
items have not been mentioned. The counties can according to actual
circumstances, do research into handicrafts which are related to the people's
economy and which need stimulus from the Party and the government, and they
can make their own plans.

Previous section       
               Next
  section


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Development of Cooperatives








ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR (5)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


  
  5. ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF COOPERATIVES


There were already cooperatives in the Border Region during the civil-war
period. Since the War of Resistance began, the Border Region government has
continued to promote them, and after five-and-a-half years of hard effort
they have gradually expanded.

In the four years from 1937 to 1941 the number of consumer cooperatives increased
from 130 to 155 and the number of cooperative members from 57,847 to 140,218.
The share capital grew from 55,525 yuan to 693,071
yuan. The value of sales increased from 261,189
yuan to more than 6,008,000 yuan. Profits rose
from 4,800 yuan to over 1,020,000 yuan and the
public accumulation fund [gongjijin] increased from 3,500
yuan to over 173,000 yuan.

If we compare the October 1942 Statistics for the nineteen county capitals
with those of 1941, the number of cooperative members has increased from
97,297 to 115,899. The share capital has risen abruptly from over 712,900
yuan to more than 6 million yuan and the profit
has also grown from 858,000 yuan to more than 3,398,000
yuan.

The largest amount of share capital owned by individual members of
consumer cooperatives is around 10,000 yuan and the
lowest is around 4 or 5 yuan,

The distribution of consumer cooperatives at the end of 1941 was as follows:
Yan'an, twenty-eight; Ansai, twelve; Yanchang, eight; Gulin, eight; Dingbian,
eight; Qingyang, Huachi, Quzi and Yanchuan, seven each; Anding, Fuxian and
Wuqi, six each; Ganquan, Jingbian and Heshui, five each; Yan'an city and
Mizhi, four each; and Suide, two. There are still no statistics for the other
counties.

Turning to producer cooperatives, ten were established In 1939 with the support
of the government and the assistance of the northwest office of the Chinese
Industrial cooperative [Gonghe]. Thereafter some consumer cooperatives
with large amounts of capital also ran producer cooperatives. By October
1942 the number of producer cooperatives had increased from ten to fifty.
The number of employees engaged in production had increased from 199 to 563.
Share capital had grown from 11,130 yuan to 2,491,600
yuan and the total value of monthly production from 60,000
yuan to over 2,300,000 yuan.

According to this year's statistics the distribution of producer cooperatives
is as follows: Suide, sixteen; Yan'an, seven; Gulin, five; Yanchang, five;
Yanchuan, five; Ganquan, three; Ansai, three; Jingbian, two; Qingyang, one;
Jiaxian, one; Mizhi, one; Anding, one.

Among the fifty producer cooperatives there are twenty-seven large and small
textile cooperatives, thirteen in Suide, four in Yan'an, two in Gulin, and
one each in Ganquan, Fuxian, Yanchang, Yanchuan, Ansai, Anding, Jiaxian and
Mizhi. Altogether they employ 497 people and their share capital is 1,700,000
yuan. Six have twenty-five or more employees, the rest ranging
from three to over ten. If these twenty-seven cooperatives were working at
full capacity, they could produce 30,000 bolts of cloth annually. At the
moment they are only producing around 22,000 bolts, 6,000 woven blankets,
4,152 dozen woolen towels, and 8,400 dozen pairs of woven socks.

There are five dyeing cooperatives, two in Yanchuan, two in Suide and one
in Yanchang. They employ a total of thirteen people, their share capital
is 128,000 yuan and each year they can dye over 7,000 bolts
of cloth. There are five producer cooperatives pressing cottonseed oil. Of
these, two are in Gulin, two in Jingbian, and one in Yanchang. They employ
a total of nineteen people, their share capital 245,000
yuan, and each year they can press l0,000 jin of
cottonseed oil. There are nine flour mills, two each in Ansai, Ganquan, Yanchang,
Yanchuan and one in Gulin. They employ a total of twenty-four people and
their share capital is 262,000 yuan There are four blanket-making
cooperatives, two in Yan'an, one in Qingyang, and one in Suide. They employ
a total of forty-two people and their share capital is 152,000
yuan. Each year they can produce 7,600 blankets. There
is one pottery cooperative in Yan'an county. It employs seven men, its share
capital is 3,000 yuan and each year it produces six kilnloads
of pottery.

The above statistics show us that both consumer and producer cooperatives
have expanded greatly in terms of membership, share capital, profit and
undertakings. However this development has been uneven. In the past five
years it has gone through three stages. Moreover, qualitative development
only began to advance rapidly during 1942. Before 1939, cooperatives everywhere
were based upon share capital from the government with the addition of some
share capital assessed from the masses. At this time their nature was basically
that of publicly-run enterprises and for the most part they became shops
publicly-run by the county and district governments. Cooperative enterprise
was not facing the masses, but was chiefly facing the government. It was
providing funds for the government and all decisions were taken by the
government. This was the first stage. After 1939, the slogan 'Popularize
the Cooperatives' was put forward. However, most places still used the old
method of assessing share capital from the masses to carry out this so-called
'popularization'. Thus the masses still regarded the cooperatives as a burden,
assessed upon them and not as something of their own. Cooperative personnel
were still the same official personnel. They ordered the masses to do substitute
farm work on their land on their behalf. The masses could not see the great
benefits to the cooperatives for themselves and, on the contrary, considered
that the cooperatives increased the labour burden they had to bear. After
1940, the duty of all the local governments to achieve self-sufficiency in
production was increased. Thereafter the large shareholders in many cooperatives
were not the people but government organs. It was thus even more difficult
for the cooperatives to give due consideration to the interests of the masses.
This was the second stage. It was only in January 1942 that the Reconstruction
Department put forward the strategy of 'overcome the desire to monopolize
everything, implement the policy of the people in control and officials as
helpers', based on the experience of the Southern District Cooperative of
Yan'an county. It was only by implementing this strategy that cooperatives
everywhere did away with the method of levying shares by assessment, and
gradually built up close relations with the masses and experience in being
concerned for the interests of the masses. Thus, in merely ten months the
share capital has risen sharply by more than 5 million yuan
and undertakings have also expanded. This has played a great role in organizing
the economic strength of the people, reducing middleman exploitation, and
developing the people's economy. This is the third stage. It is only in this
stage that the cooperatives of the Border Region have in general begun to
follow the right path.

The above outlines the path of development of most cooperatives. However,
there have been exceptions. For example the Southern District Cooperative
of Yan'an county got on to the right path some what earlier. Through several
years of hard experience, this cooperative has become a model cooperative
truly supported by the people. During 1942, cooperatives from the counties
of Suide, Anding, Ansai, Ganquan, Yanchang, Wuqi, etc. have advanced by studying
this model cooperative.

What, then, are the special features of the Southern District Cooperative?
It has the following good points. (1) It has smashed dogmatism and formalism
in cooperatives, and it does not cling to old ways and regulations. The Southern
District Cooperative began as a consumer cooperative. However, its undertakings
have extended into every aspect of the economic life of all the people of
Southern district. It does not just manage consumer undertakings but handles
supply and distribution, transport, production and credit. It has organized
six producer-cooperatives for textiles, oil-pressing, blanket manufacture
and so forth, and one transport team with more than a hundred animals. It
has become a comprehensive cooperative. It does not concentrate on the percentage
of income that should be devoted to the cooperative's own public accumulation
fund and public welfare fund [gongjijin], but strives to share out its profits
to the members. It does not place a limit on the share dividend and each
member receive a return on his shares regardless of the number held. It does
not limit the right of members to dispose of their shares and each member
has the freedom to withdraw his shareholding at any time. Nor does it limit
the nature of the membership. People from all social strata can join. (Since
Yan'an is an area that has gone through land revolution, allowing people
from all classes to join is no hindrance to the leadership of the cooperative
by the Communist Party.) They can also belong to the organs of the cooperative.
Moreover, it is not necessary to have ready cash to become a shareholder.
Before the cooperative won complete confidence among the masses, it permitted
them to become shareholders. using government bonds [gongzhaiquan] and
savings bonds [chuxupiao]. In this way the share capital was increased.
When the cooperative came to have the confidence of the masses and the masses
wanted to take out Shares but had no money, it allowed them to use any articles
of value such as grain, livestock, eggs and firewood to buy shares. Therefore,
all the people praise it.

(2) It has smashed formalism in cooperatives, and conscientiously carried
out the policy of facing the masses and working for the benefit of the people.
It has therefore gradually came to be loved and respected by the masses.
For example, every year during spring ploughing, it makes early arrangements
to transport shovels from Hancheng and other places, selling them to the
peasants at a price lower than the market price. It organizes various productive
enterprises, which not only absorb unemployed workers, take on apprentices,
and employ the family dependents of working personnel, but also expand profits,
guarantee the supply of daily necessities to the people of the area and increase
the income of the people. The Southern District Cooperative has organized
more than 800 women to spin yarn. Each month they can spin 1,400
jin. This has increased the monthly income by 70,000
yuan. The managerial policy of the consumer cooperative is
to fully ensure the supply of necessary commodities for the people, not only
letting them make fewer trips for their purchases but also charging prices
cheaper than those found in shops of large towns.

(3) It uses the policy of benefiting both the public and the private sectors
as the bridge between the economic activity of the government and the economic
activity of the people. On the one hand it carries out the financial and
economic policies of the government and on the other it adjusts the burdens
of the people so as to make those burdens more acceptable, raises their income,
and increases their enthusiasm. For example, in 1941 when the government
was mobilizing for the salt-transport levy, the Southern District Cooperative
got the people of the district to hand over a money substitute, and its transport
team transported salt for the government on behalf of the people. Before
the government collects the tax grain, the cooperative mobilizes the people
to pay it to the cooperative itself in accordance with the amount of tax
collected in the previous year. The cooperative guarantees to pay the tax
grain for the current year on behalf of the cooperative members and also
accepts the grain handed over as share capital paid in by people to join
cooperative. Thus on the one hand the cooperative acts on behalf of the
government, ensuring the payment of tax grain using it to make a profit before
it is finally paid over. On the other hand the people not only pay their
tax grain but also get some share capital. As a result some households with
surplus grain have even wished to pay two years' worth of tax grain to the
cooperative. No matter what the increase in tax grain the following year,
the cooperative undertakes to pay the difference. More than forty households
in the district have done this. In this way the burdens of the peasants have
been fixed, their income has increased, and their enthusiasm for production
has also been raised. Another example was when the government of the county
and district wanted the people to pay educational expenses and expenses for
the guard posts of the self-defense army. The cooperative again paid these
for the people from its profits. In this way the government was saved the
trouble of collecting the expenses and the people were not burdened with
the payment. The government policies of encouraging immigration and assisting
refugees can also be carried out by the cooperative (it can give credit to
the refugees and immigrants and so forth). In these ways the interests of
the government, the cooperatives, and the people, the interests of the individual
and the collective are closely united.

(4) It changes the organizational structure of the cooperative according
to the wishes of the people. It does not hold congresses of all file cooperative
members, but allows the members to elect delegates from each village. It
does not use the method of assessment for raising share capital, but rallies
groups of activist cooperative members to go and encourage the people to
take out shares. It does not limit the share capital of the cooperative members,
and it divides the profit according to shares held. However, in solving the
cooperative's problems it does not consider the number of shares owned. Each
shareholder has equal rights.

The above are the features of the Southern District Cooperative. As a Consumer
cooperative, its characteristics conform to the basic spirit of consumer
cooperatives and grow from the life, culture, economy, and politics of the
people of the Border Region. As a producer cooperative while not a cooperative
of the producers themselves but enterprise where shareholders hire labour,
its present structure is a means of absorbing unused rural capital to develop
handicrafts and corresponds to existing conditions in the Border Region where
handicrafts are not developed and handicraft workers are few.

Since 1936 the Southern District Cooperative has gone through six to seven
years of trial and hard struggle. Now it has grown from 160 members to include
more than 90 per cent of the households of the Southern district. The number
of voluntary members is 1,112. The amount of share capital has risen from
159 yuan to 2 million yuan. It has grown from
one cooperative to sixteen cooperatives. The net profit has risen from several
tens of yuan to 1,620,000 yuan for the first
ten months of 1942. It has developed the agricultural, industrial and commercial
enterprises of the people of the district and looked after their economic
welfare, becoming the economic heart of the people of Southern district.

In the large but under-populated Border Region where the economy is almost
entirely a small-scale peasant economy, it is necessary to rely upon truly
popularized cooperatives to play a pivotal role in implementing the economic
policies of the government and in organizing and encouraging the people to
develop the economy. Thus the road of the Southern District Cooperative is
the road for all the cooperatives of the Border Region. A movement to develop
cooperatives in the style of the Southern District Cooperative is a major
item of work for expanding the economy of the people of the Border Region.

For this reason, the Party and government should carry out the following
work in cooperatives throughout the Border Region:

(1) The Reconstruction Department should be responsible for studying the
experience of the Southern District Cooperative and for compiling a small
handbook as educational material for the fourth section [ke] of
all county governments and for the personnel of all cooperatives. Furthermore,
we should use the opportunity presented by holding meetings in Yan'an to
take working cadres from all parts of the Border Region on a tour of the
Southern District Cooperative.

(2) All the enterprises run by the Commodities Bureau should help successful
consumer and producer cooperatives with supplies and distribution. They should
sell commodities to the consumer cooperatives, and supply raw material to,
and guarantee the purchase of products from, the producer cooperatives. The
government should issue 3 million yuan to the Commodities Bureau
in 1943 to help in adjusting the cooperatives' supplies and distribution.

(3) In order to stimulate cooperatives the government must clearly stipulate
and conscientiously carry out a reduction in the cooperatives' tax burden.

(4) The Border Region Government and the governments of all the counties
should seek out students educated to the upper primary school or higher level
for training as accountants or managers so as to ease the difficulties of
all cooperatives over these.

(5) The personnel of the cooperatives must implement the policy of
'popularization' and adopt the wages system, doing away with the system of
substitute cultivation for cooperative personnel. They must improve cooperative
organization and simplify administration. They must make them into proper
enterprises and not official organs. They must reduce the working personnel
and reduce expenditure.

In order to ensure that everyone fully understands the history of the development
of the Southern District Cooperative, we have specially invited its director,
Comrades Liu Jianzhang, to write a report which now follows.

  
  THE HISTORY OF THE
  YAN'AN SOUTHERN DISTRICT COOPERATIVE


  First Period


On 2 December 1936, we began to propagandize the people to buy shares. At
that time each share was worth 0.30 yuan in soviet currency.
After twenty days there were 160 members with 533 shares giving a total value
of 159.90 Yuan.

Wang Tianjin was elected director, Liu Jianzhang accountant, and Li Shengzhang
buyer.

Dividends were paid quarterly and the gross profit for the first quarter
was 199.44 yuan.

Expenditures were made up of payments to the three personnel 9
yuan, food 45 yuan, stationery 3.50
yuan, woolen socks and gloves to support the front 13
yuan, help for the dependable of troops of the War of Resistance
15 yuan, support for the small school 8 yuan
and public welfare fund 10 yuan. After expenses, the dividend
per share was 0.18 yuan, and the total dividend 95.94
yuan.

On the occasion of this dividend, we held a cooperative members' congress
attended by all. At this melting we reported on the work done by the cooperative,
shared out the dividend, and gave the members dinner. The meeting produced
great results. The members themselves proposed that since the cooperative
was helping the dependents of soldiers in the War of Resistance, assisting
the small school, and supporting the front with woolen socks and gloves and
so forth on their behalf, everyone should buy more shares. This was the first
period.

  
  Second Period


Wang Shengming became treasurer. I planned a large increase in the share
capital. Director Wang was not satisfied. He argued that an increase in share
capital should be carried out when the situation demanded it. I wanted to
take the matter to county government for discussion and later we went to
see Liu Shichang, head of the national economy department [guomin
jingjibi] of the county government. Department head Liu permitted an
increase in share capital. Since Wang Tianjin disagreed with everyone, the
county government moved him to another post.

In March 1937, Liu Jianzhang was elected director, Wang Shengming accountant,
and Li Shengzhang remained as buyer. Once again there were three people.
On one hand we managed the business and on the other we increased the share
capital. The date for the second payment of dividend was 2 June, 1937. The
total of new shares issued was 2,697, which together with the previous issue
made a total of 3,230 with a value of 969 yuan at the maintained
rate of 0.30 yuan per share. The sum of 3,657
yuan was handled in turnover [guoliushui] during
the three months and the gross profit was 276 yuan. Expenditures
included support for the small school 6 yuan, support for the
dependents of soldiers in the War of Resistance 12 yuan, donation
to the appeal for support for the front 20 yuan, public welfare
fund 10 yuan, three months' food 53 yuan, staff
payments 13.50 yuan, and office expenses 3.50
yuan. After expenses the dividend per share was 0.05
yuan, a combined total of 161.50 yuan. As before,
a congress of cooperative members was held when the dividend was paid. Two-thirds
of the members attended. We reported on the activities of the Cooperative.
At that time we had bought 3 tan of grain on behalf of the
troops and had also acted as an agent in the purchase of all the charcoal
and firewood used by the reception centre of the Northwest Military Committee
[xibei Jun-wei]. All income from this business was in soviet notes, but the
ordinary people did not agree. They asked the cooperative to request goods
as a pledge when acting as a purchasing agent. On the one hand they should
give some goods and on the other we could accept some soviet notes. At this
time the cadres of the cooperative worked hard and patiently to bring about
agreement between the people and the troops. After this we built up relations
between the army and the people. If the soviet notes held by the people could
not be used to buy things in other places, the cooperative could buy them.
When this was announced, the members gained a greater understanding of the
cooperative and stated that 'the cooperative was able to act on their behalf.'

  
  Third Period


Beginning in June 1937 we again planned to increase the number of cadres.
Sun Shenghua was promoted to be a buyer. He worked for one month, every day
acting as buying agent for the troops which he found very troublesome. He
said he wanted to stop working. Despite repeated attempts at persuasion and
education, he was determined not to work for the cooperative and so he left.
Li Shenghai became buyer. We planned to open a fire wood shop at Goumenshang.
The cooperative put up 200 yuan capital and it became an
independent unit. Li Shengzhang was director of the shop with his wife as
cook and Li Shenghai as assistant. In three months the gross profit was 400
yuan.

The current account for the running of the cooperative and the shop was 7,175.60
yuan and the gross profit 538.70 yuan. Three
yuan in soviet currency was equivalent to one
yuan in national currency [baipiao], giving a converted value
of 175 yuan [yang yuan]. When cooperative members
took out shares, 1 yuan in Soviet currency was taken as equivalent
to 1 yuan in national currency. We donated 25
yuan for the front and 10 yuan to help the small
school. The director for women's affairs of the district was robbed by local
bandits and new bedding for her cost 4.50 yuan. The public
welfare fund was 12 yuan. Losses on forged notes came to 8.50
yuan, payments to staff 45 yuan, food 90
yuan, and office expenses 7.50 yuan. New shares
issued numbered 2,130, making a total of 5,360 with value of 1,596
yuan. Dividend per share was 0.02 yuan.

During this period, the porters in Ansai county, Bao'an county, and our own
district organized a salt-transport cooperative. They pooled their capital
and formed a partnership setting up a salt-transport team with a total of
twelve donkeys, horses and mules. Together with more than one hundred
privately-owned animals, they regularly went to Yanchi to transport salt
which was sold through the cooperative. This also encouraged porters from
other counties to invest 320 yuan in the shop. During this
period the soviet currency used to buy shares was converted entirely into
national currency.

We reported to the September cooperative members' meeting. Everyone expressed
the opinion that making the soviet notes worth 1 yuan in national
currency instead of 0.30 yuan had increased the trust of the
members. We proposed an increase in the share capital, made a census of the
population and surveyed the conditions of the people's economy. The three
townships of the district had 432 households with a population of 1,733.
There were 222 ox-drawn implements and 323 oxen, 125 donkeys and 270 sheep.
The total value of the people's economy for the whole district was 220,000
yuan, including livestock, land, houses and all assets. Excluding
grains, the average annual expenditure per head on clothing, agricultural
implements, salt, matches, etc. was 40 yuan, making a total
of 69,320 yuan. We proposed to the meeting that each person
should increase his share capital to 20 yuan so that we could
provide daily necessities for the people. The members agreed to increase
the share capital and to lengthen the accounting periods from quarterly to
half-yearly.

  
  Fourth Period


The fourth period ran from September 1937 to February 1938. The original
value of 0.30 yuan per share was raised to 0.50
yuan. The total number of shares was 5,360 valued at 2,680
yuan. The current account was 22,875 yuan and
the gross profit 1,732.30 yuan. Outgoing were the public
accumulation fund 110 yuan, the public welfare fund 68
yuan, woollen socks and gloves to support the front 245
yuan, support for the dependents of troops in the War of Resistance
18 yuan, support for the small school 12
yuan, payments to cooperative personnel and hired labour 310.50
yuan, food 90 yuan, entertainment expenses 38.50
yuan, office expenses 61.50 yuan, incentives
for personnel 60 yuan and repairs 285 yuan. After
expenses the dividend per share was 0.08 yuan and the total
dividend was 428.80 yuan. Although the cooperative members'
meeting for the previous period had proposed raising the share capital per
person to 20 yuan, this had only been partly realized because
of difficulties in the people's economy. This time the meeting planned to
establish a credit cooperative with share capital of 1,000
yuan. People could come to this cooperative for short-term
loans for marriages and funerals without paying interest. As soon as this
slogan was put forward, the members said they would guarantee the raising
of all share capital. The aim was to provide assistance. We also planned
to open a restaurant in Liulin.

  
  Fifth Period


This ran from March to August 1938. First of all we increased the number
of cadres, recruiting Wang Yaoming, Mao Keye, Li Shenghai, Huang Baozhong,
etc. Within three months we raised 1,060 yuan share capital
for the credit cooperative and in addition increased other share capital
by 110 yuan. Including previous share capital the total was
3,890 yuan. The current account for the six months was 42,500
yuan and the gross profit was 3,633 yuan. Expenses
were woolen socks for troops at the front 185 yuan, relief
appeal donations 22 yuan, incentives 80 yuan,
repairs 230 yuan, meetings and entertainment 85.60
yuan, office expenses 189 yuan, payments and
salaries (twenty-four people) 864 yuan, and food 900
yuan. After expenses the dividend per share was 0.10
yuan and the total dividend 778 yuan. When the
dividend was distributed we held a meeting of cooperative members' group
leaders. We Planned to accumulate 500 yuan to buy ploughshares.
Each plowshare cost 0.25 yuan so we could buy 2,000. We also
planned to expand with an oil-pressing shop [youfang], a flour-mill
[fengfang], and a public welfare centre [gongyixin]
so as to establish commercial relations in Yan'an city. On this
occasion none of the group leaders disagreed.

  
  Sixth Period


This ran from September 1938 to February 1939. We changed the share value
from 0.50 yuan to 1 yuan, and we increased share
capital by 4,510 yuan making a new total of 8,200
yuan. The current account for the six months was 49,860
yuan and the gross profit 4,118 yuan. Expenses
included support for dependents of troops in the War of Resistance 34
yuan, the public accumulation fund 654 yuan,
the public welfare fund 10 yuan, incentives 131
yuan, entertainment 180 yuan, miscellaneous expenses
116 yuan, salaries and payments to personnel (thirty people)
867 yuan and food 1,116 yuan. During this period
all plans were realized. We bought 2,000 shovels in Hancheng. Each shovel
was worth 0.50 yuan and the market-price was 0 90
yuan. We sold them to cooperative members at 0.60
yuan each, a saving of 0.30 yuan and a total
saving of 600 yuan. The oil-pressing shop and flour-mill were
established. In this period we still paid a dividend on a half-yearly basis.
There was a total of 850 cooperative members.

  
  Seventh Period


This ran from March to August 1939. We started planning to do business in
partnership with private individuals. In the area there were some people
who wanted to go into business but feared that the government would increase
taxation on them. So they invested their money together with the cooperative
as individual shareholders in a joint venture. First we set up business in
partnership with private individuals in Sanshilipu including a noodle shop
and a restaurant. The cooperative put up 200 yuan and the
individuals 800 yuan. Through this partnership business we
solved many problems for the people. We made rule allowing the freedom to
invest or withdraw share capital from the cooperative. This lasted until
the end of the year when the government, reaffirming the principles of
cooperatives pointed out that the cooperative had developed the private economy
and this was not allowed. So this business was broken off.

In the same year we expanded share capital by 860 yuan, making
a new total of 9,016 yuan. Cooperative members numbered 960.

The current account was 57,600 yuan and the gross profit was
4,778.60 yuan.

After deducting the public accumulation fund, welfare fund and other expenses,
the net dividend was 0.10 yuan per share and the total dividend
901.60 yuan.

In the course of paying out this dividend, many difficulties arose. On one
hand the expansion of share capital was slow and the rise in commodity prices
high, making it difficult for the cooperative to operate. On the other hand,
the people reckoned there was no increased profit for the individual, and
were unwilling to invest in more shares. We tried again and again to propagandize
and persuade them but they remained unwilling to invest more. I myself reckoned
that unless we formed partnerships with private individuals, the cooperative
could not develop, and that we should do business in such partnerships without
government approval. I put this forward for discussion at a management meeting
and it was agreed that it should be done.

  Eighth period


In September 1939 we again went into partnership with individuals to set
up the Xinghua Branch Cooperative at Sanshilipu, the Limin Cooperative at
Goumenshang, the Minsheng Herbalist at Liulin, and the Lihe Cooperative at
Nanzhuanghe. Using the cover of being joint public and private ventures;
they attracted over 100,000 yuan of capital from private investors.
The people working in the branches got personal shares. We drew up contracts.
There was still complete freedom in making investments and withdrawals and
the cooperative did not lay down any restrictions. Subsequently when the
county government learned about this, it wanted to see the contracts. After
seeing them, it approved the formation of partnerships. The original cooperative
was changed into the head cooperative of the district, and the various townships
set up branch cooperatives. Excluding the branch cooperatives, the head
cooperative again increased share capital by 2,629 yuan, making
a new total of 11,645 yuan. The current account for the head
and branch cooperatives together was 158,350 yuan and the gross
profit 18,250 yuan. Expenses were 8,895.13
yuan and the net profit was 9,354.07 yuan. The
dividend per share was 0.10 yuan, including the branch
cooperatives. Having set up branch cooperatives, the head cooperative was
strong enough to establish productive undertakings. In 1940 in partnership
with the Guanghua Store, we bought mules and set up a transport team, benefiting
from cooperation with private individuals. The original capital of the transport
team was 5,000 yuan. By the end of the year, it had expanded
to have 160 mules and was regularly transporting salt goods. We also set
up a textile mill and a leather-workshop. The West District Cooperative and
the Xinmin Cooperative at Dufuchuan collectively set up a transshipment warehouse
and two felt-workshops at Qilipu. At first shares were taken out on an individual
basis so that there could be several cooperative members within one family.
Later this became troublesome, so they were combined, taking the household
as the unit. Each family became one cooperative member, and there was a total
of 853 members.

After the membership had been combined in this way households had 300-500
yuan to 1,000 yuan invested. At the same time,
small merchants and porters from other counties had also joined the branch
cooperatives with share capital of 10,000 yuan. In particular
the porters who came frequently from the counties of Luochuan, Fuxian, Ansai,
Bao'an and Sanbian invested in the cooperative. When the dividend was paid
in the ninth month we held a meeting of members' representatives and reported
on the reasons for the expansion of the cooperative. After examination we
put forward the general aims for future work. First we wanted to increase
shares by 30,000 yuan and we asked the representatives to guarantee
that this would be done. Secondly, we planned to accept local products and
to sell them on behalf of the people, to supply the people with all daily
necessities, and to take responsibility for buying goods from other areas.
Thirdly, the salt, matches, and ploughshares needed by the people of the
district would not be bought from outside but would be supplied by the
cooperative. We reckoned that the 7,135 people of the district consumed 2
qian of a salt per head per day and 4.5 jin per
head per year, making an annual total of 32,107.5 jin. At a
price per jin 1 yuan below the market-price, we could save
over 32,100 yuan. Each family used five packs of matches per
year, a total of 8,675 packs for the whole district. At a price per pack
5 yuan below the market-price, we could save 43,375
yuan. The district used 1,500 ploughshares per year. At 15
yuan below the market-price we could save 22,500
yuan. The total saving for these three items could be 98,050
yuan. The district population's annual consumption of cotton
cloth for making clothes was 7,000 bolts. Each bolt required 25
jin of raw cotton, a total requirement of 17,515
jin. The total value was 3,500,O00 yuan. If the
yarn was spun by the people, they could earn half of it, that is, 1,750,000
yuan. We reported on our plans to the members at this meeting.
After approval by the members, we increased the number of machines for spinning
and weaving by peasant women.

  Ninth period


In August 1941 we increased share capital in the form of shares taken out
as government bonds for national salvation [jiuguo gongzhai].
The government mobilized the people to buy government bonds for national
salvation. The amount of bonds to be taken out by the people was added on
to their share capital. The dividend on this share capital was paid towards
the government bonds of 33,000 yuan. In this difficult situation
for the people, we helped them ease their burdens and raised their faith
in our ability to do so.

The now share capital was 33.070 yuan. Combined with the old,
this gave a total of 44,715 yuan for the head cooperative.
The share capital for the various branch cooperatives was 120,000
yuan and for the transport team it was 80,000
yuan The combined total was thus 244.715 yuan
and the membership was 1,018. The current account for the head and branch
cooperatives together was 1,161,840.70 yuan and the gross profit
was 284,317.40 yuan. Expenses were 138,849.30
yuan and the net profit was 145,469 yuan. The
dividend per share of 1 yuan was 0.70 yuan. When
issuing the dividend we proposed that each dividend of 0.70
yuan could be valued at 1 yuan if invested as
share capital. This increased members' trust and a lot of the dividend was
added on to the share capital. People taking out additional share could use
local products, firewood and grain as money, calculating the value higher
than market price. For example, each jin of grass was valued
0.20 yuan higher than the market-price. This was true of all
investment in kind and it also increased the people's trust.

  
  Tenth period


In 1942 we set up a sock-weaving factory. When we began propagandizing for
share capital, we made each share worth 20 yuan and presented
the members with a pair of socks. Afterwards, with the increase in the cost
of raw cotton, we raised the value of each share to 40
yuan. The total share capital was 30,000
yuan. We set up the sock-weaving factory and it now has six
machines. In Yan'an city we set up the Yunhe transshipment warehouse with
420,000 yuan share capital. At Songshulin we set up a branch
cooperative with share capital of 340,000 yuan. The surplus
accumulated by the transport team increased its capital to 750,000
yuan. The head and branch cooperatives expanded their share
capital by 1,232,000 yuan, making a new total 2,520,000
yuan. The membership was 1,112 (each member represented one
household). The largest investor had shares to the value of 5,000
yuan. There were nineteen units of the cooperative within the
boundaries of the district (including production, transport, and consumption).
Apart from the cooperatives, there was no other private commerce. Southern
district is 60 li long and 40 li broad. It has
1,544 households with 7,128 people. Altogether there are 1,469 oxen, 635
donkeys, 60 horses, 22 mules, and 4,445 sheep. Arable land covers 54,408
mu The wheat harvest was 872.5 tan. The harvest
of coarse grains was 9,084.16 tan, equivalent to 5,662.43
tan of hulled grain. The output from subsidiary undertakings
was equivalent to 334.25 tan of hulled grain. The full total
was 6,869.18 tan. In 1942 we paid 2,480 tan of
grain tax leaving 4,389.18 tan. The average amount of grain
per head was 0.6 tan. Animal fodder totalled 1,500
tan.

This spring the government mobilized to get 34,000 yuan for
educational expenses and for sentry fees for the self-defence army, 8,000
yuan for share capital for production at Gaomaowan, and 20,000
yuan for bank savings bonds. The total was 62,000
yuan to be raised in three parts. Each time each household
would have to attend a meeting for collection and loose the work of one of
its members. This would happen three times and each time the work of 1,500
would be lost. The work of each person was valued at 30
yuan so the total loss of earnings would be 135,000
yuan. Added to the 62,000 yuan the full burden
on the people would have been 197,000 yuan. Therefore the
cooperative paid the 62,000 yuan, on behalf of the people,
saving the 135,000 yuan which would have been lost. We helped
the people's production at a particularly busy agricultural time. We also
handed over 1,050 packs of salt each worth 240 yuan as salt
tax on behalf of the people. The total value of this was 252,000
yuan. Reducing the amount of work time lost by the people
influenced their attitude towards the cooperative, and we increased share
capital by 420,000 yuan. We plan to pay next year's salt tax
on their behalf.

We organized 600 peasant women to do spinning. Each day each person spun
2 liang of yarn. The total of raw cotton spun each day was 75
jin and the people should get half of it. Each
jin of yarn was reckoned as worth 150 yuan. The
profit per day was 5,250 yuan and the profit for the year was
1,890,000 yuan. This year they spun 5,000 jin
of raw cotton. In the first half of the year cotton was low-priced. Combining
both halves each jin cost 70 yuan. The people
earned 2,500 jin of raw cotton, equal to 175,000
yuan. The cooperative arranged advances of 20,000
yuan for spinning-wheels. After deducting this 20,000
yuan, the people earned 155,000 yuan. Now we
are expanding the amount of spinning done by women. In the past there was
no spinning done in Southern district. Now large numbers of women are taking
part, but there are problems of raw materials. Finally, this year we sold
20,000 jin of charcoal for the people at 2
yuan per jin. The people got 400,000
yuan.

The above facts relate what the cooperative has done. We have not divided
out the dividend so far this year on account of the floods. The cooperative
has lost 58 buildings with a value of 400,000 yuan, equipment
worth 300,000 yuan, goods worth 400,000 yuan,
and the Fuchang Storehouse at a value of 200,000 yuan. Total
losses were 1,300,000 yuan. The Government later helped us
borrow 500,000 yuan and we went to Dingbian county three times
to sell goods making a gross profit of 300,000 yuan. At present
we again have repair expenses of 240,000 yuan and we are expanding
share capital.

As regards the organization of the cooperative, each village elects one or
two representatives. Cooperative affairs are handled by the twelveman management
committee held on the sixth day of each month. All questions concerning
management and cadres are determined at the management committee meetings.

  
  supplementary notes:


(1) At present the cooperative has 135 buildings and fifty-five stone-built
cave houses worth 2,890,000 yuan at current values, liquid
capital of 1,500,000 yuan, and equipment and livestock worth
1,020,000 yuan.

(2) The experience and lessons of the cooperative are explained in the page
on the Southern District Cooperative in the volume Materials on Yan'an's
economic Construction.

13 December 1942

 The above document leaves a gap of two years between the eighth and
ninth periods, and there seem to be some omissions. Inquiries were made and
the following report came back:

  
  CONCERNING THE PROBLEM OF PERIODIZATION OF THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT COOPERATIVE


Operations began in December 1936 and the first meeting of all cooperative
members was held after three months. Altogether three such meetings were
held at three-monthly intervals. Then they were changed to once every six
months and a further three meetings were held. After the sixth meeting, there
was a gap of eight months and then the first meeting of representatives was
held (at the end of 1939). Afterwards the second meeting of representatives
was held in July 1940, and the third in August 1941. We planned to hold the
fourth meeting in July this year but because of floods it was difficult to
draw up the accounts so we extended the period. Before 1939 the period between
meetings was short and all the members attended. This was because our scope
and membership were both small. Later, meetings of representatives were held
once a year because our membership was too large, our undertakings had expanded
and drawing up accounts was not easy.

In our previous report we omitted to refer to the second representative meeting
of July 1940 and so the eighth period was lengthened into two years.

The previous report was made without proper drafting. If there are still
questions on this material please instruct for further reports

Wang Pi'nian'
Liu Jianzhang
15 December


 Below is the report of the comrades of the Yan'an county Party Committee
on the Southern District Cooperative. It is reproduced here for study.

  
  THE EXPERIENCE OF THE LIULIN DISTRICT
  (i.e. YAN'AN SOUTHERN DISTRICT)
  COOPERATIVE


Looking at the process of development of the Liulin District Cooperative
we can see:

(1) Cooperative operations are not limited to consumption but are also related
to production, credit and transport, making them a coherent whole. The head
cooperative and its branches make a total of sixteen.

On the production side there is the textile-mill, the leather-workshop, the
felt-workshop, the oil-pressing shop, and the flour-mill.

On the transport side there is the transport team with over a hundred animals.
The cooperative's capital investment is 500,000 yuan.

Because the Liulin District Cooperative operates by uniting several economic
functions together, its scope is wide, its capital is large, its activities
are big, its development is fast, and it has solved many problems in the
supply of daily commodities for the people. Other cooperatives in this county
are limited to consumption. Compared to a cooperative which also carries
out production and transport, their capital and scope are small and their
development retarded.

(2) The policy for management of cooperatives by the people was put forward
by adopting the experience of Liulin. This cooperative's share capital expanded,
absorbed the capital of small merchants and drew them into take part in the
work. All the work of the cooperative was discussed and decided by the
cooperative members. The people were deeply involved with the cooperative.
They did not consider it to be run by officials but by themselves.

(3) The cooperative solves problems in the supply of daily necessities for
the masses, such as bolts of cloth, salt, matches, ploughshares, etc. at
lower than market-price. Taking matches and salt alone, the annual savings
for the people was more then 80,000 yuan. Naturally the people
wish to buy things at the cooperative. The cooperative can supply the entire
needs of the people of Liulin district in these four daily necessities.

(4) The cooperative helps the masses out of urgent difficulties such as those
created by marriages or funerals by allowing them to borrow funds temporarily,
either giving credit against bolts of cloth or taking something as a pledge.
It sets a time limit for repayment. This fills the role of a credit cooperative,
solving major difficulties for the people. Because the cooperative does this
at a time of urgent need when no help can be found elsewhere, it creates
trust among the people, who consider the cooperative really helps them.

(5) The cooperative has a variety of ways of expanding share capital:

(i) Buying shares with ready cash.

(ii) Taking out shares in return for goods: a chicken, a pair of shoes, some
sheepskins, some hemp ropes can all be exchanged for shares at equivalent
value.

(iii) Absorbing the capital of small merchants.

(iv) Helping the masses pay burdens from the government and making this a
way of taking out shares. After the government issues its demand, the cooperative
turns them into a call for buying shares (to the same amount) and itself
pays the taxes. For example, in 1942 the people of the district had to pay
250,000 yuan to the government as a cash substitute for tax
salt. This was treated as share capital and paid to the cooperative. The
cooperative paid the salt tax to the government, making a profit from the
handling of the cash. The people also got a dividend. Government bonds, education
costs, sentry costs, and so forth were collected in this way and paid by
the cooperative. The government was paid, the cooperative's share capital
increased and its operations expanded. The people profited and they had less
troubles. They also received dividends as shareholders.

(v) Increasing share capital through making timely responses to the needs
of the moment of the people. For example, when they wanted to expand spinning
and weaving, they put forward the slogan of raising share capital to do so.
In 1941 the cooperative experimented with paying tax grain for the people.
For each tan of the previous year's grain tax the people bought shares for
cash. The cooperative used the cash to expand its operations. In the following
year when the grain tax was allocated among the people, it was paid by the
cooperative from the profits it had obtained. This was done for forty or
so households, for whom paying grain tax was almost like not paying. They
became share holders in the cooperative, able to get a dividend every year.
They were very happy, their enthusiasm for production increased and they
got even more grain.

(vi) Paying a dividend on taking out shares. People taking out shares for
40 yuan were issued a pair of socks valued at 20
yuan. In this way the people were encouraged to buy shares.

(6) The cooperative is in a very good geographical position since it is in
Liulin district which is close to the large commercial market in Yan'an.
Liulin has much forest land. Many people sell timber and charcoal, which
raises their income and thus there is a lot of liquid capital in the villages
which can be absorbed in the purchase of shares. At the same time, being
near a market, the turnover of capital is very quick. These are objective
factors.

(7) The scope of the cooperative's activities is very wide. It has established
relations with the Border Region Bank, the Guanghua Store and the various
official organizations in Yan'an. Sometimes it can borrow capital or do a
lot of work for the official organizations and the cooperative has been able
to develop through this mutual help.

(8) The cadres have not been transferred much and they pay attention to
investigation and research. Director Liu has not been transferred to other
work since he was appointed. He has been able to concentrate exclusively
on his work, research and on thinking of ways of doing things. At the same
time, he also pays great attention in investigating objective conditions.
For example, he often investigate such things as the annual consumption per
individual bolts of cotton, salt, matches and so forth so as to solve the
people' s problems.

Here is an example to show the relationship between the cooperative and the
people. In 1941 the peasant Bai Da of Lufengpo in Liulin district had to
hand over 60 yuan for nations salvation grain tax. Beforehand
he paid it to the cooperative as share capital. At the appointed time the
cooperative paid the government on his behalf. Later the dividend was add
to the original capital of 60 yuan bringing it up to 200
yuan. He bought four ploughshares from the cooperative and
saved 15 yuan on each (that is, they were sold at 15
yuan less than the market-price), making a total saving of
60 yuan. He bought five packs of matches saving 5
yuan on each, a total of 25 yuan. At the end
the twelfth lunar month in 1941, he bought goods worth 1000
yuan at the cooperative but only paid 500
yuan saving 500 yuan. Subsequently, the market
prices of these goods rose by 550 yuan. Including the previous
purchases of ploughshares and matches he saved a total of 635
yuan. Originally he had to pay 60 yuan in grain
tax, now it has become share capital of 200 yuan and he saved
635 yuan on the purchase of goods. This has really made the
cooperative belong to the people, facilitating their dealings and looking
after their interests. There are many examples like this.

  
  The Cooperative Situation throughout the County





Table 5.1 Number of cooperatives in Yan'an county,
1941 and July 1942


 

1941

1942



Branch cooperatives

18

30



District cooperatives

8

8



Total

26

38






Table 5.2 Capital (in yuan) invested in cooperatives
in Yan'an county, 1941 and 1942 (half year)


 

1941

1942
(for half year)


District cooperatives

264,207.56

312,207.56


Branch cooperatives

193,340.00

978,507.14


Total

457,547.56

1,290,714.70




Within six months capital increased by 833,167.14 yuan. The
fastest increase in capital was in the branch cooperatives, which are directly
organized by the people with the support of the district cooperatives. Therefore
the people are very enthusiastic about taking shares.

The average taken from 1,290,000 yuan works out 20
yuan per head of the population of the county. This is not
much, so the role of the cooperatives in the entire county is still a minor
one.

Important experience

(1) Persist in the policy of management by the people and non-interference
by the government. We inspected the cooperatives in July this year and called
for an increase in share capital. Substantial capital should be held by the
co-operatives .

(2) Cooperative cadres should not be lightly transferred to other posts.
Let them be settled in their posts, concentrating on their work. Guarantee
their livelihood. Cooperatives should adopt the method of assigning personal
shares [da Shenfen]. That is, each member of the cooperative's personnel
should be equivalent to a number of shares depending on his ability and work.
For example, if someone is made equivalent to shares of 5,000
yuan, he is paid the interest due on shares of 5,000
yuan at the time of settling accounts. This becomes his salary
and he does not receive any other income.

(3) Enlarging the scope of cooperative undertakings should not be limited
to consumption alone but should include production, transport, credit and
so forth. This is an inevitable trend in cooperative development henceforth.
That is to say, we must run comprehensive cooperatives.

(4) Concentrate on making a good job of one or two cooperatives and gaining
experience. Gradually expand to other areas. For example, we are preparing
to turn the Songshulin Cooperative of Jinpen district into a second Liulin
Cooperative.

These are opinions on our future work.

Previous section       
               Next
  section


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On the Development of the Salt Industry








ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR (6)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


  
  6. ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SALT INDUSTRY


Salt is the great resource of the Border Region. It is the mainstay which
balances imports and exports, stabilizes the currency, and regulates commodity
prices. A large proportion the people rely on salt [as a form of] exchange
for goods from outside. A relatively large proportion of the troops and working
personnel rely on salt for their livelihood or to supplement their livelihood.
Salt is also a major source of government financial revenue. Therefore salt
plays an extremely important role in the Border Region. Since the War of
Resistance began the supply of salt from the sea has been cut off and the
supply from the Huai area and from Shanxi has been reduced. The southwest
relies on salt from Sichuan and the northwest and the eastern areas on salt
from Ningsia and Qinghai. Salt from a Border Region has thus come to occupy
an important position and the transport and sale of salt increases annually.
In 1983 our salt exports were only 70,000 packs (each pack is 150 and each
jin is 24 liang.). In 1939 there was a sudden
increase to 190,000 packs. In 1940, the figure was 230,000 packs and in 1941
there was another abrupt increase to 299,068 packs. By September 1942 the
total was 155,790 packs and it is estimated that another 70,000-80,000 packs
can be sold in the last three months making a total of 230,000-240,000 packs.
These statistics reflect two important facts: the first is the external demand,
and the second is our hard work. Some comrades cannot see that external demand
is determined by the war of Resistance and that within certain limits salt
can be sold. Therefore they propose that things should follow their own course
and that there is no need for the Party and government to interfere. Other
comrades merely ascribe the yearly increase in the sale of salt to external
demand and do not recognize that the leadership of the Party and government
is a great factor in that increase. We began to pay attention to the salt
industry in autumn 1940. As well as the objective factor of the external
salt famine and depletion of salt stocks which made 1941 salt sales particularly
good, the abrupt increase from 230,000 packs in 1940 to 299,000 packs in
1941 was also due to the subjective factor that we implemented the policy
of supervising transport in that year. Apart from the fact that external
demand was not as urgent as in 1941, the sudden drop to 230,000-240,000 packs
in 1942 from the previous year's 299,000 was due to our abandonment of the
policy of supervising transport (putting an end to the many plans made by
the people for transporting salt). If we do not learn a lesson from this,
we shall repeat past mistakes in future work. Certainly there were defects
in the salt-industry work for 1941. The original plan to transport 600,000
packs was too big. The Border Region still does not have such a great transport
capacity. The achievement in producing 700,000 packs of salt was good but
the quality [of the salt] was too poor. Supervision of transport was correct
but it was unnecessary to mobilize everyone everywhere. There were also many
abuses in the organization and method of mobilization which did not accord
with the actual situation. All these things were shortcomings and mistakes
in our work in 1941. Nevertheless, adopting a policy of active development
of the salt industry was entirely correct. Belittling, misunderstanding and
even opposing this policy is entirely wrong.

What should be done in 1943? First we must determine a policy for active
development. In the current situation in the Border Region, we certainly
cannot adopt a negative approach towards salt which is a major factor in
solving financial problems (the publicly-run salt industry and the salt tax
), in balancing imports and exports, and in stabilizing the currency and
commodity prices. Therefore we must enlarge the already established Salt
Company into the main force for allying public and private salt industry
and for expanding public and private production, transport and sales. And
we must improve the quality of salt produced so as to promote sales. We must
restore transport supervision and organize all possible transport capacity
among the people to expand salt transport. We must draw in porters from outside
areas to transport and sell more. We must build roads, and arrange for inns,
warehouses and fodder to help transport. The Salt Company should gradually
gain control of outside sales in order to avoid the anarchic situation produced
by lack of public and private coordination. These are our general policies
for the active development of the salt industry in 1943, Concrete arrangements
should be as follows:

(1) Expand the Salt Company and increase its capital. Under the direction
of the Commodities Bureau raise share capital from the various official
organizations, the troops and privet individuals. Develop salt transport,
expand salt sales. Regulate salt prices. Guarantee that the company transports
40,000 pack in 1943, and with this salt as a basis buy as much salt from
the people as possible to carry out partial unification of salt sales to
outside areas. Afterwards, depending on the situation gradually achieve complete
unification so as to prevent outside manipulation and guarantee the interests
of the government and the people.

(2) In 1943, plan to produce 400,000 packs of salt and to transport
300,000-360,000 packs. Moreover strive to exceed this. As regards production,
continue the policy of supervision by officials and production by the people.
Ensure that the salt is mostly or entirely top-quality and do not allow inferior
quality to be produced again. As regards transport; plan for the Salt Company
system to transport 400,000 packs, draw in porters from outside to move 50,000
packs, and organize the manpower and animal power of the Border Region to
move 210,000-260,000 packs, making a total of 300,000-360,000 packs.

(3 ) The organization of the manpower and animal power of the Border Region
to transport 210,000-260,000 packs is immense, arduous and meticulous piece
of organizational and mass work. It should be directed by the Reconstruction
Department and supervised by the government at various levels, the Party
committees at each level having the responsibility for checking up and helping.
Mobilization to transport salt must have a degree of coercion but it certainly
must avoid commandism which causes damage. We must chiefly adopt the policy
of unit propaganda and persuasion. The organization to transport salt must
take the forms of transport cooperatives and transport teams. Propagandize
the masses to buy shares voluntarily. Some can provide manpower and some
can provide draught animal. Some can provide both. Some can provide running
costs and some, in special circumstances, can be exempted from providing
anything. We can organize transport teams among people who have rich experience
in portering, together with the necessary animals. The Party and government
at county, district and township level should actively direct the rational,
fair and health, organization of these transport teams. They should set off
smoothly, do the necessary work along the way and ensure the safety of the
personnel and animals. On return pay attention to the distribution of the
cooperative's profits and guarantee the interests of the people involved
and of all the cooperative members. Salt transport must not violate the
agricultural season. We must strengthen the organization of labour mutual-aid
cooperatives (exchange labour) so that after the transport team has set off,
the cooperative members do not lose agricultural production through lack
of manpower and animal power. As regards the salt-transport organizations
(cooperatives and teams) of the Sui-Mi special military area and the three
eastern counties, we should allow the masses greater freedom and reduce coercion.
The transport cooperatives and teams of all places must be built up on a
basis of benefiting the cooperative members. The duties of the Party and
government lie in making these benefits increase daily, otherwise we will
certainly be defeated. The Reconstruction Department, the sub-regions and
counties should teach the people through the most successful examples of
salt transport by the masses. They should propagandize them widely for imitation
so as to be certain that the plan for salt-transport in 1943 will be completed
and will also bring large direct benefits for the people.

(4) The enterprises of the Commodities Bureau and the people's cooperatives
in all places must closely coordinate with the people's transport cooperatives
and teams, and strive to ensure that the animals used by the people to transport
salt are able to transport other goods on their return journey. Only then
can the people's salt-transport undertaking expand and the whole of salt
transport develop, and only then will the whole salt-transport plan be completed.

(5) The key sector in developing the salt industry is transport, and the
major condition for transport is communications. In 1943 the government should
allocate 2 million yuan under the direction of the Reconstruction
Department for the building of two cart-roads between Yan'an and Dingbian,
and Dingbian and Qingyang, and for repairing the road from Yan'an to Fuxian.
Furthermore the Commodities Bureau should set up inns with stables and
trans-shipment warehouses along the main salt transport routes, and dig
water-storage holes in places lacking water. The Reconstruction Department
and Commodities Bureau together should plant alfalfa widely along the routes
and also provide fodder in other ways. So long as there are roads, inns,
grass and water, transport costs can be greatly cut, the volume of transport
can be greatly increased, and the three forms of transport - porters from
outside, people from the area and the Salt Company - can all develop. Plans
to improve the means of transport should also be directed by the Reconstruction
Department. Carts and handcarts should be built according to road conditions
in order to increase salt transport. Provided the roads are well built. it
is much better for the government to use more carts and the people to use
more handcarts than to use pack-animals.

(6) In 1943 the salt tax is fixed as 100,000 packs. Those who live near will
provide transport, those who live far away will provide a substitute, and
some will provide a mixture of both. However, the salt tax and the development
of the salt industry are two different matters. So long as we can definitely
export 300,000-360,000 packs, it does not matter whether we accept actual
salt or substitute payments for salt tax.

If we can complete our plans for planting cotton and spinning and weaving
in 1943, we can reduce our imports of raw cotton, cotton yarn and cotton
cloth. If we can export 300,000-360,000 packs of salt in 1943 at an average
value of 10 yuan Border Region currency per
jin (each donkey pack is 150 jin) our income
will be between 450 million yuan and 540 million
yuan. Thus by reducing one and increasing the other, the Border
Region's problem of balancing imports and exports will be entirely solved.
The following material reflects the people's experience in the transport
of salt during 1941.


  A RECORD OF LU ZHONGCAI'S LONG MARCH


Report on the first experiences in salt transport of Chengguan district,
Fuxian county, as told by the deputy leader of Chengguan district, Lu Zhongcai.
Supplemented by Wang Yuxian and Kong Zhaoqing. Recorded by Gao Kelin, 13
August 1941.

(l) For the first salt transport, Chengguan district should have provided
fifty pack animals. In fact it provided twenty-eight. The reason the plan
was not fulfilled was the lack of animals (at the very most we could mobilize
forty ). Some animals were hidden away and not kept at home. The district
government did not handle things firmly as it was busy with grain loans and
government bonds.

(2) We set off on 18 July and returned home on 11 August, a total of twenty-five
days. It took twelve days to get from Fuxian to Dingbian, one day to get
to Yanchi and load up, and twelve days to return. The longest stage was 90
li. The route, stage names and conditions during each stage
was as follows:

(i) From Fuxian to Zhangcunyi, 50 li. Five gullies and the
road was difficult. Good water and grass.

(ii) Zhangcunyi to Lannipo, altogether five stages, each 70 li.
Road good. Cut grass to feed the animals.

(iii) Lannipo to Lijiabian. 20 li of mountains and 40
li of gullies. Road difficult. Fodder no good.

(iv) Lijiabian to Lujiajiao. 30 li of gullies and 5
li of mountains. Most difficult to travel. Fodder no good .

(v) Lujiajiao to Luanshitouchuan. Travelling in gullies. There were military
stations. Fodder was sold (each 100 jin of mountain grass 30
yuan of valley grass 50 yuan, and wheat hay 40
yuan.).

(vi) Luanshitouchuan to Sanlimiao, 80 li. There were military
stations. Dry grass cost 50 yuan for 100 jin.
Forty li of mountains, very precipitous. Difficult to travel.
Water difficult ( Salt water not drinkable). Saw a salt-porter whose donkey
had fallen to its death.

(vii) Sanlimiao to Liangzhuang, 80 li.

(viii) Liangzhuang to Dingbian 90 li. There were military stations.
Fodder 50 to 100 yuan per 100 jin. No water.

(ix ) Dingbian to Yanchi, 40 li. One day there and back. Sandy
road difficult to travel. 

(3) Difficulties along the route were:

(i) During three of the five stages from Zhangcunyi to Lannipo, locusts [zhameng]
were biting. It was best for men and animals to travel in the evening.

(ii) During the two stages from Sanlimiao to Liangzhuang and thence to Dingbian
there was no water. Men and animals were thirsty.

(iii) There were a lot of thieves at Dingbian. Animals, money, clothing and
tools often taken.

(iv) Beyond Luanshitouchuan since salt-transport animals from various counties
converge there are often several thousands or hundreds of animals travelling
together. Thus there are problems of inn space, fodder, water, and especially
of room to rest animals. Things can easily go wrong and cause trouble.  

(4) Life on the road:

Chengguan district sent twenty-eight animals and fourteen men. Along the
way we cooked for ourselves. Each meal required 7 sheng of millet, roughly
25 jin. Everyone felt that 'We eat more when we have set out'.
Inn charges ranged from 3 yuan at the lowest to 8
yuan at the most. It depended entirely on whether you had a
good or bad relationship with the manager of the inn. When travelling we
sang and told stories, many of them about Duke Xiang seeking a wife. Everyone
was very happy and no one felt burdened. Animal fodder was cut in rotation.
It was plentiful and could not all be eaten up. The masses along the route
were very good, and there was no problem in getting grain and fodder, though
we chiefly relied on ourselves. Sometimes there were quarrels, mainly because
the animals had eaten someone's crops. Only in one place did the manager
of an inn give us bad grain.

(5} Points that arose during the journey:

Good :

(i) None of the animals had any illness. Those from the first and third townships
were thin when we set off but returned fat. This was because of the care
of the porters, and careful feeding.

(ii) None of the porters had any illness. Everyone was very fit and in good
spirits. No one grew thinner. They just got a little sunburned.

(iii) Nothing was left behind along the way and the animals did not eat people's
crops. This was mainly because deputy district head Lu Zhongcai's was an
old porter. He was experienced, responsible, and meticulous. Everyone else
was very active and thus we were successful.

Bad:

(i) Du Hai, head of the village council of the First administrative village
of the Third township, sold good donkey and bought a bad one to go. As a
result the donkey was exhausted, did not carry pack and we wasted 165
yuan in travel expenses. The township also sent another bad
animal (it had bad loins) and Jianjuntaicun of Fourth township sent donkey
with a bad leg. Neither carried salt and each wasted 165
yuan in travel expenses. Furthermore, the same village sent
a donkey with a rotten saddle with the result that its back was hurt through
the pressure of its load. The head of Second township had two donkeys. He
sent a bad one with a pod saddle and frame. This caused a lot of bother along
the way. The district-level government did not make a careful inspection
of these matters before we set out. Some were known about but not corrected.
As a result only twenty-five of the twenty-eight donkeys carried salt. The
other three travelled without loads, not contributing one bit to the value
of salt carried and wasting from 500 to 600 yuan in travel
costs. All in, the total loss was over 1,500 yuan. This is
a valuable warning for district and township cadres.

(ii) The head of the village council of Jianjuntaicun in Fourth township
did not obey deputy district head Lu Zhongcai's instructions. He did not
bring good fodder for the animals (oats [yumai] and broad beans
[candou]) and instead used kaoliang and other poor substitutes.
As a result the animals from that township sometimes lay down when travailing
because of their poor fodder. We are preparing to struggle against that village
head and punish him.

(iii) The porter Yang Wanbao from Fourth township was a real troublemaker
on the way. He pretended to be ill and skulked off home. He created wild
rumours, 'two people had died, deputy district head Lu and a man called Wang...
There was nothing to eat along the way... The donkeys' backs had all been
ruined under their loads... The inns could not sell grain...' so that many
people back in the town felt unhappy. The district head did not pay sufficient
attention to this. In future he should be alert.

(iv) Some families sent bad donkeys which carried less, only about 110
jin. One family from Jianjuntaicun in Fourth district changed
their donkey's halter for a bad one when they sent it off. They anticipated
the donkey would die and had made up their minds to write everything off.
The donkey from the head of Second township was only 10 li
from home on the way back when it lay down. He was unwilling to send a good
donkey to take over. He defaulted on his responsibility as he thought the
donkey would surely die and could not return. So he did not come and take
over.

(v) Twelve donkeys carried too much and 40 to 50 jin were given
to a donkey without a load. When we got to the tax inspection office at
Sunkeyaoxian they confiscated 50 jin of salt and one sack (value
20 yuan) because we had no certificate.

(6) Costs, losses and gains:

(i) Average expenses per donkey were: 2 tou of beans value
60 yuan; each man had 1.5 tou of grain and as
each man looked after two donkeys this equaled 0.75 tou per
donkey with a value of 35 yuan; travelling costs were 70
yuan. The total 165 yuan. In addition there was
salt capital [yanben] of 20 yuan. The average cost per donkey
was thus 185 yuan.

(ii) On average each donkey from First township carried 130
jin, and from Second, Third and Fourth townships 110
jin. At present market prices of 200 yuan per
100 jin salt, each load was worth from 220 to 260
yuan.

(iii) At current prices, after expenses are deducted, earnings per donkey
load ranged from 35 to 75 yuan.

Notes: (a) If each donkey were able to carry 150 jin, the
guaranteed income per donkey at current prices would be above 100
yuan.

(b) Reports on amounts carried were given by the porters who were certainly
holding something in reserve—most donkeys here can carry 150
jin.

(c) At the same time the principle is clear that so long as you have good
donkeys you can earn more. The worse the donkeys the less you earn, and you
can even make a loss.

(7) Experience and lessons:

(i) The victorious return of this salt-transport team from Chengguan district,
Fuxian, proves that the Party and government's plans, estimates and methods
for salt transport are entirely correct. The doubts, lack of trust and
considerations that it would be a burden by various comrades are all erroneous
and shallow outlooks.

(ii) We smashed the fears of some cadres and masses about going to Sanbian
for salt ( 'men and animals will die... they will go and not return'). On
the contrary the animals carrying salt returned fatter, and the men were
healthier and merely a little sunburned.

(iii) We proved that salt transport can earn money, and smashed the inaccurate
reckless talk that we 'certainly would lose capital', 'each donkey would
lose 100 yuan., and 'it is the greatest burden ever imposed
it the Border Region'.

(iv) We showed that certain cadres at district and township level, particularly
at township level, did not do their work responsibly (they did not inspect
carefully ), were prepared to cover-up things that were wrong (village and
township heads could send poor animals and were not investigated), were corrupt
(used poor kaoliang instead of beans ), and had become tails following behind
the masses.

(v) The cadres played a decisive role. Deputy district head Lu Zhongcai was
experienced, lively and responsible. Each time we reached a place or something
happened, he held a discussion meeting of the porters — he even discussed
how much salt each donkey should carry. As a result neither men nor animals
came to any harm and on the contrary ended up stronger and in better spirits
than when they set out.

Lessons:

(i) The district and township cadres did not pay attention to and investigate
at the right time the troublemaker from Fourth township, Yang Wanbao who
skulked off home and created rumours. They did not talk to him and did not
report to higher levels. As a result a rumour spread among the people of
the district that two people had died - deputy district head Lu and somebody
Wang - and that three donkeys had died. This made people very uneasy.

(ii) There were problems along the way (some stages were hard going, one
or two had many locusts, and two had little water) but they could be overcome.
On bad roads we had to be more careful. Where there were locusts we travelled
in the evening. Where there was little water we drank more on getting up
in the morning and carried water with us. With patience all difficulties
could be overcome.

(iii ) The better the donkeys, the more we can earn. If we could earn 75
yuan for each donkey that carried I30 jin this
time, we can earn 115 yuan for donkeys carrying 150
jin, The worse the donkeys the less we can earn, and we can
even make a loss. For example, Chengguan district sent three poor donkeys
(one with bad loins, one with bad legs, and one was exhausted). As a result
they did not carry salt. Each donkey wasted 165 yuan in travailing
expenses and the total loss including porters was over 1,000
yuan. At the same time this showed that work must be done carefully
and you cannot muddle through. If the district and township had carefully
inspected the donkeys sent this time, worked conscientiously, and not given
any favours, we, would not have made these losses since everyone would have
known about the poor donkeys.

(iv) If we had not stayed at inns along the way and let the animals out to
pasture not buying hay, we could have saved over 50 yuan per
donkey. What we save becomes earnings.

(v) We must pay more attention to the national laws. Because we were not
careful we had 50 jin of salt and one sack confiscated. This
was an unnecessary loss. ( This report was published in the Liberation
Daily 14, 15 September 1941.)

Previous section       
               Next
  section


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On the Development of Self-Supporting
  Industry








ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR (7)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


  7. ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-SUPPORTING INDUSTRY


The agriculture, animal husbandry, handicraft industry, cooperatives and
salt industry discussed above are all economic undertakings by the people.
The Party and government give guidance and help within the bounds of possibility
and need so that these things can develop and the requirements of the people
can be met. At the same time, the portion handed over to the government by
the people in the form of taxes ensures a part of the government's needs
(for example, grain tax, salt tax and other taxes ) and the portion handed
over in the form of trade ensures another part of the government's needs
(for example, raw cotton, cotton yarn, cotton cloth, wool, etc.). Their basic
nature is that of undertakings run by the people. Only in the case of the
salt industry, where 40,000 packs of salt are transported and sold under
the control of the government's Salt Company and the 5,000 or so packs are
consumed directly by government personnel, does a part (about one-seventh
of the whole) belong to the public sector of the economy.

As a whole the undertakings of the public Sector of the economy consist of
the following three kinds: (1) the salt industry, industry and commerce run
by the government; (2) the agriculture, industry and commerce run by the
army; and (3) the agriculture, industry and commerce of the official organization
of the Party and government. These all directly ensure the supply of the
living and other expenses of the Party, government and army personnel. According
to accounts for 1942 and the budget for 1943, the amount supplied in this
way exceeds the amount handed over by the people in the form of taxes (including
the grain tax ) . Therefore publicly-run economic undertaking have become
the greater of the two large sources ensuring financial supplies. Their
importance cannot be overstated.

The reasons we pay attention to publicly-run economic construction are both
historical and contemporary. During the civil war, the Party Central established
some publicly-run industry and commerce in the Jiangxi Soviet in order to
meet the need of the war. At that time, we initiated the growing of vegetable
and raising of pigs by the various official organizations and schools so
as to make up for the lack of provisions. Only the army did not have experience
in production. Also, since the peasants of Jiangxi were comparatively rich
and numerous, it was not yet necessary for us ourselves to set-to to provide
grain. These are historical reasons. Since the War of Resistance began, we
have found ourselves in a very special situation. At first the Kuomintang
provided a very small amount of ratio for our arms. Subsequently, it cut
them off entirely. The Border Region was blockaded, leaving us no alternative,
but to become self-supporting in supplying the needs of the War of Resistance.
These are contemporary reasons.

After the War of Resistance began, attention was turned to publicly-run economic
construction in 1938. Since we could not cover the costs of our army we began
a production movement. However, at that time we only ordered some of the
troops to take part in production, growing vegetables, raising pigs, cutting
wood, making shoes and so forth on a trial basis. The aim was simply to rely
on this as a way of improving the livelihood of the soldiers. We still did
not plan to rely on it as a way of providing general finance and supplies.
Later we saw how successful the soldiers were in this experiment. They could
do a lot of productive work during their rests from training, and their living
standards really improved. After this happened there was a reduction in the
instances of desertion. On seeing this success, we applied the experience
widely among the troops garrisoned in the Border Region. An order was issued
from the Garrison Office [liushouchu] calling on the troops to learn
from this example. But we still aimed at improving livelihood and not at
meeting general needs. At that time, the government started to pay
attention to setting up several small factories but the official organizations
and schools were not even called on to grow vegetables and raise pigs. In
1939, the Kuomintang issued the Methods to Restrict the Activities
of Alien Parties and relations between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party worsened. The number of official organizations and schools in the Border
Region also increased. Although there was a small amount of subsidy for expenses
from outside, it was already far from sufficient. We were facing a serious
situation in finance and supplies. For these reasons we were forced to devise
a movement for all-round mobilization to become economically self-supporting.
We then raised the following questions at the congress for cadre mobilization.
Do you want to starve to death? Shall we disband? Or shall we set-to ourselves?
No one approved of starving to death, and no one approved of disbanding.
Let us set-to ourselves — this was our answer. We pointed out this simple
principle: in the final analysis, how did ancient man survive if not by getting
down to it himself? Why is it that we, the sons and grandsons of these ancient
men, do not even have this spark of intelligence? We also pointed out: it
is very common for an exploited peasant household in a feudal society with
three or four or even seven or eight mouths to feed to rely on the production
of only one labour power. Such a family must not only support itself but
must also pay 50 to 80 per cent of its income in rent and taxes to others.
Why are we not as good as such a family? Our army is made up entirely of
labour power, there are no women, no old and young. Nor is there the burden
of rent and taxes. How could hunger arise? We have these powerful organs
of government. Why cannot they provide their own clothing, food, housing
and equipment? We reflected for a while on the reasons why ancient man and
today's poor peasant were able to survive, and moreover to live better than
wild animals. Without doubt it was because each had a pair of hands, and
extended their hands using tools. We again considered ourselves. In fact
each of us has a pair of hands, and we can extend them with tools. This period
of reflection was very important. Thereafter our problems were immediately
solved. In sum we affirmed that we were able to overcome economic difficulties.
Our response to all problems in this respect were the three words 'set-to
ourselves'. This time the tasks we set were no longer the same as those of
1938. We no longer wanted merely to improve our livelihood, but also wanted
to meet some of our general needs. The scope of mobilization was not limited
to the army and we called on all forces, official organizations and schools
to carry out production. We implemented a call for a large-scale production
movement. The Song of Opening up New Land was a new song from
that period, and so was The Production Chorus. This call not
only mobilized the several tens of thousands of personnel in the Party,
government, army and schools, but also mobilized the common folk of the Border
Region. In that year the common folk opened up over 1 million
mu of new land. This call also reached all over north
China. Many units of the Eighth Route Army at the battlefront also carried
out production during breaks in the fighting. This was the first stage of
our movement for production self-sufficiency. This stage included the three
whole years of 1938, 1939 and 1940. During this stage the government's
industrial construction advanced and the army, official organizations and
schools developed agricultural production.

From 1941 until this Senior Cadres' Conference (December 1942) has been the
second stage. The foundation for self-supporting production had already been
firmly laid. During these two years, personnel increased and many people
unable to find enough to eat outside came to the Border Region seeking food.
The 359 Brigade also came to strengthen defences along the Yellow River.
The troops have grown in number and support from outside has completely
ceased. There are only two sources for the government's living and operating
expenses, the people and the government itself. As a result of two years'
hard work the proportion of the total amount coming from the government itself
is greater then that coming from the people. Experience during this stage
makes us feel grateful to those people who blockaded us. For the blockade
as well as having its negative drawbacks also brought about a positive side,
which was to encourage us to be determined to set-to ourselves. As a result
we achieved our goal of overcoming difficulties and trained experience in
running economic enterprises. The old saying 'hardship and distress help
you to success' is something we have come to understand entirely and consciously.

During the first of the two stages we have gone through, the troops, official
organizations and schools placed emphasis on agriculture and the government
developed industry. During the second stage we stressed commerce in order
to provide for the critical needs of the moment. With the exception of those
troops, official organizations and schools which persisted in the policy
of putting agriculture in a prime position, the rest developed business skills
and did not place such heavy emphasis on agriculture as in the first stage.
However, the government, troops, official organizations and schools all developed
industry and handicrafts. After this Senior Cadres' Conference we will enter
a new stage of development. In the new stage our economic base will already
be rather firm and our experience fairly wide. He should put agriculture
in first place, industry, handicrafts, transport and animal husbandry in
second place, and commerce in third place. Since commerce can only help in
an emergency, we cannot and should not attempt to lay a long-lasting foundation
upon it.

Distinctions between the government, the army, and the official organizations
and schools in the public sector of the economy can only be made in terms
of management and not in terms of an economic nature. Therefore in the following
discussion on self-supporting industry we shall treat the industry run by
all three as a whole, and when discussing the self-supporting economy of
the army and the official organizations and schools, we shall again look
at their industrial production separately. However, since industry run by
the government is the largest part of all publicly-run industry (government
textile mills produce 56 per cent of the 22,000 bolts of cloth produced annually
by all publicly-run textile mills; the output of government paper factories
is 70 per cent of all publicly-run paper production; the output of government
soap factories is 70 per cent of all Border Region soap production), it is
rational to deal with all self-supporting industry alongside that run by
the government.

Why should unified, self-supporting industry be run in such a dispersed way?
The main reason is that the labour force is divided among the various branches
of the Party, government and army. If it were centralized, we would destroy
their activism. For example, we encouraged 359 Brigade to set up the Daguang
Textile Mill and did not order it to combine with a government mill because
most of the several hundred employees at the mill were selected from the
officers and men of 359 Brigade. They work to produce the bedding and clothing
requirements of the Brigade and their enthusiasm is high. If we centralized,
we would destroy this enthusiasm. Another important reason for dispersed
operation is that raw materials are in many different locations and this
causes transport problems. For example, in order to meet the needs of the
Party, government and army personnel of Guanzhong, Longdong, Sanbian, and
Suide the bedding and clothing industry finds it best to produce cloth (or
buy it) on the spot, and to make it up on the spot. It certainly should not
concentrate its making up in Yan'an alone. Thus we use the activism of the
various branches to undertake production to meet their own needs. Adopting
the policy of 'dispersed operation' is correct and ideas aimed at centralizing
everything are wrong. However, enterprises of the same kind carried out within
the same area should be centralized as much as possible. Unlimited dispersal
is not profitable. At present we are already carrying out or about to carry
out centralization of this kind. One example is the handing over to government
control of the Tuanjie Textile Mill of the Central Committee's Central
Administration Bureau [Zhonguang Guanliju] and the Jiao-tong
Textile Mill of the Rear Services Department [honquinbu]. Perhaps
this process of dispersal at first and centralization later cannot be avoided.
Dispersal makes it possible to use the activism of various branches when
setting something up, and centralization enables the various branches to
get better supplies. But it is very important that dispersed management does
not lead to forgetting centralized leadership. This facilitates unified planning,
balanced supplies, and essential arrangements in rational management and
distribution. Up to now we have had great shortcomings in this respect and
they must be corrected in future. To sum up, our policy is 'centralized
leadership and dispersed operation'. Not only is industry like this, agriculture
and commerce are too.

At this point we must distinguish between two forms of publicly-run agriculture,
industry and commerce, the large and the small. Large should be centralized
and small should be dispersed. Examples of things for which we should encourage
dispersed operation include agricultural work such as growing vegetables,
raising pigs, cutting wood and making charcoal, and handicrafts such as
shoemaking, knitting, or small mills when both are run by one or more provision
units [huoshi danwei] to provide for their own daily food,
bedding and clothing needs and to make up deficiencies in running expenses;
or cooperatives and small-scale commerce operated to provide from consumption
costs or to earn a small profit to cover office expenses. These things must
be dispersed, being carried out and developed everywhere. They cannot be
centralized and should not be. This is one kind. However, there is another
kind. Examples of this are such things as large agricultural plans to provide
a definite amount of grain for a whole brigade or regiment of troops —
that is the military farming [tun tian]plan; large agricultural
stations run to meet the grain and vegetable requirements of many official
organizations; large workshops and factories run to provide for the bedding,
clothing and daily requirements of a Whole brigade, a regiment, or a large
number of official organizations; and large-scale commerce run to meet the
operating costs of such large units. All these things must have a unified
plan, centralized control, and strict regulation of expenditure. We cannot
allow them to lack coordination and operate without restraint. However,
agriculture, industry and commerce which should be under centralized leadership
must not be put entirely in the hands of one single official organization
for the whole Border Region. Instead the unified plan drawn up by such an
official organization (at present the Border Region Finance and Economy Committee
and its office) according to the needs of the whole and the parts and the
possibilities for operation, is handed over to the Party, government and
army systems for separate implementation. Within the Party, government and
army systems, there is also a unified plan with division in operation. These
are the features of the policy of 'centralized leadership and dispersed
operation' in the publicly-run sector of the economy of the Border Region.

In the five years since 1938, the public sector of the economy has made some
very great achievements. These achievements are worth treasuring for ourselves
and for our nation. That is, we have established a new model for the national
economy. The reason that this is a new model is that it is neither the old
Bismarkian model of the national economy nor the new Soviet model of the
national economy but it is the national economy of the New Democracy or the
Three People's Principles.

Our publicly-run, self-supporting industry has not yet reached the stage
of supplying fully all our needs. We still cannot talk of using surplus capacity
to meet the needs of the people. As yet those needs can only be met by the
Party and government providing organizational stimulus and the people setting-to
themselves. At present all our efforts are aimed at meeting the needs of
self-sufficiency within two or three years, particularly the need for cotton
cloth. We must not indulge in the fantasy that in present circumstances we
can have tremendous development. That will only do harm.

Below I shall discuss our publicly-run economic undertakings over the past
five years item-by-item beginning with self-supporting industry.

We first began to pay attention to the construction of publicly-run industry
in 1938. In that year the Border Region successively established the Refugee
Textile Mills, the paper factory, the bedding and clothing factory, the
agricultural implements factory, and the Eighth Route Army medicine factory.
Later on most of these factories each provided an important stimulus. At
this time the industrialist Mr Shen Hong voluntarily moved his ten
privately-owned machines to the Border Region to serve the Eighth Route Army,
and Mr Shen himself came to the Border Region to work. Thereafter many scientific
and technical personnel also came to the Border Region to work, enabling
the Border Region to gather a pool of scientific and technical talent as
the guiding force in the establishment of industry.

In 1939 the blockade of the Border Region economy began. Imports of industrial
products were limited. The Party Central issued the calls to 'set-to ourselves'
and to be 'self-reliant'. After the Border Region Government held the
agricultural exhibition in January, it held an industrial exhibition on Labour
Day, which stimulated enthusiasm to develop industry. The government and
the Rear Services Department sent people to Si'an to select and buy machines
and materials. They also organized spinning and weaving cooperatives and
oil-pressing and tile-making producer cooperatives in Yan'an and Ansai. Although
the machines and materials bought from Si'an were insufficient, they became
one of the major material strengths in the development of Border Region industry
over the past few years. In that year we also set up the Xinghua Chemical
Factory and the Guanghua Medicine Factory, and began to explore the thick
coal-seams at Shilipu in Yan'an county.

The development of industry in 1940 was carried out under the policy of becoming
'semi-self-sufficient' in production. It was decided to make the development
of light industry the key feature. In January we held the second industrial
exhibition and reviewed the strength of our factories. The Border Region
Bank lent 1 million yuan to expand factory capital, to set
up proper factory sites and to continue buying materials. In February the
Central Committee put forward the policy of 'centralized leadership and dispersed
operation'. In September Commander Zhu promoted the wool-spinning movement
and developed some wool-spinning and weaving undertakings. Very many large
official organizations and schools and troop units planned actively to set
up factories. They sent people to existing factories to study techniques.
They studied methods of control and fixed plans for the rapid development
of industry in 1941.

In 1941 the Central Committee put forward the policy of 'moving from
semi-self-sufficiency to complete self-sufficiency'. Under this policy the
Bank increased its loan by 3 million yuan and the government
also invested 500,000 yuan in the publicly-run factories. Many
official organizations and troop units also set aside funds to establish
factories. On the Eight of March Festival [International Woman's Day) we
held a production exhibition. In December the large Bank building was completed
and we held another industrial exhibition presided over by the Bank. The
following list gives the factories set up by the official organizations and
schools directly under the Central Committee in 1942 so as to show the efforts
made by the various units to develop industry at this time. These industries
are all handicraft factories, none large and some very small.

(1) The Xin Zhongguo Textile Mill, the Shiyan Factory, the wooden implements
factory, the carpentry factory, the first and second charcoal factories,
the tile factory, and the bedding and clothing factory run by the Finance
and Economy Office directly under the Central Committee. Total capital over
200,000 yuan. More than 220 employees.

(2) The Shengli Wool Factory and Shengli Carpentry Factory set up by the
Central Organization Department [Zhonguang Zuzhibu].

(3) The Qiyi Mill set up by the Central Propaganda Department
[Zhonguang Xuanchuanbu].

(4) The Tuanjie Textile Mill set up by the Marxism-Leninism Institute.

(5) The Sun Yat-sen Textile Mill set up by the Central Party School.

(6) The blanket factory, mill, alcohol factory, glass factory and machine
factory set up by the National Sciences Institute.

(7) The factories run by the Lu Hsun Academy, the North Shaanxi Public School
[shaangong], the Youth League cadres and the Women's University.

(8) The Xinhua Carpentry Factory and the bedding and clothing factory run
by the Central Printing and Publishing Department.

(9) The Yanyuan Paper Factory run by the instruction brigade [jiaodao
dadui].

The above lists twenty-seven factories run my the systems directly controlled
by the Central Committee with a total of 447 employees and more than 400,000
yuan capital. Most were set up with the aim of achieving economic
self-sufficiency.

These apart, there are several small factories run by the Economic Construction
Department [Jingjianbu], the Garrison Office, the Public Security
headquarters, the Border Region Finance and Economy Office, 359 Brigade and
various special offices. The Daguang Textile Mill of 359 Brigade has a fairly
large output. The various regiments of 359 Brigade also have their own
small-scale cotton or wool-spinning and weaving workshops.

The industry constructed from 1938 to 1941 is now expanding. Development
during 1941 was particularly vigorous and provided a foundation for the work
of 1942. However throughout the period construction was carried out rather
blindly. Many personnel lacked conscious awareness. They only thought of
the present and not of the future. They only thought of dispersed operation
and not of unified leadership. They had an entirely anarchic outlook. As
a result some factories closed down as soon as they were built, some announced
they were closing down after a short period of operation and some merged
with other factories. Only a portion of them have continued to exist. To
take textile enterprises near Yan'an, by 1942 only three large factories,
the Refugee, the Jiaotong and the Tuanjie and two small factories, the Xinghua
and the Gongyi remained. This winding path could not be avoided at the time,
since one can only gain experience from paths that one has already travelled.
But having gained experience from this stage, it would be better to avoid
following similar winding path in new industrial construction.

In 1942 the Reconstruction Department laid down the policy of consolidating
existing publicly-run factories and developing rural handicrafts. Government
investment in industry was 1,700,000 yuan. Rural handicrafts
run by the people had already greatly expanded before this year. In Suide,
for example, there were 600-700 cotton cloth hand-looms. Blanket-making,
leather-tanning and ironwork had also developed in other places. The public
and private textile industry has developed particularly quickly and it has
a lot of problems. In order to ensure the development of the textile industry,
we have reduced the import tax on raw cotton and foreign yarn to 1 per cent
and increased the import tax on bolts of cloth to 15 percent. In Suide the
bank organized the 'the Yongchang Native Cloth Producing and Selling Company'
with capital of 2 million yuan. It issues raw cotton and collects
yarn and cloth, encouraging the peasant women to spin yarn and weave cloth.
Since cloth-weaving by peasant households has expanded, much of the cloth
produced by privately-run, small-scale, capitalist textile production
cooperatives can no longer be sold. They also have difficulties with the
supply of native yarn. They have no choice but to reduce their scope of
operation, or to become fragmented, distributing their equipment among the
people and transforming themselves into family subsidiaries. Since publicly-run
textile mills chiefly supply for public use, they can maintain themselves.
But they also have problems with the supply of raw cotton and yarn. This
year the Zhenhua main factory and branch factory of the publicly-run paper
industry completed the task of supplying the Publications Office with 3,000
rolls of paper made from malan grass. The Lihua first and second
factories originally planned to produce 2,500 rolls but did not succeed.
This year's output will not exceed 500 rolls. Other publicly-run paper factories
experience great difficulty since there is no market for their paper. The
products of the publicly-run woollen industry such as blankets are aimed
at solving problems of finance. The government does not use them itself.
Some are exported and others are sold to the troops. The fine-spun woollen
thread produced is particularly well received and brings a good profit. Beginning
in September, the Jiaotong, Xinghua and Tuanjie textile mills, and the first
and second Lihua paper factories were all handed over to the control of the
Border Region Government from the Central Committee and the Rear Services
Department systems. In order to ensure raw materials for spinning and weaving
in 1943, we have begun to buy cotton from the three eastern counties this
year. We plan to buy 750,000 jin . To ensure the supply of
raw materials for paper manufacture, we have raised a levy of 730,000
jin of malan grass from the counties of Ganquan,
Yan'an, Ansai, Anding, and so forth. The factories should wait until they
have carried out the policy of better workers and simpler administration
before dealing with the recruitment of personnel.

The year 1942, and particularly this Senior Cadres' Conference, is an important
landmark in beginning to get rid of blindness and anarchy, and for introducing
consciousness and unified and planned operation into the whole of the public
sector of the Border Region economy, and especially into publicly-run industry.
Although the Central Committee put forward the principle of 'centralized
leadership and dispersed operation' long ago in February 1940, only in 1942
has it attracted comrades' attention. It has only obtained unanimous acceptance
at this Senior Cadres' Conference. Five years of practical experience has
made us progress a lot. After this conference, the whole public sector, industry
included, must be reorganized so that it develops healthily.

Above I have given a simple outline of the history of industry in the Border
Region over the past five years. By December 1942 we have seven kinds of
industry: textiles, bedding and clothing, paper, printing, chemical, tools
and coal and charcoal. There are seven textile mills with 26,900,000
yuan capital and 1,427 employees; eight bedding, clothing and
shoe factories with l,001,100 yuan capital and 405 employees;
twelve paper factories with 4,100,000 yuan capital and 437
employees; three printing factories with 5,200,000 yuan capital
and 379 employees; twelve chemical factories (medicine, soap, leather, pottery,
petrol, etc. ) with 17,030,000 yuan capital and 674 employees;
nine tool factories with 3,662,792 yuan capital and 237 employees:
and twelve coal and charcoal factories with 1,777,070 yuan
capital and 432 employees. The total figures are sixty-two factories
with 59,670,962 yuan capital and 3,991 employees. Although
our industry is still very small and mainly takes the form of handicrafts
with not much machine industry, nevertheless it has taken five years of effort,
laid down an initial foundation and played a part in ensuring supplies and
regulating commodity prices. Developing from this foundation, it can certainly
plan an even greater role.

Our most important self-supporting industries are the textile industry and
the bedding and clothing industry. These are what the several tens of thousands
of troops and personnel in the official organizations and schools rely upon
each year for their cloth, bedding and clothing. Without them we would be
frozen. In 1942 our textile industry was already capable of producing over
22,000 bolts of cloth. However we needed 40,000-50,000 bolts and we can only
reach our goal of self-sufficiency through great efforts. If we want to develop
textiles, we must carry out the following policies.

(1) We must raise cotton-cloth import duty and protect native cloth. At the
same time, the troops and official organizations and schools must use only
native cloth produced in the Border Region.

(2) We must generally encourage peasant women to spin cotton yarn and woollen
thread to guarantee supplies of yarn and thread to the factories. At the
same time, we can raise the income of the masses.

(3) We must solve problems of supply and distribution. No matter whether
publicly-run, privately-run or family subsidiary, the ability to develop
is chiefly related to whether problems of supply and distribution can be
solved. As regards raw materials, we are still not self-sufficient in raw
cotton and cotton yarn, and the sources are not dependable. Since communications
are not very good either, there are problems in distribution. We must arrange
things so that yarn-spinners can buy raw cotton whenever they want it, and
cloth-wavers can buy yarn whenever they want it. As regards finished products,
the markets for cotton cloth and woollen products are not stable. We must
arrange things so that producers can sell their products at any time; of
suitable market-prices. These problems must be solved by the combined strength
of the financial organs, commercial organs and the people's cooperatives.

(4) As for problems in the supply of clothing and bedding, we must act according
to the methods implemented by the Finance Department in 1942 so as to economize
on costs and get clothing at the right time.

Our papermaking industry can already produce over 5,000 rolls of
malan paper per year. In 1943 we can increase this to 7,000
rolls, which is entirely sufficient for our printing needs. However, we must
(i) unify the production and supply of paper. malan paper is
not suitable for general use apart from printing. It cannot be sold if the
printing departments do not want it. At present we have the following situation:
if the printing factories do not use enough, the paper factories cannot sell
and have to stockpile, capital turnover is sluggish and this influences
production. In order to solve this contradiction between supply and demand
in 1943, we should unify purchase and supply, and make precise economic
relationships between particular official organizations and paper factories.
(2) We must improve the quality of the paper. With existing equipment and
technical conditions the quality of the paper can be improved at a greater
cost in work and raw materials. From the point of view of function and
significance, a slightly greater cost is worth-while. On the other hand we
must study improvements in papermaking implements so as to raise production
efficiency.

Our printing industry is a modernized cultural tool, and a large quantity
of books and papers depend on it. In 1942 printing shops of the Central
Committee, Eighth Route Army and Northwest Bureau printed 51,600,000 characters.
In 1943 this can be increased to 53,600,000. However, we must increase equipment
and ensure the supply of paper.

Our chemical industry includes medicine, soap, leather, pottery, glass, alcohol,
matches, petrol and so forth. The Eighth Route Army and Guanghua medicine
factories can produce some of the Western and Chinese medicines needed for
military and public use, but we are still not entirely self-sufficient. In
1943 we should study the medicinal materials produced in the Border Region,
and set up the means for buying raw materials so as to increase the production
of necessary medicines. The Xinhua and Daguang factories make soap. Their
production increases daily and their quality is good. As well as meeting
our own needs, they can sell outside. In 1943 the Xinhua factory can produce
420,000 pieces of soap valued at 7 million yuan. And it has
prospects of development. The scale of leather-tanning is small and the cost
of materials high. It cannot develop much. If we could use plant materials
produced in the Border Region to manufacture leather for military use then
there would be some prospect of development. There are three small pottery
kilns making pottery for daily and industrial uses. Glass has already been
successfully trial-produced and we have decided to set up a factory. We can
also make our own alcohol for industrial and medical use. We have still not
been able to solve the problem of supply of phosphorous for making matches.
We are now investigating the possibility of getting it from animal bones.
Apart from these, there is petrol from Yanchang which supplies a little each
year for military use. The white wax it contains can be supplied for daily
use. In sum, the chemical industry must choose to expand and introduce the
supply of things which are urgently needed or are profitable and possible.
It should not bother with the rest.

Our tool-manufacturing industry supplies spinning-machinery, weaving-machinery,
cotton-bowing and crushing machinery. paper-making equipment, horse-carts,
carpenters' tools, agricultural implements and so forth. They are mainly
handicraft tools but are extremely important. We must do research into
improvements, and provide for expansion.

Our coal industry is concentrated in Yan'an and Guanzhong. Its output is
for daily use. Although it is small-scale, It is very important.

The Border Region lacks iron, which impedes the manufacture and improvement
of industrial and agricultural tools. At present we are holding trials in
Guanzhong and there are hopes of success. If we can make iron, we can solve
a major problem of the Border Region.

The above discussion has roughly covered the whole of publicly-run,
self-sufficient industry. Textiles, papermaking, bedding and clothing, printing,
chemical, tool-making and coal, all have reasonable prospects for development.
Their first target is to meet the needs of the army and government, and their
second is to supply some of the people's needs. We should make the following
improvements in 1943 in order to meet these targets.

(1) Increase capital (the amount to be decided). Each official organization
concerned should draw up concrete plans for consideration by the Finance
and Economy Office [of the Border Region Government - caijing
Banshichu ] with the aim of investing in each. Of the various
industries and in certain investigation and research undertakings, in order
to promote the development of self-sufficient industry in a planned way.

(2) Establish a unified leadership for the whole of self-supporting industry,
overcome the serious anarchy which exists now; The principle of 'centralized
leadership and dispersed operation' put forward earlier is correct but it
has not been thoroughly implemented. As a result, there is lack of planning,
excessive dispersal in production, lack of work inspection and waste of manpower
and materials among the industries run by the Reconstruction Department,
the Finance Department, the troops and the official organizations. In 1943
we should set up unified leadership under the Finance and Economy Office
and first make all self-supporting industry have a unified plan, no matter
which branch it controls. In the unified plan we should calculate as a whole
the supplies of raw materials, grain and straw, the totals for production
and the coordination of sales. In supplying raw materials we must deal with
the problem of many factories facing regular raw-material crises because
the region is spread out and these materials are not concentrated, or because
supply comes from outside. In supplying grain and hay, we should provide
the factories with the grain and hay they need as calculated by the Finance
Department so as to save distracting the responsible people at each factory
from their concentration on looking after production. In respect of the problems
of production and sales, the Finance Department and the official organization
concerned should, under the unified plan of the Finance and Economy Office,
give each factory responsibility to produce a definite amount so that whatever
is needed is produced in the quantity required and the finished products
are accepted by a definite organ at the right time solving the contradiction
between production and supply. In the unified plan we must realize mutual
aid between enterprises and get rid of departmentalism, which gives rise
to independence from each other or even hindrance of each other. We must
also realize unified inspection, giving encouragement and criticism so that
the poor catch up with the good. In sum, the problem of unified leadership
is the central problem in advancing self-supporting industry during 1943.
We must make thorough efforts to solve it.

(3) Establish the system of economic accounting [jingji
hesuanzhi] overcome the muddled situation within the enterprises.
To achieve this we must do the following. First, each factory unit should
have independent capital (liquid and fixed ) so that it can handle the capital
itself and its production is not frequently hindered through capital problems.
Second, income and expenditure in each factory unit should be handled according
to fixed regulations and procedures, putting an end to the confused situation
where income and expenditure are not clear and procedures are not settled.
Third, according to the actual situation in the factories some should adopt
the cost-accounting system [chengben kuaijizhi] and some need
not for the time being. However, all factories must calculate costs. Fourth,
each factory should have regulations for inspecting the rate of progress
in completing the annual and monthly plans. They should not let things slide
by doing without inspections for long periods. Fifth, each factory should
have regulations for economizing on raw materials and looking after tools,
and for fostering the practice of doing these things. All these points are
the chief elements of the system of economic accounting. Once we have a strict
accounting system, we can examine fully whether an enterprise is profitably
operated or not.

(4) Improve factory organization and administration, overcome the tendency
to build organizations like those of government organs
[jiguanhua] and relaxation of discipline. The first thing we
must reform is the irrational phenomenon of excessive staffing in factories.
At present many of our factories are extremely irrationally organized. There
are too many personnel, the organization is too large, the ratio between
administrative personnel and those directly involved in production is not
right, and systems for administering large factories are being used in our
small factories. These phenomena must be quickly corrected so that all factories
carry out 'enterprization' [qiyehua]. All factories should
shrink or grow according to their economic prosperity. All salaries should
be paid from the factories' own profit and not from tax grant, government
clothing and government grants. Second, we should implement the ten-hour
work system and the progressive piecework wages system [jijian leijin
gongzizhi] so as to raise work enthusiasm and increase production.
The eight-hour system is something to be implemented in future with the
development of large-scale industry. At present we should universally implement
the ten-hour system and make employees understand that this is a requirement
of the War of Resistance. An egalitarian system of wages destroys the distinction
between skilled labour and unskilled labour and the distinction between
industriousness and laziness, thus lowering work enthusiasm. We can only
stimulate labour enthusiasm and increase the quantity and quality of production
by replacing it with a progressive piecework wages system. For the moment
industrial production in the army cannot adopt the piecework wages system
and should have the piecework incentive system [jijian jiangli
zhidu]. Next, we should improve the work of the workers' congress
[zhigonghui] and launch a Zhao Zhankui (A model worker) movement
in every factory. Work done by the workers' congress which is not suitable
for raising labour discipline and activism must be changed. Within a factory,
the work of the administration, Party branch and workers' congress must be
united towards common ends. These common ends are to save as much as possible
on costs (raw materials, tools and other expenses), to make as many and as
good products as possible, and to sell them as quickly and as profitably
as possible. These tasks of lower costs, better products and faster sales
are the tasks shared by the administration, Party branch and workers' congress,
all three of which should unite as one. Working methods which divide their
work into three separate areas are entirely wrong. The three sides must organize
a unified committee, in the first place to put administrative personnel,
administrative work, and production plans on the right track. The task of
the Party and the workers' congress is to ensure completion of the production
plans. Finally the factory should reward the workers and employees with the
greatest achievements, and criticize or punish workers and employees who
commit errors. Without a suitable system of rewards and punishments, we Cannot
ensure the improvement of labour discipline and labour enthusiasm.

(5) Strengthen and enlarge textile mills, increase output of bolts of cotton
cloth, Struggle to achieve complete self-sufficiency in cotton cloth used
by the government in 1944. Improve woollen goods and, after supplying the
army's needs, increase the amount exported. In the bedding and clothing industry
fix standards for the cotton cloth used and the methods of making up. Ensure
that cotton garments and bedding can be used for two years.

(6) Put papermaking factories in order, improve the quality of paper. Ensure
it is fully satisfactory for printing and office use. Make us entirely
self-sufficient in paper for printing and office use in 1944.

(7) Increase production of coal and oil, ensure self-sufficiency and also
some exports. Set up ways of making or buying phosphorous so that match-factories
can be established. As for other industries, continue with or enlarge those
which are urgently needed or profitable. All those which do not match the
principle of ensuring supplies or are unprofitable should be merged or closed
down.

Previous section       
               Next
  section


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On the Development of the Productive Under-Takings
  of the Troops








ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR (8)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


  8. ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE PRODUCTIVE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TROOPS


Which of the three branches of the public sector of our economy -- the
government, the army and the official organizations -- is ultimately the
most important in terms of directly meeting requirements most quickly and
in greatest quantity? Our experience of the past few years shows that it
is the army. The army's productive undertakings have become the most important
part of the public sector of our economy because the army is the body which
is relatively most organized and has most labour power. So long as it has
no direct fighting duties, it can use all its time outside training, doing
work. And under our present backward technical conditions, labour is the
decisive factor in economic undertakings.

The production movement in the garrison forces of the Shaan-Kan-Ning Border
Region began in 1938, and one year before that in the official organizations
and schools. A joint production movement of the army and official organizations
and schools together began in 1939. In 1940, 359 Brigade took on the duty
of defence on the Yellow River and joined in the production movement. In
1941 and 1942, the army increased its responsibility for self-supporting
production just like the official organizations and schools. However, the
tasks taken on by the army were greater and occupied the most important position
in the total volume of self-supporting production. It would have been impossible,
if during these years the army had not for the most part provided its own
means of livelihood and running costs and instead had relied on the government.
Responding to the Party Central and Northwest Bureau's call for 'production
self-sufficiency', the army has fulfilled its production tasks in the midst
of the urgent work of fighting, guarding and training. The objective
circumstances of some troop units are better than those of others; some have
more duties than others, some have worked harder than others. As a result
their respective level of achievement has varied. Nevertheless, in general
they have all fulfilled their tasks. With very little capital and backward
techniques, they have all developed agriculture, handicrafts, transport and
commerce. Some have even set up relatively large-scale textile and papermaking
factories. During these two years, the capital invested by the government
in the army's productive undertakings has not exceeded 6-7 million
yuan in total. However, in that time they have both ensured
supplies worth over 300 million yuan and they have accumulated
roughly 80 million yuan capital from their agriculture, industry
and commerce. They have opened up several tens of thousands of
mu of land, and supplied rich experience for the whole of
production construction. They have not only played a political and military
role in the protection of the Border Region but have also played a role in
directly providing a large amount of financial supplies and in helping to
develop the Border Region economy.

Let us take a look at the self-supporting production of a certain company
in a certain regiment. The income and expenditure of this company during
1941 are shown in Table 8.1.

With the exception of 750 yuan production capital from upper
levels, miscellaneous payments of 360 yuan from the office,
supplementary production payments of 2,855 yuan and supplementary
provisions payments of 3,771 yuan given by the regimental supplies
office, a total of 7,736 yuan, the expenditure of 52,530
yuan shown [Table 8.1] was met by the company's own production
of 44,794 yuan. This excludes the capital accumulated for use
in production the following year.

According to these figures, each regiment of ten companies can be self-supporting
up to 440,440 yuan.

Furthermore, there is still the self-supporting production run by the regimental
headquarters [shown in Table 8.2]. The total Value of production of the
companies, battalions and regiments is 703,828 yuan. The regiment's
total annual expenditure (including grain and a proportion of clothing and
bedding) is 896,638 yuan, which leaves a shortfall of 185,510
yuan to be supplemented from upper levels. As a result the
regiment's own self-supporting production accounts for 79 per cent of consumption
and supplements from above account for 21 per cent. If we add the large amount
of self-supporting production carried out by the brigade headquarters, the
proportion for the whole brigade far exceeds 80 per cent.

The following material is a summary by the Garrison Office of five years'
production by the garrison army. We can see the general situation in
self-supporting production by the army.

 

  
Table 8.1





Income and expenditure of a regimental company in 1941



1941 Income (yuan)

1941 Expenditure (yuan)



Transport of coal and charcoal (shitan)

698.20
Miscellaneous Expenses

1,312.00


Transport of salt

772.45
2 mules

2.850.00


Sawn planks

3,256. 40
1 donkey

574.00


Wooden beams

630.00
600 sweat shirts

600.00


Pig sales

738.02
shoes (2 pairs per man)

405.50


Stables

2,256.00
87 towels

128.00


Corn sales

998.20
Tobacco

179.00


Export business

935.60
Basins

90.00


Miscellaneous business

481 25
Production tools

181.00


Oil (840 jin)

16,800.00
Oil

16,880.0


Meat (1,610 jin)

16,100.00
Meat

16,100.00


Vegetables (4,690 jin)

4,690.00
Vegetables

4,690.00


Charcoal (5,000 jin)

500.00
Charcoal

500.00


Firewood (2,555 jin)

2,555.00
Firewood

2,555.00


Received Production capital

750.00
Supplementary provisions

3.771.00


Miscellaneous office payments

360.00
5 months' pay

567.50


Supplementary production payments

3,885.00
Rifle-cleaning

22.00


Supplementary provisions payments

3,771.00
Summer clothing

100.00


 
 
New Year costs

146.00


 
 
Office

339.00


 
 
Horse feed [?magan]

620.00


Total

Net income 6.537.12 yuan

59,147.12
Total

52,530.00



    Table 8.2
  




The values (in yuan) or self-supporting production
by

Regimental headquarters


Regimental headquarters

197,426


Directly controlled forces

27,149


1st Battalion headquarters

18,629


2nd Battalion headquarters

12,777


3rd Battalion headquarters

7,408


Total

263,389




A SUMMARY OF FIVE YEARS PRODUCTION BY THE GARRISON ARMY
(a)    Outline

In the new and difficult environment since the War of Resistance and following
Chairman Mao's call for production, the garrison army began the production
movement in the autumn of 1938. At the time, production was not yet aimed
at self-sufficiency and was merely making up for deficiencies in the necessities
of life. We could only give each member of the force 0.05
yuan for vegetables and 1.5 jin of grain per
day. At the market-prices of the time each yuan could buy 30-40
jin of vegetables, 2 jin of edible oil, or 100
jin of fire wood. With a hundred men in a company, each day
they had 5 yuan for vegetables. If they bought vegetables,
they could not buy oil, salt and firewood. If they bought oil, salt and firewood,
they could not buy vegetables. Pork was even further beyond their reach.
As for their clothing and bedding, you could rarely see a soldier whose clothing
was not darned and patched. Bullet bags were so tattered they could not longer
carry bullets, which had to be put in pouches. Some wore padded clothes in
summer and some wore shorts in winter. Some went on parade barefoot in the
snow and some could not even find a broken old leather bag for leg wrappings.
These were the material conditions of the troops then.

The methods used in the production movement at that time were: (i) to set
up cooperatives; (ii) to plant lots of vegetables; (iii) to set up
grinding-mills, to raise pigs and sheep, to make bean curd and to grow bean
sprouts; (iv) to mobilize every soldier to learn to make shoes; (v) to knit
woollen clothes, socks, shoes and gloves; (vi) to promote economy and prevent
waste. The result of half a year's production in 1938 exceeded the plan,
and the soldiers' life was greatly improved. For example, they ensured
self-sufficiency in vegetables, each week they had two pork meals, they partly
met requirements for woollen clothes, socks, gloves and shoes, and they
supplemented the supply of bullet bags, pouches, leather bags and leg wrappings.

The Significant achievements in production of the latter half of 1938 raised
the troops' enthusiasm for, and trust in, production. So in 1939 even greater
tasks for self-supporting production could be put forward, reducing the burden
on the people of the Border Region. In 1939 it was stipulated that the troops
in their agricultural work should plant grain as well as vegetables so as
to fulfil the task of producing 4,700 tan of grain. Most production
in 1939 was agricultural and 25,136 mu of new land was opened
up over the whole year. At first it was estimated that 2
tou of hulled grain could be harvested per mu
giving a total of 4,986 tan. But because the new land
was just being broken in, there were not enough agricultural tools, leadership
experience was not even and some of the land suffered natural disasters,
only 2,590 tan of hulled grain was harvested. At this time
the troops still had little capital and commerce had not yet developed.

In 1940 the production tasks for the troops stipulated that each section
should provide grain for one-and-a-half months, a total of 3,400
tan. In that year the troops opened up 20,679.7 mu
of land which should have given 4,136 tan of hulled
grain. Because the harvest was poor, they only got 2,400
tan. In order to fulfil its duties, each section also took-on
salt transport, digging liquorice root and felling trees (in Guanzhong they
also did some commercial work). The garrison army earned a total profit of
2,236,516.16 yuan from this supplementary production. This,
together with the agricultural harvest, provided grain for one-and-a-half
months and also met part of the supplements for equipment.

In 1941 the operating budget for all troops was 4,479,536.40
yuan and the task for production was to provide 400,000
yuan. However, the result was entirely different. The requirement
for operating expenses was much greater and the task for self-supporting
production was much greater than originally estimated. Chiefly as a result
of the call by Commander Zhu to select six battalions to get salt, we got
a total of 56,966 packs of salt valued at 236,408.90 yuan.
In agriculture 14,794.6 mu were opened up and 1,170
tan of miscellaneous grains harvested. In commerce the total
profit was 12,019,592.72 yuan. Because of price inflation,
the value of paper money fell. Regular expenses and clothing and bedding
expenses for the whole year were 7,881,757.17 yuan. (All these
excludes the income and expenditure of one regiment and the forces in Guanzhong.)
The average daily expenses for provisions per man over the whole year was
0.50 yuan. Apart from the 0.10 yuan issued by
the State, we provided 0.40 yuan ourselves, a total of 2,592,000
yuan. The total for the above regular expenses, bedding and
clothing expenses and provisions expenses was 10,473,757.17
yuan, 5,673,804.53 yuan above the original budget.
There was still a surplus after payments were made from production income.

In 1942 the budget for expenses (excluding grain, clothing and bedding) was
5,833,636 yuan and we took on the task of helping central expenses
with 2,500,000 yuan. The year's production plan was for 12,400,000
yuan. By August (statistics for the later period not yet
available), commerce had earned a profit of 38,969,230,20
yuan and industry had a profit of 431,773.40
yuan, giving a total of 39,401,004.60 yuan.

By June we had received 1,440,058.60 yuan running expenses,
and supplementary expenses for the first issue of summer clothing of 206,825
yuan. Actual expenditure was running expenses 7,750,598.85
yuan, supplements for bedding and clothing 3,067,730.60
yuan, and supplements for provisions (the State issued 0.70
yuan per man per day and the actual cost was 3.00
yuan) over the half-year, 9,180,000 yuan. Most
of the winter clothing and bedding for the latter half of the year was provided
by the brigades and regiments themselves. The second issue of summer clothing,
half of the padded cloth, 40 per cent of the bedding, and bindings, bullet
bags, grenade pouches, padded cotton shoes, and light shoes, these eight
items had a total value of 12,641,200 yuan. Other things like
charcoal for heating in winter were provided by each unit itself. As for
animal fodder, in 1941 we provided two months' horse-feed ourselves. In 1942
the Finance Department issued eight months' hay for horses, leaving two months'
unaccounted for. In general we cut two months' supply of grass ourselves,
saving roughly 1,200,000 yuan. Furthermore, in 1942 the budget
for horse fodder was 11,000 tan. According to the regulations
of the Finance Department 1 tou of hulled grain is equivalent
to 2 tou of horse fodder. But this is insufficient and it is
necessary to increase the annual amount by 2,750 tan which
comes to 1,375,000 yuan at 500 yuan per
tan.

The outcome of five years' production has been that, besides meeting annual
running expenses, clothing and bedding expenses and provisions expenses,
current financial assets include 24 million yuan commercial
capital 556 transport animals (excluding plough oxen, and excluding the First
and Fifth regiments) with a value of 11,232,000 yuan, and factory
capital of 712,000 yuan. The combined total is 35,944,00
yuan.

(Note: The above summary does not include 359 Brigade and the peace preservation
corps, [bao'an budui].)

(b) Lessons

(1) The reason why the forces of the Border Region have been able to carry
out self-supporting production and solve great problems over the past few
years is their immense labour power and better organizational strength, and
the fact that the Border Region also has rich resources to develop. This
experience proves that the troops can be entirely self-sufficient. Because
the troops have solved the problem of self-sufficiency over the past few
years and increased their faith in production, they have realized that
self-sufficiency is one of the major tasks in building-up the army, and is
one of the best methods overcoming hardships and coming through a difficult
period.

(2) The production construction of the troops is part of the economic
construction of the whole Border Region. Although in the past the troops
did well in working hard to fulfill production tasks, ideologically they
did not emphasize the relationship with the construction of the Border Region.
Therefore they still had a shallow understanding of the development of the
agricultural and industrial base. They were not good enough at working hard
to establish a secure foundation. Their thinking on unified construction
was also muddled. There was even a lack of coordination between units and
incidences of serious breaches of command discipline. These shortcomings
must be resolutely and ruthlessly corrected.

(3) Under conditions of backward production methods, the production base
must chiefly be built us depending on the labour power and economic base
of each unit. Therefore the government's financial and economic policy should
look after the productive undertakings of these units. Within the confines
of the government's unified policy, they should be allowed full development
and profitability. Only this way can the development of productive undertakings
have greater organization, greater strength, greater unity, greater rationality,
and greater ability to fight the blockade in a unified way. The greatest
shortcoming of the troops in production is to pay most attention to commerce
and to neglect agriculture. In future they must improve and encourage
agricultural production.

(4) In their productive work, the troops should grasp ideological leadership
tightly and set up and strengthen the regulations and leadership organs in
production. They should correct and guard against cadres doing things without
coordination, becoming decadent, eating and living well, spending recklessly,
not economizing, not stressing effective results and adopting other corrupt
practices.

The above sums up our opinions.

The self-supporting production of 359 Brigade is the best among the various
units in the garrison forces. In the first place the leading comrades of
359 Brigade have grasped the strategy of agriculture first, industry and
transport second, and commerce third. They have taken advantage of their
lack of active duties, the suitable environment of Nanniwan for agriculture
and of The Suide special military area for light industry. They have mobilized
the large amount of labour power and within three years have completed large
assignments for economic self-sufficiency. In particular they have grasped
the policy of taking agriculture as the core so that the economic base rests
on a secure foundation. Second, the troops of 359 Brigade have carried out
the following concrete economic construction: (i) Their grain production
in 1940 was a failure, but they were not disheartened. They persevered in
1941 and got tremendous results. In 1942 they strengthened this foundation.
They opened up 25,000 mu of land and planted grain, vegetables,
hemp and tobacco, meeting the troops requirements of vegetables, lamp-oil,
hemp for shoes and tobacco, and supplementing supplies of grain, vegetable-oil,
horse beans and fodder. Thus after only two years' work they laid the foundation
of the agricultural economy of all the companies in the brigade. Further
more, the period of labour for all the officers and men was no more than
two months per year. Ten months were left for troop exercises, and training
was not impeded. According to the new method thought out by the brigade,
each company sets up a specialist agricultural labour group of six or seven
men and the masses of soldiers only provide extensive assistance during the
busy agricultural seasons. In this way training time is even greater. (ii)
They have used the farms to develop animal husbandry. In 1942 the whole brigade
maintained 2,000 pigs which met the troops' requirements for meat and oil.
Since the troops ate more meat, they saved grain. In addition they organized
groups of men to gather firewood, make charcoal and saw planks, which not
only provided for their own fuel and building needs but also provided a surplus
for sale. (iii) They also built up industry and handicrafts. In 1941 they
assigned some soldiers and rear-service personnel to establish the Daguang
Textile Mill and Daguang Soap Factory. Now there are 'Daguang' products on
the market in addition to those they consume themselves. They set up ten
salt-wells in Suide and Nanniwan, one charcoal-pit, two carpentry factories,
three iron-factories, six mills, eight flour-mills and one oil-press. They
also mobilized the soldiers during their spare time after training to spin
woollen thread, to make various kinds of utensils from willow and elm wands,
to make writing-boards from birch bark, to make vegetable-boxes and to make
lamplighters. This work done by the soldiers not only benefited the whole
but also profited the individuals. The brigade stipulated that four-fifths
of all the products of handicraft labour done using publicly-owned tools
should come under public ownership and one-fifth should belong to the private
individual, and the two-thirds of that produced not using publicly-owned
tools should come under public ownership and one-third should belong to the
private individuals. This method provided commodities for public use and
was also equivalent to raising the soldiers' pay. (iv) They established a
strong transport undertaking. Now they have a transport team which owns 600
pack mules and is fully engaged in the transport of salt and goods. Along
the road between Suide, Sanbian and Yan'an they have set up ten stables and
settled a group of older and weaker personnel. (v) Their commercial organ
is the Daguang Store, which has ten branches besides the main shop. The profit
in the first nine months of 1942 was over 6 million yuan. However,
this commerce only makes up 10 per cent of the brigade's total production
of 60 million yuan (at Yan'an market-prices). (vi) The brigade
has implemented a unified production plan, and regulations for production
and supply. The production plan for the whole brigade is fixed by the brigade
headquarters. Some undertakings are directly run by the brigade headquarters
such as large-scale industry, transport and commerce. Others are run by the
regiments and companies such as agriculture, animal husbandry, small industry
and commerce. Inspections are carried out at each level from brigade down
to individual companies. The regulations for production are also fixed by
the brigade headquarters. The arrangements for soldiers spinning woollen
thread described above is an example of this. The regulations for supply
also preserve unity. Although the agricultural, industrial transport and
commercial undertakings are each run separately, all expenditure above a
certain level must be approved from above. Lower levels cannot spend freely.
This prevents instance where free spending of the fruits of production bring
unequal blessings or waste. It ensures the utility of the whole brigade.
(vii) They have not only developed large amounts of production but have also
carried out the policy of strict economy rigorously. For example, they laid
down that they would issue three suits of summer clothing every two years
and two suits of padded clothing every three years, and that new bedding
and clothing would only be issued in exchange for old. They also issued needles
and thread to the soldiers so that they could repair clothes themselves.
Thereafter bedding and clothing lasted longer, and the soldiers took greater
care of them, greatly reducing these expenses. As mentioned above, they ordered
the soldiers to make writing-boards from birch bark, vegetable-boxes and
lamplighters, and issued wool to the soldiers to knit socks, gloves and so
forth. This not only increased the supply of daily necessities but also
economized on purchases of these things. All building construction and tool
repairs for the whole brigade is done by the troops and none is contracted
out. All these things have not only economized on expenditure but have also
developed care for public property among the officers and men, attention
to results, opposition to waste and a simple style of work that rejects
ostentation.

The following material is a summary of three years' production by 359 Brigade,
drawn-up by its leading comrade. It shows us the actual situation in the
brigade's agriculture, industry and commerce.

A SUMMARY OF PRODUCTION AND CONSTRUCTION IN 359 BRIGADE OVER THE PAST
THREE YEARS

In the three years since this brigade has returned to take up the defence
of the Border Region, the implementation of the economic policy of self-reliance
and self-sufficiency has been a new creation in building up the army. With
the exception of grain received from the government, we have achieved 82
per cent self-sufficiency in all other expenses through carrying out this
policy. In this way we overcame difficulties with material resources, improved
our troops' provisions, consolidated our forces, promoted the physical strength
of the soldiers, consolidated army discipline and strengthened the ties between
the army and the people. The following outlines our experience over the past
three years in agricultural, industrial and commercial operations.

(A) Agriculture

In response to the call for a production movement, we began agricultural
production in 1940. We planned to plough and plant enough land to be
self-sufficient for two months' grain, to be entirely self-sufficient in
vegetables from the summer onwards, and to raise enough pigs to cover our
meat requirement for the New Year festivities. However, since the areas where
we were stationed in Suide, Mizhi and Wuqi counties were heavily populated
with little spare land, we had to travel to places over 100
li away (Jiulishan and Qingjian) to open up new land and wasted
a lot of time in travel. Although enthusiastic and taking trouble, we did
not investigate carefully nor plan suitably. As a result the harvest did
not match the capital spent on tools and seeds. However, the vegetables planted
near where we were stationed enabled us to be self-sufficient for these after
the summer Each provisions unit was issued 0.10 yuan provisions
expenses per man per day, barely enough to buy oil and salt. The troops had
to go up to 100 li away carrying charcoal for sale. They earned
enough to make more charcoal and a surplus to buy pigs for raising. These
productive activities laid the foundations for the companies to improve
provisions. Apart from opening up all the public unused land (public cemeteries,
the neighbourhood of temples, odd pieces of land near cities, stretches of
old unused road, old military defence works, etc. ) around the towns of Suide,
Mizhi, Jiaxian, Wuqi and Qingjian where we were stationed and along the river
defences, we also rented land from the local inhabitants to plant vegetables.
The spirit of bitter struggle and hard work of the commanders and troops
gained great sympathy and understanding from people of all walks of life.
Some of the landlords from whom we rented land (like the landlords and rich
peasants of Yihezhen) would not accept our rent payments. Other poor peasants
voluntarily granted temporary tenant rights. This came from the deep sympathy
and concern of the people for the army. For those stationed in poor agricultural
regions, particularly those where the climate only suited summer and autumn
crops, agricultural production was not only necessary to solve difficulties
in running expenses, but was also essential to maintain the correct relationship
with the people. From the end of 1939 to the spring of 1940, the troops did
not have enough expenses for provisions and were short of vegetables. Personnel
sent out to buy sometimes resorted to the serious actions of forced purchase
or purchase at unfair prices. In carrying out agricultural production, we
ensured a good political influence among the people with the exception of
the small number of people in the county towns who relied on market gardening
for their livelihood and spoke angrily of the poor defence forces who offered
no profit.

We solved the following problems with our production in 1940: (i) We became
self-sufficient in vegetables after May. (ii) We added pig-raising to
self-sufficiency in vegetables and improved provisions in the latter half
of the year so that each man could eat 1 jin of meat per month.
(iii) Each provisions unit made their own agricultural implements and raised
over ten pigs. (iv) We proved the old saying: 'If you have vegetables you
have half a year's grain, if you have no vegetables you have half a year's
famine.' The troops' grain was sufficient. (v) Planting grain meant opening
up new land. In the first year we got no profit from grain since it was too
far from the places we were stationed. We could not weed at the right time
and we wasted too much effort in travel. For these reasons, the planned grain
harvest was not realized.

In 1941 the troops found land they could farm and implemented the policy
of farming which the commander-in-chief himself ordered. Each man on average
farmed 6 mu of land. Each mu needed seven days'
work including opening up, planting seed, weeding and harvesting. Six
mu required forty-two days' from which was obtained roughly
3 tou (lower-middle harvest) of hulled millet, and hay, also
worth 3 tou hulled grain. The grain and hay together could
be exchanged for one suit of padded clothing. If an upper-middle harvest
could be obtained, the return would increase by one-quarter. Various secondary
crops such as corn, hemp and sesame also gave a harvest the same as that
of millet. Around the edges of the 6 mu we could plant many
subsidiary crops such as castor, pumpkins, beans and so forth giving good
harvest. In addition, each man planted half a mu to provide
vegetables for a whole year. Also among the products were hot peppers, garlic,
onions, lamp-oil, tobacco, grass rope for sandals, and so forth. Since we
had field crops, it was easy to raise domestic animals such as pigs, cows,
sheep, chickens, ducks, rabbits etc. As pig-raising was most profitable,
it was the major subsidiary. Reckoning at one pig for every five men, a hundred
men could raise twenty pigs. As well as this they could raise three sows.
Every year each sow can have two litters of at the very least four piglets.
With no swine fever and no untoward events, they could produce twenty-four
pigs per year. Killing pigs at a rate of two a month, we would have to kill
twenty-four a year. The pig-breeding rate would counterbalance the slaughter
rate and there would still be surplus piglets. From birth to slaughter,
piglets-can grow 5 liang per day on average. In actual practice
the annual average was indeed one pig per five men.

As a result of agricultural production, there was a lot of vegetable refuse.
Since we were grinding flour, we got the chaff remains from the husking,
and since we were making beancurd we got the bean residues, etc. We could
raise the pigs using waste and gain great benefits. Now the entire brigade
has achieved all of the above. The wealth obtained from agriculture and animal
husbandry by each provisions unit is increasing. And this wealth is controlled
by the party branch, supervised by all the soldiers and used rationally according
to the regulations laid down at high levels. As yet there is no summary for
1942, but harvests will definitely be no less than last year.

Reviewing the agricultural production movement, we can make the following
summary of its merits and shortcomings.

Merits

(1) The troops carried out political mobilization concerning the performance
of the tasks so that all personnel realized that the slogan of self-sufficiency
in production put forward by Chairman Mao was of great significance in
maintaining unity in the War of Resistance and in passing through an economic
crisis. The commander-in-chief himself led the way after his return to the
Border Region and strengthened the soldiers' enthusiasm and endurance.

(2) Improvements in real livelihood made us feel the advantages of the production
movement.

(3) The brigade and regiments fixed the whole of the annual -production plan,
stipulated the production tasks for the companies, and conscientiously supervised
the regiments' guidance and supervision of the companies' production.

(4) The companies organized production committees to discuss and arrange
the implementation of production tasks, to inspect and examine the economy
(the companies' economies are entirely public) and to ensure the implementation
of the supply regulations.

(5) Mow every company is enjoying a self-sufficient, rich peasant family
standard of living because of its agricultural production.

Shortcomings

(1) We have not paid full attention to production tools, we have not organized
and employed plough oxen and we have not selected some soldiers (from among
the cooks) to specialize in farming throughout the year. We have generally
adopted the method of all-round mobilization, wasting time and impeding
troop-training.

(2) Some cadres have taken a negative attitude towards farming and do not
strive to get a larger harvest by extending the land farmed.

(3) We have not been conscientious in gathering manure.

(4) We have no cadres specially directing production.

According to experience, we must use oxen for ploughing, carting manure and
harvesting (using ox-carts), prepare sufficient tools, assign cadres with
special responsibility for directing production (a deputy battalion leader
for production and company leaders with special duties), assign soldiers
(from among the cooks) to carry out agricultural production throughout the
year, mobilize all the officers and men to take part at planting, weeding
and harvesting times, and stipulate the number of workdays so as to use a
fixed amount of time. In this way the total work per man to farm 6
mu and cut a year's fire wood will not exceed two months, and
we shall not only get grain but will also become entirely self-sufficient
for all daily vegetables, meat, straw shoes, firewood, shoes and socks. The
last few items alone make up one-third of all running expenses so they cannot
he considered a small problem. The grain harvest can sustain 2,000 men.

The above is a brief summary of the brigade's agricultural production.

The following list shows how much work and time it would cost a provisions
unit for a hundred men to travel over 60 li to make its purchases
if it did not plant vegetables itself.



Monthly vegetable consumption (1
      jin per man per day)

      3,000 jin


Number of purchases (each time buying 100
      jin)

      30 times


Labour days per purchase (each time using
      2 men)

      4 days


Actual days per purchase (there and back
      2 days)

      2 days


Labour days per month

      120 days


Actual days per month

      60 days


Labour days per year

      1,440 days


Actual days per year

      720 days



Using this table alone we can explode the lie that 'agricultural production
is profitless and hinders training' .

(B) Industry

There follows a summary of our experience in establishing and developing
the Daguang Textile Mill and of other handicrafts.

(1) Motivation and intentions.

The troops need clothing and bedding every year. The raw materials for bedding
and clothing are the chief problems in supply work. In the winter of 1939
after the troops returned to the defence of the Border Region, we had
difficulties in buying these raw materials and also had no money. In response
to the call by Chairman Mao for self-reliance, self-sufficiency and overcoming
difficulties to build up the Border Region, we made a long-term plan to run
a textile mill.

(2) Trial beginnings.

We began to think of running a textile mill in September 1940. At the time
there was a man from Hebei in the short-term training class set up by the
supply department who could weave cloth. We set up a small wooden loom, bought
some foreign yarn and tried it out. Within ten days all the yarn was woven
and the cloth was quite good. We could weave 100 feet per day [Chinese
measurement] and costs worked out one-third cheaper than buying cloth.

Since there were weavers among the troops we decided to set up a factory
and undertook the following: (i) we bought wood and built nineteen small
looms in our own machine-repair shop, and we bought four metal looms from
Shanxi; (ii) we bought yarn from local merchants on credit; (iii) we selected
twenty skilled men from places like Gaoyang in Hebei who were among the troops.

In this way the factory got going. It was not only profitable and convenient,
but also solved problems in buying cloth.

In December 1940 we decided to enlarge the factory in order to achieve
self-sufficiency in cloth for the whole brigade.

Early in 1941 we abolished service personnel at all levels throughout the
brigade, and collected together over a hundred youths as apprentices to study
weaving.

We again bought two iron looms from the northwest of Shanxi and made a further
eleven large wooden ones ourselves. In February and March we made another
sixteen large wooden looms, and fourteen more towards the end of March. We
thus had sixty-six looms of all kinds. At the same time we made spinning-wheels
and other essential small implements.

As regards raw materials, in 1941 the government issued the brigade with
400,000 yuan capital for production. Of this, 250,000
yuan was divided among the regiments. Of the remaining 150,000
yuan, 100,000 was spent buying 300 bales of yarn (each bale
was 7 jin 14 liang and cost 280-90
yuan) and some things that had to be bought (such as the wire
for the looms which we could not make ourselves and had to purchase outside).

Administered by the supply department accountants, the workers divided into
yarn-starchers, weavers, thread-joiners [luoxian], and threaders
[daxian]. Each group had twenty to thirty men. About ten skilled
men became master workmen and took charge of the technical work in starching
and reeling the yarn. Intelligent youths studied weaving, and the less bright
and the younger did threading and thread-pining.

As soon as the looms started working, we became aware of a need for more
labour power. So taking the name, the Daguang Textile Mills, we employed
fifty young boys and girls from the Suide areas as apprentices. We also took
captured bandits and people who had committed mistakes from the military
courts. In this way we assembled our labour force. There were then over 200
workers administered by the military training unit and the supply department.
They were divided into four platoons and twelve squads (including one women's
platoon; each platoon had three squads of ten or more people).

The factory was roughly taking shape. But there were still two difficult
problems to be solved, first the supply of capital and raw materials, and
second the control, education and training of the workers.

(a) The problem of the supply of capital and raw materials 
In May 1941 we borrowed 200,000 yuan from the Border Region
Bank but it still did not provide support for long. After that we had to
make friends, built up relationships, liaison with rich merchants and buy
raw materials on credit, making repayments at fixed periods.

Before May 1941 most foreign yarn was bought from Shanxi. Afterwards, because
supplies were cut off, we could only buy from Sian and Yan'an (Shenxin and
Guanghe brands). We also bought raw cotton from Sian and Yan'an.

The supply of local yarn came as a result of the government's encouragement
of local women to spin. At first the wage for spinning 1
jin of yarn was from 3 to 7 yuan (raw cotton
cost 4 yuan per jin ), and it was divided into
three grades. In July and August this was clanged to issuing 11/2
jin of prepared Cotton in return for 1 jin of
yarn. In February and March of 1942 this was again changed into 2
jin or 2 jin 2 liang for 1
jin of yarn.

Because the supply of yarn from the people was insufficient and of poor quality,
we set up our own yarn-spinning factory with four cotton-bowing machines
and forty spearing machines in October 1941. By July 1942 we still lacked
skilled workers and the cotton bowed by the machines could not all be used
on the machines (the raw cotton was poor). Now only the four bowing machines
are still going and spinning has stopped.

(b) The problem of controlling, educating and staining the workers. 
The number of workers has increased but there are many different elements
and they are not easy to control. They young service personify in particular
were used to a free life and had not taken part in labour before they left
home. At first they would fight, curse and carry on every day. They would
say 'We've seen all the grocers, big and small' and would not accept any
controls.

Most of the women from the villages had come because of marriage problems.
They had been sent to the factory by the women's aid committee of the government.
Whenever they talked of marriage, some cried and some laughed. They often
asked for help in solving their marriage problems.

Persuading captured bandits to work was difficult.

Many of the people being punished for mistakes were company and platoon cadres
who maintained their old character, were unwilling to work and were
troublemakers.

From January to March 1941, the head of the supply department tried hard
to correct them and achieved some success.

During this time, approximately twenty skilled workers acted as master-workers
and taught the youths in the weaving group. First they used the small looms
(needed little strength and easy to manage). The master-worker did all the
preliminaries and told them how to start the loom, how to connect broken
threads, how to handle the shuttle, and how to coordinate hand and foot.
At the beginning they only wove for two or three hours a day. After one or
two months, this group had mastered these looms and moved onto the large
wooden ones, and another group came to learn. Thus group-by-group the teaching
went on until March 1941.

The work of joining the threads and threading was easy to learn and only
needed patience. Once you had learned to join the threads properly, you were
all right. But it needed practice. When unpracticed, the results were not
good enough for weaving.

When the work began and the young apprentices sat at the looms or did their
joining and threading, their backsides ached after a short time, yarn easily
broke, tempers rose, there was little patience and they wasted a lot of thread
and broke some looms. So before March 1941, products were no good.

Apart from strengthening technical training and raising technical skills,
the chief way of dealing with this was political encouragement and education
in revolutionary labour discipline. This made the workers consciously realize
the important significance of production, made them patient in their work
and improved their enthusiasm for production and their labour discipline.

Various methods of education were used to implement military discipline.
The head of the supply department, He Weizhong, the head of the military
training unit and the branch Party secretary personally came to give guidance
every day, explaining that production at the rear was equal to fighting at
the front, that they should accept organization, that work was glorious and
that they were the working class. We proposed a competition with emulation
between apprentices and emulation between male and female workers. We implemented
a system of rewards and punishments and a system for getting time off. At
the same time each person was given some writing materials every month, and
we bought some entertainment equipment.

Thereafter the workers felt that to work was glorious. After work they wanted
to study culture and politics and to live a military life. As a result life
became organized on military lines. In this way we gradually set up the
soldier-worker system, and the factory got going in the right way. Before
breakfast there were early-morning exercises and running. After breakfast
they went to work. In winter and spring there was a ten-hour day.

We then encountered new difficulties.

The factory site was a hired house. As it was not convenient for work, we
built ten or so cave houses ourselves for the workers to live in. Unexpectedly
the cave houses were moist and damp, the workers developed sores and many
of them could not work. So we changed the new caves into storerooms and the
workers moved into the hired house. In June we began to build five stone
cave houses for the looms and these were not completed until October. During
this period there was nowhere to put the looms. The only thing we could do
was to put them in the courtyards and work under tents. In May and June there
was early morning dew and it rained often. Wet thread is no good for weaving.
In July the weather was hot and the sun strong. The threads became very dry
which was also no good for weaving. The only thing we could do then was cover
the looms in wet army blankets and pour water on the ground. But this only
worked for two or three hours and, as can be imagined, gave a lot of trouble.

The months from June to September passed in this way. The new caves were
completed in October and we also built one-story houses with a total of
twenty-seven rooms for the workers to live in. Only then were all these problems
overcome.

As for raising the workers' technical level, after June the youths gradually
became skilled, and some even exceeded the master-workers.

In the first week when they were apprentices they generally only worked for
two or three hours a day and made four or five feet of cloth. Alter two or
three weeks they worked for seven or eight hours a day and could weave 10
to 40 feet. After April they could do 40 to 50 feet, and by May, 60 to 70.
After June, they had all become skilled workers and the best could weave
120 to 130 feet a day. During this time the quality of cloth continuously
improved.

We can say that after June 1941 the factory was consolidated and began to
develop, having overcome all kinds of difficulties.

(3) Establishing the soldier-worker system

The factory expanded and needed to be regularized. It was very inconvenient
for the administrators from the military training unit. And so under the
supply department we set up a factory head and a commissar to provide leadership,
and drew-up a draft outline for the administration of the factory.

Under the leadership of the head and commissar, the administration was divided
into four sections: labour, operations, accounts and general work. These
sections divided the tasks and worked together, each with its own responsibility.
We stipulated a variety of regulations for meetings, minutes, reports,
inspection, livelihood, pay (according to technical skill with the top rate
of 10 yuan)and for rewards and punishment. We settled the times
for work, study, rest and relaxation. We fixed the scope for democratic life
and all kinds of principles for the workshops, dormitories, canteen, days
off, leaving the premises and so forth.

By October 1941, everything was properly set up.

After October we felt that the wooden looms were not as good as the iron
ones. The cloth the latter produced was of good quality and needed less work.
We planned gradually to replace the wooden looms with iron ones. Between
January and October 1942 we built iron looms ourselves. However, as one had
to be strong and skilful to weave with these looms and there were not enough
workers like that, we could not convert entirely to iron looms and we did
not build any more. The total was forty-five iron looms and sixty-two wooden
looms. Apart from this, we bought thirteen wooden looms for weaving woollen
blankets and woollen goods from the Longwan Factory (in spring 1942) and
built thirteen wooden looms ourselves. This gave a total of 133 looms. On
average we produced about 1,000 bolts of wide cloth, 500 woollen towels and
100 blankets per month.

After May 1942 the pay system was changed into a piecework system giving
.70-80 yuan per month at the most ( roughly one-tenth of wages
in a privately-run factory), and 20-30 yuan at the least. This
increased the workers' enthusiasm to produce. Same workers did not take their
noon rest and did not stop work at the end of the working day but kept an
working. After some persuasion and education, we overcame this excessive
enthusiasm.

We persisted in the soldier-worker system. The factory workers also grew
vegetables and raised pigs for their food.

In the winter of 1942 we stopped work for one month to make padded clothing.

In 1941 after all expenses, the factory made a profit of 3,900,000
yuan. In the first ten months of 1942, the profit was 8 million
yuan. The value of the factory site, looms, yarn and raw cotton
is 5 million yuan ( yarn and cotton 1 minion
yuan). We intend to invest several million more to maintain
reproduction.

In sum the lessons of experience in running industry are as follows:

(i) The profit earned by the soldier-workers working in textiles, that is
the Daguang Hill led by the brigade supply department, is the largest of
all the profits earned by the various industrial enterprises. In 1941 the
total number of employees was 250 and in 1942 it were 225. After all expenses,
its profit in 1941 was 3,900,000 yuan equivalent to the price
of 4,000 tan of millet at year-end price (300 jin
per tan).

Profit by October 1942 was 8 million yuan, again equivalent
to 4,000 tan of millet at current prices in Suide. The average
net profit per worker was roughly 18 tan.

In the light of two years' experience and the present circumstances, we shall
invest 25,000 yuan per head for the 225 employees of the factory
during 1943, not counting buildings and tools, making a total of 5,625,000
yuan. The cloth required for uniforms will be bought from the
factory. In this way production for 1943 will earn a net profit per man of
20 tan of millet (because of inflation, it is best to take
millet as the standard ) .

Each regiment has a cloth-weaving factory which can produce enough cloth
for a hundred men.

In addition, apart from undertakings purely for producing equipment and clothing
for the troops such as shoemaking, cloths-making and leather-tanning, the
brigade also has roughly 200 blacksmiths and carpenters. In the light of
the past two to three years' experience and the prospects for the continued
development of the Border Region economy, these craftsmen could make an annual
profit roughly equivalent to 6 tan of millet in return for
an investment of 1,000 yuan per man.

There is also a papermaking factory and an oil-pressing shop which use as
raw materials the sesame seeds and straw coming from the troops' agriculture
and malan grass cut by the soldier-workers, for which the factories
pay a cheap price. These enterprise employ sixty people with an average net
profit per head of 6 tan of millet.

(ii) Besides agriculture, effective operation of the system of soldier-workers
is a way of realizing self-sufficiency and solve both commodity and financial
problems. Commerce is definitely not as reliable as agriculture and industry.
Commerce relies on others, not on oneself, so it is not suitable to do too
much of it.

(iii) Shortcomings are: in running a large factory there is a lot of expenses
and waste, and there is no fixed amount of capital. This influences reproduction.
Therefore in future we must strive to set up a fixed amount of capital.

(iv) In the past we did not take the whole Border Region economy into
consideration. Nor did we make a unified plan for the troops' agricultural
and industrial production. We could not interlock agriculture, industry,
transport and commerce. This was a great failing. Henceforth, we should have
unified plans and interrelated management.

The above is a summary of our opinions.

(C) Commerce

Our commerce began with a cooperative and it took six years to develop into
large-scale commerce.

In 1937, the brigade was sent across the Yellow River to the area around
Guoxian to fight the enemy. After the loss on Taiyuan, commerce was disrupted
and city goods could not be moved into the countryside. The common folk did
not dare to travel to buy goods. As a result there were great shortages of
daily necessities. Oil and salt were out of supply for a while. Both the
army and the people had to eat plain food. In these circumstances we set
up a cooperative at the request of the people. We allocated animals to go
to Ningwu and elsewhere for salt. The supply department put up 300
yuan to buy goods belonging to merchants which were stored
in the countryside. We contracted the merchant, Li Maolin, from Yangwu as
manager and set up business at Yangwu. It was called '359 Brigade Army-People
Cooperative'. The aim was simply to solve difficulties in the supply of salt,
oil and so forth, and to handle other necessary goods. At the time the currency
had not yet lost value, so, although the capital was small, business was
successful. In the short period of six months from October 1937 to April
1938 when the troops moved east, we gained great sympathy among the people
of the county. Thousands of people praised us saying that if it were not
for the cooperative, they would have died without being killed by the enemy.
Making a profit was not the aim at the time, so although business was good
we did not earn any money. At the end in April, the capital and profit of
490 yuan was handed over to the troops and used.

In May, 1938, the cooperative personnel went to the Shanxi-Chahar-Hebei Border
Region with the troops. When they got to Lingqiu there was another shortage
of daily necessities. Both the people and the army suffered. They wanted
to continue with the cooperative but had no capital and could think of no
way. In August, the cooperative personnel went to the county town of Laiyu
county to build up relations with merchants. Through friendly connections
they bought goods worth 3,042 yuan on credit. Most of it consisted
of bolts of cloth, writing-materials, paper, soap and so forth totaling eleven
packs. They returned to Donghenanzhen east of Lingqiu and set up a shop.
The suppliers of the goods also came along. Within five days the goods were
entirely sold and they got a net profit of 800 yuan. They paid
the suppliers 2,042 yuan and presented 1,000
yuan to the frontline troops for buying provisions. With the
800 yuan left over, they returned with the suppliers to Laiyuan
to get more goods. This process was repeated several times up until December
when the hill for goods was fully repaid. From August to December the operations
of the cooperative provided supplies of oil, salt and cloth needed by the
people of the Lingqiu region and earner 2,800 yuan to supplement
the troops' expenses. In addition there remained goods worth 1,500
yuan.

In January 1939 we moved the 1,500 yuan worth of goods to
Xiaguanzhen. We mainly dealt in oil and salt, on the one hand supplying the
troops and on the other helping the ordinary folk. since the troops were
continuously engaging the enemy at this time, we had over 1,000 wounded.
It was not easy to get Western medicines and nutritious foods so the cooperative
set up good relations with various merchants and through them got Western
medicine, milk, arrowroot and so forth from Tianjin, Beijing, Baoding and
other places. This ensured the supply of necessities for the wounded. In
September 1939 the brigade received the order to take on the defence of the
Yellow River between Shanxi and Shaanxi. The cooperative was closed down.
The nine months' business brought in 9,400 yuan. When the troops
set off they had no money so 5,400 yuan was paid out in expenses.
The remaining goods worth 4,000 yuan were brought west with
the troops in five donkey packs. In October we got to Wuliwan in Suide in
the Border Region, we sold them for 20,000 yuan and we sent
people to Loufan, Wenshui and Jiaocheng to buy writing-materials and cloth.
By the end of the year we had 31,000 yuan in goods and cash.

In January 1940 the cooperative moved to Nanguan in Suide. At that time the
troops' economy was in great difficulties. We could only rely on the earnings
of the cooperative to help pay expenses, so we felt the name 'Army-People
Cooperative' was not suitable and changed it into the ' Daguang Store' showing
that its goal had changed into making a profit. During that year we built
up friendships with some merchants and bought goods either for cash or on
credit. We bought writing-materials, cloth, paper, shoes, socks, towels and
so forth, and made a profit in the market. We worked hard and by the year-end
earned 191,700 yuan. We apportioned 101,700
yuan to the troops to help with the expenses, and kept 90,000
yuan as capital for 1941.

In 1941 the brigade decided to expand its commercial activities as a supplement
to the major undertakings in agriculture, industry and transport in order
to meet the urgent requirements of the troops. Besides the existing 90,000
yuan capital, a further 250,000 yuan was given
from the 400,000 yuan issued to the brigade by the Finance
Department for production capital. In addition all the small shops run by
the regiments were closed, and their capital of 60,000 yuan
collected together. The town capital was 400,000 yuan. Beginning
in January 1941 we set up ten branch shops. After a year's operation we got
a profit of 2,982,377 yuan of which 982,377
yuan was used to supplement the troops' expenses and 2 million
was kept as the store's capital.

In 1942, the store and ten branch shops got a profit of 6,720,080
yuan from operations during spring, summer and autumn. Two
million yuan were used to supplement expenditure for the troops
and the remaining sum of 4,720,080 yuan in use.

The lessons of experience are:

(i) We helped the ordinary folk to buy cloth, paper, oil, salt and other
necessities, and we strengthened relations between the army and the people.

(ii) We helped the troops to buy daily necessities by making it possible
for the soldiers' income of 1 yuan to purchase soap, towels,
toothbrushes, toothpaste etc., at a time when the Eighth Route Army was in
difficult economic circumstances. On the other hand, the troops rightfully
bought daily necessities with their money which reduced improper and wasteful
behaviour among the troops.

(iii) Building friendships is very important. If we had not had good relations
with the merchants of Laiyuan, we could not have bought goods.

(iv) Surplus income supplemented expenditure for our forces.

(v) We sold local products and put limits on goods from outside. However,
since we did not inspect strictly and provide firm leadership, some shops
could not carry out this work in a pleasant and integrated manner. They only
looked after narrow departmental interests and neglected all-round economic
construction.

(vi) Before 1940 we did not know much about setting up a Commercial information
network, and only knew how to work hard. As a result we suffered quite a
few losses from rises and few in prices. In 1941 we set up such a network
to report on the situation in various places and built up liaison with some
big merchants. We learned of rises and falls in prices at the right time.
Therefore we did not make losses of this kind in 1941 and 1942.

(vii) We liaised and worked together with local experienced merchants able
to operate outside the Border' Region. When we encountered difficulties in
the supply of raw materials for spinning and weaving, we obtained great help.
However, we also encountered some rogue merchants who used us to carry out
their own business, damaging our operations.

(viii) There were too many people working in the store not earning their
keep and adding to expenses.

(ix) Frequent contact with merchants from outside enabled us to understand
each other's policies and attitudes, reducing misunderstandings and building
friendships.

(x) We tested the cadres' Party spirit, thought and ability.

(xi) Only with strict administration and a correlate system of regulations
could the store reduce waste.

(xii) To help stabilize the currency, in 1940 the store changed Guanghua
banknotes.

(xiii) Comprehensive preparations, correct and lively application of trading
policies, staying within the scope of non-prohibited goods, selling local
products and selling necessities solved difficulties in the supply of goods
for the army and provided a profit.

(xiv) With the aim of earning money, after January 1941 all the brigade and
regimental cooperatives became part of the Daguang Store. The organization
took Suide as its centre and set up branches in Suide, Mizhi, Jiaxian, Wuqi,
Anding, Yanchuan and Yanchang. The brigade had the Daguang Store, and the
regiments had the branches.

(xv) Most personnel in the shops were soldiers given payments according to
their jobs. Employees were paid a wage according to their ability, strengths
and weaknesses.

(xvi) Most of the goods were bought from northwestern Shanxi during 1941.
Afterwards because of the enemy's mopping-up campaigns and the economic blockade
(the decline of the nationalist currency and the use of the puppet currency),
commodity prices rose. In addition because of our problems with capital,
we could not get much money to buy goods. Therefore using the slogan ' resist
the enemy's goods and sell local products', we sold the cloth we wove ourselves,
and the leather shoes, woollen towels and cloth shoes we produced ourselves.
We also sold Daguange soap in even greater quantities. To prevent unprincipled
merchants from raising market-prices and to promote the Border Region currency
we changed Guanghua banknotes, and lowered the rising market-prices. For
example, the salt we extracted ourselves we sold at 2 jin 4
liang per yuan compared to the market-price of
1 jin 4 liang per yuan. Thus we
enabled the ordinary folk to buy at cheaper prices. So we can say that in
a certain period our aim was not to earn money but to stabilize prices and
secure the people's livelihood

(xvii) 'If you knew what would happen in three days' time, you would be rich
for thousands of years.' It seems as if trading is a question of finding
the right way by accident. If you find a good opportunity, then you can earn
money. In fact it is not so. Trading relies entirely on correct estimation,
understanding of the situation locally and elsewhere, and understanding the
difference between imports and exports. Then you can forecast the rise and
fall in commodity prices, and fix the policies for attention in a certain
period.

(xviii) A stable currency and secured finances are the: primary conditions
for developing business. During the past three years the sudden rise and
fall in the value of the Border Region currency and the disruption of finances
has influenced trading in commodities and made everything difficult. Another
aspect is that this situation has enabled speculative merchants to deal in
currency notes. They have earned a lot of money and influenced the economy
of the Border Region.

(xix) The various regimental shops have in practice not thoroughly implemented
centralized leadership and have competed with each other. They have lacked
coordination which is an unhealthy tendency.

(xx) The various regiments have set up an accounting system run by specialists
who keep the accounts. However since too many of them were merchants in the
past, they did not use new methods of recording and still used the old.

A concrete plan for agricultural production In 1943 has been prepared by
359 Brigade. It is really clear and definite and may be supplied to all units
for consideration. The text follows.

359 BRIGADE'S 1943 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION PLAN

The military farming system of the troops stationed in the Border Region
is one of the basic duties of our army in carrying out the policy of the
anti-Japanese national united front and in establishing new democratic politics.
Persisting in carrying out this duty enables us to lighten the people's burden,
improve the quality of the army and achieve close unity with the people from
a position of self-reliance and self-sufficiency. Therefore, in the light
of the experience and achievements in carrying out the call from upper levels
for production during the past three years, the brigade has drawn up the
following plan to strengthen the implementation t of this call and to increase
he quantity of production in 1943 .

(A) How should we organize the troops' agricultural production?


(1) All the defence areas where the regiments and troops are stationed have
arable land, so we stipulate that each provisions unit should carry out
agricultural production according to its manpower and the land situation.

(2) In circumstances where the army is stationed in one place, each provisions
unit only needs three cooks for every hundred men. Therefore each provisions
unit can select six or seven strong comrades with agricultural experience
from among the cooks to specialize in farming.

(3) The deputy battalion head with responsibility for production in each
battalion, the head of the special duties in each company, and the deputy
officers with responsibility for production in the brigade and regiments
have the task of planning and inspection. During spring ploughing, summer
weeding and autumn harvesting, they should organize and lead all personnel
to take part.

(4) We stipulate that the provisions unit of each combat company, apart from
supplying all their own vegetables, should plant 600 mu of
grain. Table 8.3 lays down the tasks each unit can shoulder.


TABLE 8.3 -- AGRICULTURAL TASKS ASSIGNED TO UNITS




TROOP UNITS


A


B


C


D


E


F


G


H


TOTAL




 NUMBER OF PRODUCTION UNITS


5


2


1


17


16


13


6


5


65




AREA TO BE PLANTED (mu)


3,000


1,200


600


10,200


9,600


7,800


3,600


3000


39,000




NUMBER OF MEN TO BE SELECTED  AMONG THE COOKS


30


12


6


11


96


78


36


30


390




(B) The year's plan relies on the spring. This winter we must prepare
for the work of the coming spring

(l) Each provisions unit must make a clear register of the land to be planted,
how much mountain land, how much river land, how much land that has been
farmed, and how much uncultivated land. It must also work out what is going
to be planted and how much work, seed and so forth will be required for planting,
hoeing and harvesting.

(2) Farming requires oxen, ploughs, and other agricultural tools such as
hoes, rakes, baskets and sickles. These should be fully prepared in winter.
Actual requirements per provisions unit are three plough-oxen, three ploughs
and sixty other implements.

(3) If you do not use manure, the crops do not grow well. Every unit must
collect manure. All nightsoil, animal manure, and wood and straw ashes must
be gathered. Pay attention to control of lavatories, pig-sties, sheep-pens,
and oxen and horse-stables. We must put at least 4 tan of manure
on each mu of land. In many places there are grass roots from
flooded land and tree leaves. These can be moved to the farmed land for burning.

Table 8.4 lists the amount of preparatory work to be undertaken by all units
and by the brigade as a whole.


TABLE 8.4 -- PREPARATORY WORK NECESSARY BY SPRING 1944






UNITS


A


B


C


D


E


F


G


H


TOTAL




NUMBER OF PRODUCTION UNITS


5


2


1


17


16


13


6


5


65




NUMBER OF PLOUGH-OXEN


15


6


3


51


48


39


18


15


195




NUMBER OF PLOUGHS


15


6


3


51


48


39


18


15


195




NUMBER OF OTHER IMPLEMENTS


300


120


60


1,020


960


780


360


300


3,900




AMOUNT OF MANURE IN 'tan'


12,00


4,800


2,400


40,800


38,400


31,200


14,400


12,00


156,000




 (C) How much money is needed and how many workdays? 

(1) Oxen, ploughs and other implements all cost money to buy or make. This
is capital. In addition there is manure and seeds which come to at least
800 yuan for 600 mu. Total capital for 600
mu, and for the land formed by the units and for the brigade
as a whole, is shown [in Tables 8.5 and 8.6].


TABLE 8.5 -- CAPITAL NEEDED TO FARM

600 mu





ITEM


COST (yuan)




OXEN


12,000




PLOUGHS


600




OTHER IMPLEMENTS


6,000




MANURE & SEED


800




OX FODDER


2,700




TOTAL


22,100 





  NB (i) Each ox is reckoned at 4,000 yuan.
  (ii) Each plough at 200 yuan.
  (iii) Each implement at 100 yuan.
  (iv) Ox fodder at 900 yuan per animal.

TABLE 8.6 - CAPITAL NEEDED FOR THE LAND FARMED BY THE UNITS AND BY THE
BRIGADE AS A WHOLE (yuan)





UNIT


A


B


C


D


E


F


G


H


TOTAL




OXEN


60,000


24,000


12,000


204,000


192,000


156,000


72,000


60,000


780,000




PLOUGHS


3,000


1,200


600


10,200


9,600


7,800


3,600


3,000


39,000




OTHER IMPLEMENTS


30,000


1,000


6,000


102,000


96,000


78,000


36,000


30,000


379,000




SEED, MANURE


4,000


1,600


800


13,600


12,800


10,400


4,800


4,000


52,000




OX FODDER


13,500


5,400


2,700


45,900


43,200


35,100


16,200


13,500


175,500




TOTAL


110,500


33,200


22,100


375,700


353,600


287,300


131,600


110,500


1,425,500




(2) How many workdays are required on 600 mu, from opening
up the land and sowing seed to harvesting? It is estimated that opening land
and sowing seed requires 500 days; preparation and spreading of manure, 800
days; three weddings, 1,800 days; and harvesting, 450 days. This makes 3,550
days in all.

Note: six cooks farming 600 mu throughout the year can do at
least 1,000 workdays; 3,550 work days minus 1,000 leaves 2,550. Each provisions
unit has a hundred men so each man has to do twenty-five days' agricultural
labour during the year.

(D) The type of crops and the harvest

(1) Find out what is the most suitable grain to be planted according to the
land. In general, plant spiked millet [gu (zi)], millet
[su], goaliang, maize [baogu], beans, rice and
so forth. In addition, also consider the needs of the troops and plant hemp
for sandals, lamp-oil and cooking-oil Some units can plant cotton.

The seventh regiment can plant 200 mu of cotton. Estimating
a harvest of 30 jin of cotton per mu, the total
will be 6,000 jin. At a value of 50 yuan per
jin this will be equal to 300,000 yuan.

Each company in the special duties battalion [tewuying] should
plant 80 mu of cotton in addition to its 600
mu of grain. This can give an estimated harvest of 2,400
jin worth 120,000 yuan. The battalion headquarters
can plant 20 mu giving 600 jin worth 30,000
yuan.

(2) Reckoning at 4 tou of hulled grain for every 3
mu, 600 mu can produce 80 tan of
hulled grain, and the 39,000 mu of the whole brigade can produce
5,200 tan. At a value of 1,250 yuan per
tan, the crop from 600 mu will be worth 100,000
yuan, and that of the brigade's 39,000 mu, 6
5 million yuan.

(3) In each 600 mu, it is estimated that 300 will be planted
to spiked millet. Each mu will Produce 300
jin of hay giving a total of 90,000
jin. At a value of 1 yuan per
jin, 600 mu will produce hay worth 90,000
yuan, and the whole brigade will produce hay worth 5,850,000
yuan.

The harvest totals are given [in Tables 8.7 and 8.8].

TABLE 8.7 -- HARVEST TOTAL ON 600 mu





HULLED GRAIN


80


Tan

      




VALUE OF GRAIN PER tan


1,250


Yuan

      




TOTAL GRAIN VALUE


100,000


Yuan

      




HAY


90,000


Jin

      




VALUE OF HAY PER 100 jin


100


Yuan

      




TOTAL VALUE OF HAY


90,000


Yuan

      




TOTAL VALUE GRAIN & HAY


190,000


Yuan

      




TABLE 8.8 -- HARVEST FOR 359 BRIGADE



UNIT

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

TOTAL


AREA PLANTED IN mu

3,000

1,200

600

10,200

9,600

7,800

3,600

3,000

39,000


GRAIN WHICH COULD BE HARVESTED IN
tan

400

160

80

1,360

1,280

1,040

480

400

5,200


HAY (10,000 jin)

45

18

9

153

144

117

54

45

585


VALUE OF HAY CROPS (10,000
yuan)

50

20

10

170

160

130

60

50

650


TOTAL VALUE OF CROPS (10,000
yuan)

95

38

19

323

304

247

114

95

1,235




After each regiment and unit has received this plan, it should at once call
a meeting of production cadres to discuss implementation. The general plan
for the regiment or unit and the plan for each provisions unit ( including
their own plans for vegetables, edible oil, lamp-oil, hemp for making sandals
and so forth for which they have been self-sufficient for three years) should
be reported upwards by the end of November. It is important that this should
be obeyed.

The above materials show us that the army's self-supporting production has
undoubtedly achieved a great deal. What have these achievements depended
on? These have depended on the active leadership of the cadres and the labour
enthusiasm of the troops. The cadres have given active leadership to the
production movement consciously in order to overcome difficulties in the
course of the revolution. The troops have taken part in productive labour
consciously in order to overcome difficulties in the course of the revolution.
If these two groups had not had this conscious awareness, if they had not
felt that their work was not for others but for themselves, not for some
worthless cause but for the sacred cause of the revolution, there would have
been no ways for them to fulfil these difficult production tasks. If they
had felt they were hired labourers, if they had felt that the production
they carried out had no relationship to their own interests and no relationship
to the common revolutionary cause, there would have been no way to fulfil
these production tasks.

Above we have discussed the fine experience and great achievements of our
army in self-supporting production. Below we shall again discuss the shortcomings
in our work.

Our work has shortcomings, and these shortcomings are not only found in the
army but also in the official organizations and schools. Some of these
shortcomings were unavoidable in the past. However, after five years' experience
we should be able to correct them. Some have already become serious abuses.
If we do not correct them, they will hinder the interests of the Party and
the revolution.

What are these shortcomings?

First, in order to solve urgent problems of self-sufficiency quickly some
army units and some official organizations and schools have relatively or
specially stressed commerce and neglected agriculture and industry. They
do not realize that only agriculture and industry produce value. Commerce
is merely a medium of circulation. It cannot produce any value itself. Warned
by experience, the production task for all forces and official organizations
and schools in 1943 is gradually to transfer the again emphasis to agriculture,
industry and transport. In our present circumstances, agriculture is particularly
important since the majority of the things we need are agriculture products
(staple grain, miscellaneous grain, vegetables, hemp, meat, vegetable-oil,
animal-oil, cotton, horse-fodder, timber, firewood, etc.). Agricultural products
can also be exported in exchange for industrial products. If we also undertake
some possible and necessary handicrafts (spinning yarn, spinning wool, making
shoes, weaving woollen thread and garments, digging coal, sawing wood, pressing
oil, etc.) and large light industry (textiles, papermaking), we can meet
the majority of our daily requirements and produce enough for trading.

The second shortcoming is that we lack unified planning and unified inspection.
Lower levels act without coordination and upper levels either do not have
or lack sufficient unified direction, planning and inspection of policy
principles and work content. As a result the various branches do not know
what they should not do, or do know but still do it. Thus instances of lack
of coordination or struggling for independence often occur. Incidents have
arisen where policy principles and government orders have been broken, where
the people's interests have been damaged, where various economic units have
not only not cooperated but have competed and hindered each other, where
the upper levels have been deceived and not the lower levels, or where both
have been deceived, where things have been kept back or where lies have been
told. There has been great waste, reckless spending, concentration on show
and not on results. Particularly serious are cases of the evils of bribery
and corruption among cadres. Some cadres have been enticed by material things
and are not loyal to the sacred cause of communism, having become completely
corrupt. Other cadres, have been poisoned, and can only get back to health
by drying out in the sun. All these bad things and all this corruption have
occurred to a lesser or greater extent among some parts of the army and in
some official organizations and schools. Henceforth, all upper-level leadership
organs in the army and the official organizations and schools must place
emphasis on looking after the whole situation and on grasping policy. They
must provide unified planning and inspection for the productive activities
of all subordinate units. They certainly must not permit the abuses described
above to occur again. If they do occur again, they must be strictly disciplined.
Less important cases should be criticized and serious ones punished. We certainly
cannot condone them or, to use a flattering term, 'have a liberal policy'.
These are the three work styles for rectification in economic work. We must
carry them out without the slightest delay.

The third shortcoming is that in the production activities of many army units,
official organizations and schools, the cadres responsible for administration
and control do not take many pains. A minority even pay no attention at all
and merely entrust every thing to the supply organ or to the general office.
This is because they still do not understand the importance of economic work.
And the reason they still do not understand it is because they have been
poisoned by the deceitful corrupting words off metaphysicisis like Dong Zhongshu,
'Conform to the required meets and do not seek gain, be concerned with the
way and do not plan for merit', and have not yet cast them fully aside. It
is also because they consider politics, Party and army affaires come first
and are most important, while economic work, although also important, is
not important to the same degree. They feel that they themselves do not have
to divide their attention or to give much attention by being concerned. However,
these attitudes are entirely wrong. In the present situation in the
Shaan-Kan-Ning Border Region, the great majority of people have work to do.
If you talk of revolution, then in the final analysis apart from economic
work and educational work (including theoretical education, political education,
military education, cultural education, technical education, professional
education and national education) what other work is worthy of the names
central or primary work? Is there any other work that is more revolutionary?
True, there is other work and a lot of it, but the central or primary work
for the majority of comrades in the present situation in the Border Region
is certainly economic work and educational work. All other work is only
significant in the context of these two. If we conscientiously carry out
these two items of work, we can consider that we have done well in supporting
the war at the front and in helping the people of the great rear areas. Of
the two, education (or study) cannot. be carried out alone. We are not in
a time when 'official rank lies in study'. We cannot go and 'conform to the
requirements and illuminate the way' with hungry stomachs. We must get food
to eat. We must pay attention to economic work. Talking of education or study
separately from economic work is merely using superfluous and empty words.
Talking of 'revolution' separately from economic work is like making revolution
against the Finance Department and against yourselves. The enemy will not
be in the least hurt by you. Because we have many comrades with leadership
responsibilities who still take the attitude of neglecting or not paying
much attention to economic work, many other comrades copy them, being willing
to do Party; government, army and educational work, or to work in literature
and art but unwilling to do economic work. Some female comrades are unwilling
to marry economic workers, imploring that they consider them dishonunrable.
They consider that marrying the head of a mule-and-horse-team would be an
insult and they would rather marry a political-worker. In fact all these
view-points are very wrong and do not match the situation in this time and
place. We must make a new division of labour. We need some revolutionary
specialists who are separate from production affairs. We also require some
doctors, literature and art workers, and so forth. But we do not want many
people like this. If there are too many then danger arises. If those who
eat are many and those who produce are few, if those who are employed suffer
and those who benefit are comfortable, we shall collapse. Therefore many
cadres must be transferred from their present work or study to economic posts.
Chief responsible cadres at all levels in the Party, government and army
must at the same time pay full attention to leading economic work. They must
investigate and study the content of economic work, be responsible for making
plans for economic work, allocate cadres for economic work, inspect the results
of economic work, and never again entrust this extremely important work to
the supply departments or general offices alone and wash their hands of it.

The fourth shortcoming is that in the past some army units and official
organizations have not had a division of labour between levels when allocating
production tasks. All levels from brigade to company and from upper level
to lower level have been permitted to run commerce without any limits. Thus
many defects have arisen. Henceforth most commerce, industry and transport
should be concentrated in brigades, in regiments working in independent areas
and in upper-level organs. Furthermore these must work according to correct
principles. Trade with the outside must be united under the direction of
the Commodities Bureau. Units under regiments working in an independent area,
units at battalion level or below, and most lower-level organs should be
instructed to carry out agriculture, handicrafts that can be done by troops
or miscellaneous personnel and business or trading of the consumer cooperative
type. They are not allowed to do other work.

In the light of achievements and Shortcomings over the past five years, the
concrete tasks for the various units of the army in 1943 are as follows:

(1) With the exception of most of the grain and some of the bedding and clothing
which are supplied by the government, the great majority of army units should
provide 80 per cent of their own supplies. Some units (such as 359 Brigade)
should provide 100 per cent. Only those in special circumstances (such as
the cavalry) can be allowed to bear a lighter production burden, and they
too should think of ways to provide more in 1944. All forces should prepare
to increase self-sufficiency in grain and clothing and bedding in 1944 so
as to reduce the burden on the people and to let them build up their strength.

(2) With the exception of 359 Brigade, which is already fully carrying out
the military farming system, or the cavalry, which would find it difficult
because of special circumstances to implement that system at once, and of
those with garrison duties, all other forces should carry out the policy
of military farming in individual units or several units together so as to
increase agricultural production.

(3) All units from top to bottom should carry out production in an organized,
led and planned way. Set up production committees at all levels from brigade
to company, and carry out collective planning and inspection at each level.
Study in production techniques so as to increase production and improve supplies.
Correct all irregular phenomena.

(4) Select cadres strong in politics and ability to administer production
and supply work in each department. Existing economic cadres should be examined.
Incompetents and those who have committed corrupt and decadent errors must
be transferred. Particularly serious cased must be punished. Every unit must
set up a deputy battalion head with responsibility for production and personnel
to administer production in companies. These people should specially control
production and the distribution of tasks for whole battalions and whole
companies. Brigade units and regimental units should establish deputy officers
with responsibility for production to administer the production work of the
units themselves. The commanding officer of each level must personally plan
and inspect economic work.

(5) All economic and financial work of the Party, government and army in
each sub-region should carry out coordinated cost-accounting under the leadership
of the finance sub-committee of the sub-region. In order to stimulate the
activism of the production and working personnel of all units, it should
permit them to spend a suitable amount of the results of their production
on improving their livelihood. Everything apart from this should be distributed
in a coordinated way so as to avoid the problem of unequal benefits. Some
coordinated distribution should be applied throughout the Border Region as
a whole, some within the sub-regions, some within the various systems, and
some within units. It can be decided according to the nature of production
and the economic situation.

(6) Implement the policy of 'giving consideration to both the army and the
people'. The economic activities of the army, Party and government should
harmonize with the economic activities of the people. Anything which damages
the people's interests or causes them dissatisfaction is not allowed.

(7) Production and education cannot be out of balance. All units must carefully
plan both kinds of work and their mutual relationships. Correctly share out
the time for each so that production and education in 1943 can be greater
and better than in 1942. We have had five years' experience and it is entirely
possible to achieve this aim..

(8) The core of the army's political work is to ensure the fulfilment of
its production and education plans, to ensure that while it is carrying out
these plans there are correct relationships with the Party, government, and
people, to ensure the correct relationship between upper and lower levels
within the army itself, and to ensure the purity of economic cadres. If political
work does not fulfil its own task in these areas then it will be defeated.

Previous section       
               Next
  section


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On the Development of the Productive Under-Takings
  of Official Organisations and Schools








ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR (9)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


9. ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE PRODUCTIVE UNDERTAKINGS OF OFFICIAL ORGANIZATIONS
AND SCHOOLS

Within the three branches of the public sector of the economy, production
by the troops and by the official organizations and schools is directly intended
to meet their own living and running-costs. Production by government organs
is also included in this. For example, the personnel working in the various
departments and offices of the Border Region government run agricultural,
handicraft and commercial undertakings. These directly supplement deficiencies
in the running-expenses of the organs and in clothing, bedding and food for
the personnel. By contrast the salt industry, industry and agriculture
established as government enterprises are not intended to provide
running-expenses but to meet the needs of the whole Party, government and
army.

In Yan'an and the Border Region, the official organizations of the Party
and government, leading organs of the mass organizations and many schools
have pursued agriculture industry and commerce under the slogans 'set-to
ourselves' and self-reliance'. This is a broad mass-movement, and it has
solved many big problems of finance and supply. It is only just second to
the army's production and it is worth our while to sum up its experience
carefully, to point out its achievements and shortcomings and to determine
the work-plan for 1943.

The army's production movement began in 1938 and gained some experience.
In 1939 we spread this experience into all official organizations and schools.
In February 1939 we held a Production Mobilization Conference. We organized
production committees to be leading organs for the production movement and
we stipulated different production tasks according to the different circumstances
of the work and study of each official organization and school and the strength
of their labour form. For example, we laid down that working personnel in
district; and townships should be fully self-sufficient in grain and other
organizations from the centre down to the county should be either one-half
or one-third self-sufficient according to the strength and size of their
labour force. In total we asked them to open up 100,200 mu
of land and to harvest 13,000 tan of hulled grain. Besides
this we decided that all official organizations and schools should be entirely
self-sufficient in vegetables, should raise pigs for meat and should use
the straw from their crops to provide part of the fodder for horses. At the
time there were roughly 200,000 people in the official organizations and
schools of the whole Border Region. We issued average production expenses
of 2. 60 yuan per head, a total of offer 49,000
yuan. This provided capital to buy plough-oxen and agricultural
tools. After they had found land and bought oxen and tools everyone was mobilized
for the spring ploughing. Most of these people were intellectuals and youths
who had never previously taken part in production. Together with cadres from
worker and peasant backgrounds and service personnel, cooks and grooms, they
were organized into production groups to open up the land. All hilltops near
Yan'an with unused land became covered with men and women opening them up.
They automatically showed labour discipline and declared competitions in
clearing land. The strong took up hoes and the weak grew vegetables and raised
pigs, or took food and water to the workers.

The gains from this production movement were: (i) the official organizations
and schools of the whole Border Region opened up 113,414 mu
of land, harvested 11,325.63 tan of grain (equivalent to 5,830.17
tan of hulled grain) and harvested roughly 1,200,00
jin of vegetables. At prevailing market-prices the two harvests
were worth over 368,000 yuan (over 10,179,000
yuan at 1942 prices). This provided one-quarter of the grain
requirements of 20,000 people, one-half of the horse fodder and some of the
vegetables and meat. (ii) It enabled over 10,000 intellectuals and young
people to understand from their own experience what physical labors is. This
tempered them. (iii) When the common folk of the Border Region saw or heard
that all working personnel and young students in all the Party and government
official organizations — from Party Central Committee members to young
service personnel—were all going up into the mountains to farm, they
were moved. Everyone was keen to open up land and it became an exceptional
year for doing so.

On the other hand, the stipulated task for grain productions was not fulfilled
in this year because of lack of labour experience and because the application
of manure, seed planting and weeding was not done at the right time. Also,
in some areas there was drought and so forth. As a result, although a lot
of land was opened up, the harvest was not large and only 45 per cent of
the original grain target of 13,000 tan of hulled grain was
achieved. Secondly the error of egalitarianism was committed in leadership
and organization. The different nature of each organization and school was
not considered. Some were given tasks that were too great such as the call
for district and township cadres to be self-sufficient in grain. In fact
they only achieved one-quarter. Some put off and spoilt their work or study
in order to carry out production with the result that it was uneconomic.
In some cases male and female comrades, physically too weak to do hard work,
were forced to labour and their health suffered. Some units could in fact
have undertaken industry and commerce but this was not pointed out at the
time, and they purely and simply concentrated on agriculture.

In 1940 we corrected these shortcomings. First we reduced the agricultural
production tasks. Apart from self-sufficiency in vegetables and meat, we
stipulated that the official organizations and schools should be only from
one-seventh to one-sixth or one-quarter self-sufficient in grain according
to their different circumstances. We did not ask weak males nor any females
to do physical labour. No person over fifty or under fifteen took part in
production. We permitted the hiring of experienced peasants to join-in or
to direct production. In addition the Finance Department issued 50,000
yuan to the official organizations and schools as capital to
allow them to undertake industry and commerce and to develop animal husbandry,
raising pigs and sheep. Therefore in agricultural production during 1940
we did not increase cultivated land beyond the existing amount. Some units
lacked labour power and adopted the meshed of taking ordinary folk on as
tenants. Some gave part of their grain-producing land to others and concentrated
on planting vegetables and raising pigs. In addition some schools moved to
other places in north China. Therefore the 1940 harvest only amounted to
3,000 tan of hulled grain and 900,000 jin of
vegetables, worth 3 million yuan at the market-prices of the
time.

The commerce we ran began with cooperatives. In 1939 each official organization
and school had a consumers' cooperative and some had opened restaurants.
By the first half of 1940 there were thirty cooperatives and restaurants
with more than 60,000 guest capital. The largest had 10,000
yuan and the smallest not more than a few hundred
yuan. Their aim was to supply daily necessities for the
organization or school itself. At the same time they sold to outsiders for
a slight profit as a means of improving their livelihood. They had still
not become commercial undertakings to meet general needs. However, they gave
initial tempering to cadres ruling commerce, and accumulated some commercial
experience and a small amount of capital.

In the two years of 1939 and 1940, the organizations and schools generally
did not undertake industry. They only set up some flour mills for their own
needs and the rear services. Jiaotong set up a smithy for horseshoes. These
can be considered the beginnings of their handicraft production.

The above was the first period in self-sufficient production for the
organizations and schools. Below we turn to the second period.

In the winter of 1940 the production tasks of the organizations and schools
rapidly changed as a result of the economic blockade of the Border Region,
the cutting-off of outside aid, the extreme financial difficulties, and the
unavoidable need to move quickly from semi-self-sufficiency to full
self-sufficiency in finance and supplies.

At the time (with the exception of the troops) the various organs of the
Party, government, army and mass organizations and the personnel of the schools
could not all take up agriculture and the task of achieving self-sufficiency
was extremely difficult. On the one hand we wanted to rely on developing
production to ensure daily and monthly supplies. At the same time we wanted
to accumulate capital to establish a foundation for future self-sufficiency.

In order to get through this difficult situation, the Party had government
adopted necessary steps. First we improved the organizations for leading
production. In succession we established the Finance and Economy Office directly
under the Central Committee, the Rear Services Economic Construction Office,
the Finance and Economy Office at top level in the Border Region Government,
and ordered each sub-region and county to set up production committees. Second,
between the winter of 1940 and the spring of 1941 the government paid out
700,000 yuan and the Border Region Bank lent 3 million
yuan to increase the production capital of the various branches.
This was handed to the various bodies leading self-sufficient production
for issuing downwards, to be added to the capital accumulated by the
organizations themselves in the first period. Thereupon everyone made new
arrangements, selected personnel, chose undertakings put industry and commerce
to the fore.

Agriculture was then placed in a subordinate position.

Below we shall discuss the experience of' the various organizations and schools
in industry, commerce and agriculture during this period.

The starting point for the industry of the organizations and schools was
textiles. Since the Border Region had wool, the personnel of the organizations
and schools spun wool by hand after work and study during the winter of 1940.
For a while it became a movement and everybody began to spin. But since there
was not enough raw material and spinning skills were poor, the woolly threads
were uneven, and too much labour was wasted. After March 1941 this was gradually
stopped and we applied ourselves to setting up handicraft textile mills.
In the first half of 1941 each large organization and school selected service
personnel and messengers to go to the Refugee Textile Mill run by the government
to study spinning and weaving. Like bamboo shoots after spring rain, more
than ten textile mills grew up within a short time. The shortcoming was that
there was no planning. By the latter half of the year because they had no
ensured supply of raw materials or market for yarn, or because they lacked
sufficient liquid capital or were poorly administered, some had closed, some
had merged and some had temporarily closed. For example, the Xin Zhongguo
Textile Mill of the Finance and Economy Office directly under the Central
Committee first merged with the Shengli Mill of the Central Organization
Department and then merged with the Tuanjie Mill run by the Marxism-Leninism
Institute. Then using the name of Tuanjie Textile Mill, it was run in a
centralized way and got more profit. The wool-spinning factory run by the
Lu Xun Academy and the Women's University was closed down and its capital
used elsewhere. The Tuanjie Textile Mill of the Financial and Economy Office
under the Central Committee and the Jiaotong Mill run by the Rear Services
could not fully employ their production capacity because of all kinds of
difficulties. They alternately worked and closed down for a while until they
eventually got on the right track. Thus the process of moving from a
hand-spinning movement of several thousands of people to the setting up of
handicraft factories, from the setting up of over ten small textile mills
and wool-spinning factories to the final merger into two factories, the Jiaotong
and the Tuanjie, was a process of moving from blindness to consciousness
in which there was continuous groping forward through research, improvement
in techniques and improvement in administration. This process on the one
hand illustrated the hard-working spirit of the various organizations and
schools and on the other illustrated our complete lack of experience in running
industry at that time. By 1942 the Jiaotong produced 3, 336 bolts of cloth
and the Tuanjie produced 2,736, becoming major factories in the Border Region.
They are the valuable creation of the process of hard work and groping the
way forward.

Besides textile mills, the organizations and schools directly under the Central
Committee have successively set up many handicraft factories for such things
as bedding and clothing, shoes, coal and charcoal, carpentry, papermaking,
pottery, flour-milling and oil-pressing, silk weaving and making iron implements.
Their aim has been self-sufficiency. The capital for these factories came
either from commercial capital, or from bank loans, or from the closure of
the wool-spinning factories. Warned by the experience with textiles, these
factories were not run in such an entirely disorganized way. They were rather
more orderly With several organizations and schools cooperating, or with
cooperation with the common folk or with the Bank. But it was not all plain
sailing. Most only laid a firm foundation after following a winding path
from initial loss of capital through continued support to final profit.

In the years 1941 and 1942, the system under the Central Committee's Finance
and Economy Office [Zhong-cai xitong] set up a total of
twenty-seven large and small handicraft factories with total capital of over
400,000 yuan and with 477 employees. Among them there were
eight textile mills with 217,000 yuan capital and 161 employees,
three coal and charcoal factories with 70,000 yuan capital
and sixty-eight employees, three mills with 15,000 yuan capital
and twenty-one employees, two bedding and clothing factories with forty-eight
employees (capital details not available), three carpentry factories with
35,000 yuan capital and seven employees, one shoe factory with
10,000 yuan capital and thirty-eight employees, and one papermaking
workshop with 20,000 yuan capital and twenty-nine employees.
In addition there were six small factories individually producing machinery,
glass, alcohol, pottery, oil-lamps and blankets. (There are no statistics
on capital and employees for these factories. The first three were experimental
undertakings by the Natural Sciences Institute.) All the above factories
were reorganized in September 1941 when the official organizations and schools
directly under the Central Committee carried out their first drive for better
troops and simpler administration. They were transferred to the direct control
of Central Administration Bureau (the Finance and Economy Office directly
under the Central Committee was dissolved and we set up the Central
Administration Bureau attached to the Central Work Department
[Zhongyang Bangongting]). Their number was reduced from
twenty-seven by closure or merger to nineteen. In particular the merging
of the eight textile mills into two, the Tuanjie and the Shiyan, enabled
concentration of management and improvement in operation. Thus we were able
to move from a situation where eight mills either lost capital or just maintained
themselves to one of a profit of 1,600,0000 yuan in October
1942.

Self-sufficient industry run by the Rear Services system was started in the
winter of 1940 just like that run by the central financial system. After
two years' operation, 1941 and 1942, there was one textile mill, two papermaking
factories, three charcoal factories, two carpentry factories, two silk-weaving
factories, and one factory each for coal [shitan], refined salt, pottery,
bedding and clothing, writing-brushes, ironwork, flour-milling, shoes and
hemp-weaving, a total of nineteen altogether. There are no statistics yet
for the amount of capital, number of employees and amount of production of
these factories. Although the profit earned by these undertakings is not
great (in the first ten months of 1942 it was 200,000
yuan), their great merits are:


    they are run in a centralized war by the Rear Services and are not run freely
    in a dispersed way as by the various official organizations and schools.
    Thus leadership and inspection are thorough, and mistakes are quickly corrected.
  
    They constitute a wide range of operation. Unlike the Central Committee's
    Finance and Economy Office system's initial concentration on textiles through
    the establishment of eight factories, the Rear Services has at all times
    only run one factory, the Jiaotong Textile Mill, and thus had spare capacity
    to do other things.
  
    They are entirely aimed at ensuring supplies. Although they do not earn money,
    they have provided a supply of many necessary goods.


In October 1942 we carried out a thorough drive for better troops and simpler
administration. The Central Administration Bureau and Rear Services systems
were combined, and their industries administered in a unified way. We also
carried out further reorganization. The Tuanjie and Jiaotong textile mills
and the bedding and clothing factories were transferred to the Finance
Department. The medicine, alcohol, iron, and glassmaking factories were
transferred to the Garrison Office. The Natural Sciences Institute and all
the things that went with it were handed over to the government. All remaining
factories were closed, or merged and handed over to the control of the Central
Administration Bureau. By December 1942 there were three carpentry factories,
two papermaking factories, five charcoal-factories, one shoe-factory, one
oil-pressing factory, one flour-mill, three grinding-mills, one cart-factory,
one wine-factory and three blanket-workshops, a total of twenty-one large
and small handicraft factories and workshops. These can ensure all supplies
of coal, shoes and flour, the manufacture and repair of all wooden and
galvanized-iron implements, and some of the paper and edible-oil requirements
for the whole of the Central Administration Bureau system. Bedding and clothing
are supplied by the government. This is the outcome of the activism in industrial
production over the past two years of the Central Administration Bureau (prior
to September 1941 the Central Committee's Finance and Economy Office) and
the Rear Services.

The above experience shows that under present circumstances it is essential
for the official organizations and schools to run handicrafts. The aim is
not to earn money but to ensure supplies of necessities. However, organizations
and schools cannot set up any kind of factory they want to. They should choose
in a planned way which ones to run, according to the nature of the industry
and the situation in the official organization or school. They should reduce
the number of errors created by blindly groping around. Existing factories
should be organized into systems according to area and official organization.
Cutbacks, mergers and transfers can reduce waste and enable them to play
an even greater role in providing supplies.

As mentioned above, our comrades lacked experience of running commerce in
the same way as they did of running industry. They had previously only managed
a few cooperatives. We wished to turn to relying on a profit from commerce
in order to provide a large proportion of supplies. What had to be done?
Once again it was a process of moving from blindness to consciousness in
order to find an answer to this question.

During 1941 and 1942 commerce started off with the aim of rapidly overcoming
difficulties. Therefore we had no choice but to use the bulk of the capital
of each official organization and school to trade for a quick profit.

In the year from autumn 1940 to autumn 1941 we mainly operated large stores.
Some official organizations and schools enlarged their existing low-capital,
small-profit cooperatives, small shops and stalls, increasing capital and
staff, joining chambers of commerce and running proper commercial undertakings.
For example, the Jiaotong Store of the military base was at first a small
cigarette-shop set up at the entrance to the base at Qilipu in Yan'an. In
August 1939 it moved to the new market in Yan'an and as well as selling general
goods set up a Chinese Medicine shop and a horseshoe-shop. Its capital increased
from a few hundred yuan to 20,000 yuan. Another
example is the Hezuo Store which grew from the cooperative of the Anti-Japanese
University. In June 1940 it moved to the new market and set up branch stores
at the three branch schools of the Anti-Japanese University. Its capital
increased from 80 yuan to 19,000 yuan. The Rear
Services Store was at first a small stall with 30 yuan capital.
By September 1940 it had expanded and its capital had grown to 20,000
yuan. As well as selling goods it also set up a dyeing shop.
Originally many official organizations and schools did not have shops. Around
this time they too collected capital and people together and set up business
either independently or in partnerships. At the time the business done by
all the publicly-run stores depended on trading goods mainly from Suide,
Dingbian and Fuxian counties, in particular the cloth, paper, writing-materials
required by the official organizations, schools and troops themselves, and
the matches, raw cotton and so forth required by the common folk. During
this period the official organizations and schools set up over sixty large
and small stores in Yan'an, Suide and Dingbian, not including those run by
the army. In addition, there were many that did not set up premises but depended
on one or two people and a few animals to trade goods along the roads, calling
it 'floating trade'. According to statistics for October 1941 the stores
under the control of the Rear Services' committee for store administration
were the Xibei Store, the Xibei Vegetable Cooperative, and fourteen large
and small stores including the Xinghua, the Hezuo, the Jiaotong, the Xinxin,
the Xingmin, the Minxing, the Biahuo. the Junmin, and so forth. The Central
Administration Bureau had twenty stores.

We really relied on commerce to pass through a serious crisis during that
year. It solved great problems of supply. For example, during the first half
of 1941 the Central Committee's Finance and Economy Office and the official
organizations and schools relied on the twenty large and small stores run
by 113 staff with 296,800 yuan capital to earn a profit of
256,000 yuan which supplied 48 per cent of their daily
running-expenses. The Rear Services system with capital of 706,000
yuan made 810,000 yuan profit in the same period
which supplied 45 per cent of their daily running-costs.

However commerce during this period had one great fault which was excessive
dispersal and no centralized leadership. Furthermore, almost all of it was
trade in general goods. These faults came from the urgent need to solve
difficulties in running-costs for each official organization and school.
Each acted without coordination, competed with others and even disobeyed
Party policy, influencing prices and currency. Simultaneously. there was
price inflation, the Border Region banknotes lost value and the external
blockade intensified. Suddenly dealing in export and import of general goods
had a gloomy future and the various official organizations and schools which
relied on this for their running-expenses also found themselves with problems.
In this situation. it was urgently necessary to transform the commerce run
by the official organizations and schools and by the army. This transformation
began in the latter half of 1941. In the spring of 1942 the Border Region
carried out an initial drive for better troops and simpler administration.
It was then decided to organize all commerce into proper enterprises
[qiyehua]. On the one hand each system put its existing stores
in order, organized a joint committee for publicly-run commerce, unified
the leadership of publicly-run stores, and strictly carried out laws, commands
and policies. On the other hand they expanded the scope of commercial activity,
carrying out many kinds of business such as salt-shops, mule and horse supplies,
transshipment agencies, merchant warehousing, slaughtering and so forth.
The method of operation also changed. In some cases stores were merged, in
others capital was invested in private stores or in cooperatives and the
official organization or school did not run its own trade. In other cases
capital was invested in the government's Salt Company or in the Guanghua
Store. Thereafter the fault of having too many shops competing with each
other was avoided, and the function of providing the running-costs of the
official organizations and schools could be restored. For example, as a result
of reorganization according to this policy the Central Administration Bureau
and Rear Services systems reduced the number of their shops from thirty-eight
with 196 staff to twenty-five with 105 staff by October 1942. In the first
ten months of 1942 the two systems earned a profit of 16,440,000
yuan with capital of 8 million yuan. This accounted
for 68 per cent of all production income. Also during 1942 the production
committees of the various departments and offices of the Border Region Government
earned 600,000 yuan from agriculture and commerce, of this
commerce accounted for 350,000 yuan or 58 per cent. Official
organizations at sub-region and county level originally put agriculture first
but by 1942 commerce was the most important.

In 1943 financial and economic leadership will be united
[yiyuanhua]. External trade will be unified under the Commodities
Bureau. Every official organization and school must carry out a thorough
drive for better troops and simplified administration. As a result the commerce
run by the official organizations and schools must be regulated by the
Commodities Bureau, must share in running transport for local products and
salt, and must allocate some capital for cooperation with the Commodities
Bureau. In this way publicly-run commerce will be more rational.

The agricultural production of the official organizations and schools also
made progress in 1941 and 1942. In these two years there were great achievements
in the areas of grain, vegetables, charcoal and labour after work.

Some official organizations and schools were still growing grain entirely
independently in 1941, some had already changed to forming partnerships with
the common folk, and some ran agricultural stations (including both independent
operation and partnerships). Independent operation had changed somewhat.
The entire personnel no longer went up the mountains to farm. Instead, those
who went were chiefly those doing miscellaneous duties organized into production
teams accompanied by some of the physically stronger personnel. For example,
the production teams of the various official organizations in the Rear Services
system planted 5,200 mu of grain in 1941, and the Central Party
School planted 800 mu. Those in partnership with the common
folk included the Central organization Department which planted 840
mu and divided the grain at a ratio of 2:8, 2 to the government
and 8 to the private individuals, and the hay at a ratio of 7:3, 7 to the
government and 3 to the individuals. The agricultural stations included the
two stations run by the Secretariat of the Border Region Government on a
partnership basis. There were also the independent stations run at Nanniwan
by teams selected from the miscellaneous duties personnel of the official
organizations and schools equipped with oxen and tools. These included two
from the Rear Services and one each from the Central Committee's Finance
and Economy Office, the Central Organization Department and the Youth League
cadres. Official organizations of the sub-regions and counties also adopted
both independent operation and partnerships.

In 1942 the drive for better troops and simpler administration was carried
out. Many official organizations and schools in Yan'an were merged. As a
result, self-supporting vegetable production continued but all grain production
was only carried out either at agricultural stations or in partnerships.

Although partnerships have some of the character of exploitation, the common
folk, in particular the immigrants and refugees, appreciate it very much
since the government supplies seed, plough oxen and agricultural implements,
and the taxes are not high. This method has a role to play in encouraging
immigration and in adjusting the use of labour power. The Party School provides
an example:

The general office of the Party School planted 300 mu in
partnership with four immigrants. These four were all very strong. The Party
School sent one man responsible for leadership and inspection, The arrangements
were for the Party School to supply the agricultural tools, a hoe, a pick
and a sickle per man, to lend two oxen and to give the seed. They also lent
grain at rate of 4 sheng of hauled grain per 3
mu making 4 tan for 300 mu. It
was agreed to repay in the autumn of the following year. The division of
the grain and hay harvest was laid down as 20 per cent of the spiked millet
[gu (zi)] for the government and 80 per cent for the private
individuals, 30 per cent of coarse millet [Meiji] for the
government and 70 per cent for the private individuals, and 40 per cent of
the miscellaneous grains for the government and 60 per cent for the private
individuals. All the hay went to the Party School. This year the Party School
received 10,500 jin of hay, 8.37 tan of spiked
millet, 10.17 tan of coarse millet, 6.9 tou of
black beans [heidou] 4.2 tou of hemp-seed
[xiao mazi], l tou of sesame [lao
mazi] and 2 tou of adzuki beans
[xiaodou], valued at a total of 31,925 yuan in
Border Region money. The four partners received 33.48 tan of
spiked millet, 22.4 tan of coarse millet, 7.5
tou of black beans, 6.3 tou of hemp-seed, 1.5
tou of sesame, and 3 tou of adzuki beans, valued
at a total of 46,805 yuan This is a good example of giving
consideration to both public and private interests.

There is also new experience in building up agriculture stations. Since the
personnel selected from the official organizations and schools are not strong
labour powers, have limits on their working-time and are not skilled in
agricultural techniques, they will waste their capital if they only concentrate
on farming. In 1942 we adopted the following two methods. One was independent
operation which includes subsidiary undertakings such as animal husbandry,
wood-plank sawing and so forth as well as planting grain. This was like the
method adopted by 359 Brigade. The other was to form partnerships and involved
going into partnership with the common folk on stations that already had
some foundation, and setting up another new station oneself. In the first
year the new station brings no profit but in the second year it has some
foundation and can also be changed into a partnership. The Secretariat of
the Border Region Government provides an example. According to the comrades
there:

We have two stations, one to the east, the other to the south. Their size,
method of operation and harvest are much the same. In 1942 the southern station
planted 288 mu of river land, 324 mu of previously
farmed hill land and 408 mu of newly opened land. Altogether
the harvest was 244 tan of grain. Since beans and corn formed
the bulk, this was equivalent to 146.6 tan of hulled grain.
Taking each tan at 1,300 yuan this was worth
190,230 yuan. We also harvested 14,000 jin of
hay worth 14,000 yuan and 20,000 jin of vegetables
worth 20,000 yuan The total value for these three items was
224,320 yuan Originally we had 128 sheep. In 1942, eighty-one
lambs were raised, worth 10,000 yuan. We bought pigs for 3,482
yuan, and we also had thirteen worth 400 yuan
each. The total of all the above items is 243,002 yuan.

As we have adopted the method of partnership operation all our expenditures
were taken from the amount harvested including all expenses for the five
men we assigned. We went into partnership with twelve households, totaling
forty-five people. They had nineteen whole-labour powers, thirteen half-labour
powers and thirteen children not able to work. Altogether their share was
68 tan of grain equivalent 40.8 tan of hulled
grain with a total value of 53,040 yuan at 1,300
yuan per tan. They also received 7,000
jin of hay worth 7,000 yuan. The two items came
to 60,040 yuan. Our own five men (one was crippled and looked
after general running, two cooked, planted vegetables and crops, and two
looked after sheep and did general work ) four oxen, one mule and five dogs
received 30 tan of grain for eating equivalent to 18
tan of hulled grain worth 23,400 yuan and 50
jin of edible oil worth 1,300 yuan at 26
yuan per jin. In addition, repairs to implements,
ploughs, clothing and supplementary payments came to 20,000
yuan. The total of all the above expenditure was 104,740
yuan giving a surplus of 138,262 yuan. Adding
on the roughly 110,000 yuan from the eastern station, the return
on the two stations was roughly 250,000 yuan.

The two stations are nominally run by the Secretariat and the Civil Affairs,
Finance, Education and Reconstruction Departments. In practice, they only
send out ten people of whom two are hired labourers, one is a cripple and
seven are surplus personnel. The government has a production committee to
control the two stations. In practice usually only one person runs things.
This year thanks to floods and strong winds we were 150 tan
short on our harvest, worth 117,000 yuan. We were also swindled
on the seeds we bought for turnips and cabbage which were the wrong kind.
This lost 30,000 yuan. These two items came to 147,000
yuan and total losses for the two stations were roughly 200,000
yuan. This means that without natural disasters and the wrong
seeds we could get 200,000 yuan more. The working personnel
in the Civil Affairs, Finance, Education, Reconstruction Departments and
the Secretariat number around 400. The income of 250,000
yuan is thus an average of 625 yuan per head.
Although the harvest this year is below norm, they have laid the foundations
for next year and provided a livelihood for twelve immigrant households.
Furthermore, relying on this foundation, next year we are preparing to expand
the ploughed land at the southern station by 900 mu so as to
settle down surplus personnel. The two original stations will still be run
as partnerships.

The method adopted by the county-level official organizations also include
both individual operation and partnerships. For example, the top-rank official
organizations in Yan'an county have planted a total of 630
mu. Of these over 270 mu are farmed in partnership
with two households. These have five labour powers and the county committee
has only assigned two people to work on the station. The remaining 360
mu are farmed by criminals. In 1942, excluding the amount
distributed to the partners, they received a total of 75
tan of grain, equivalent to 45 tan of hulled
grain with a value of 58,500 yuan. With the addition of hay
worth 3,000 yuan, the total was 61,500 yuan.

As the above examples show, independent operation, partnerships and a combination
of both are correct. We should pay attention to this experience when determining
the grain production tasks for 1943.

A very great task in agricultural work is the growing of vegetables since
grain is also provided by the grain tax. If vegetables are not grown then
over 20,000 people will be semi-starved. The saying 'no vegetables is like
half a year's famine' is completely true.

The method for producing vegetables in the past two years has been to assign
personnel specially for growing them and to assign some supplementary labour
from the official organizations and schools. Each year we have on average
been self-sufficient for three to six months. According to the Rear Services
statistics in 1941 their various official organizations and schools planted
1,801 mu of vegetables consisting of 1,030 mu
of potatoes and 771 mu of cabbage, beans, turnips and miscellaneous
vegetables. In autumn, autumn cabbage and autumn turnips were planted on
the 771 mu. Over the year 879,000 jin of vegetables
were harvested equal to one-third of annual consumption on average. According
to the Central Administration Bureau statistics, in 1942 the various official
organizations and schools directly under central control assigned forty personnel
for growing vegetables and planted 388 mu of river land and
1,941 mu of hill land. They harvested 745,000
jin of vegetables, being self-sufficient for five months on
average. The Central Administration Bureau itself supplied nine months of
its needs. Yan'an University and the Natural Sciences Institute both supplied
eight months of their needs, and the Central Research Institute and the Chinese
Writers Anti-Aggression Association [wen-Kang] both supplied
seven months of their needs. The circumstances for vegetable production by
the personnel in the various official organizations are very varied. For
example, in Guanzhong sub-region they can only plant a little on account
of the climate, and can only achieve three months' self-sufficiency on average.
In the special military area they can only reach two or three months'
self-sufficiency because of the scarcity of land. In some areas such as Huachi,
Mudan and other counties they can achieve six months' or more because they
have land and can farm in partnerships. Production of vegetables for their
own use by official organizations and schools throughout the Border Region
is estimated to be worth around 6 million yuan.

The problem here is to discern whether the method whereby the official
organizations and schools assign production personnel to grow vegetables
outside their permanent organizational structure is ultimately worthwhile
or not. The experience of the various offices under central control shows
that it is. The best land for growing vegetables is river land, where all
kinds of green vegetables can be grown. On hilly land only potatoes and beans
can be grown. One mu of river land growing vegetables can supply
five people for a whole year, that is 0.2 mu per person. However,
1.5 mu of hill land is required to supply one person for one
year. Furthermore, so long as a man specializing in growing vegetables has
additional help when spreading manure, he can farm 6 mu of
river land. This means that one man specializing in growing vegetables together
with some supplementary labour can supply a year's vegetables for thirty
people. The daily vegetable requirement per head is 12
liang and the annual requirement is 300 jin.
For thirty people the annual requirement is 9,000 jin. At December
1942 Yan'an market prices of 3 yuan per jin,
the total value of this is 27,000 yuan. Allowing 6,000
yuan for the man specializing in growing vegetables there is
a surplus of 21,000 yuan. Taking the necessary incentive payments
into account, the least return is 20,000 yuan. Therefore in
future after each official organization and school has carried out a thorough
drive for better troops and simpler administration, it should pay attention
to arranging river land for growing vegetables, to assigning personnel for
the work, to providing supplementary labour and to ensuring self-sufficiency
in vegetables for more than half a year and even for a whole year.

Apart from grain and vegetables, raising pigs and sheep for meat is also
an important part of agriculture.

Some people consider that raising pigs wastes grain. However, our experience
proves that raising pigs does not waste grain and, instead, not raising them
does. First of all, without pigs, leftovers have to be thrown away, and there
are quite a lot of leftovers in large official organizations and companies.
Secondly, if little meat is eaten then greater quantities of other food is
consumed, and if a lot of meat is eaten then less other food is consumed.
Thus, raising pigs to increase meat supplies is not only necessary to maintain
health but is also economically rational. The various official organizations
and schools have developed many ways of raising pigs. For example, the Central
Party School directed the pig slaughterhouse to send someone to the kitchen
daily to collect the water in which the grain was washed and the vegetable
waste to feed the pigs. The Central General Affairs Section
[Zhongyang Zongwuchu] directed someone to collect
as pig-food the waste left after husking the grain and also the leaves and
roots left over in the vegetable plots when the vegetables were harvested.
According to the Rear Services Department statistics, in the first half of
1941 its various official organizations got 56,814 jin of pork
worth 170,440 yuan at the market-prices of that time. This
was enough for each person to have 1 jin of pork a month. If
we add the following six months, the value for the whole year was roughly
350,000 yuan. According to the statistics of the Central
Administration Bureau, the various official organizations and schools directly
under central control raised an average of 2 65 pigs a month up to October
1942. Over the ten months this gave an estimated 23,330 jin
of pork worth 700,000 yuan in Border Region currency. Another
example is the top-level official organizations in Yan'an county, which in
the first ten months of 1942 earned 10,000 yuan from pig-raising.
According to these figures the total value of animal husbandry by the official
organizations and schools of the whole Border Region is more than 4 million
yuan.

As well as raising pigs, raising sheep is also profitable where there is
pasture.

After a thorough drive for better troops and simpler administration in 1943,
we can adopt the method used by 359 Brigade whereby they assign one cook
for every forty people and reduce the service personnel. The remaining cooks
and service personnel are sent to work on the production front where they
can do many things such as growing grain and vegetables, and raising pigs
and sheep. Running large-scale animal husbandry on large livestock farms
should be given greater prominence in 1943.

Apart from the grain, vegetables and animals, there is also charcoal-burning
and labour done outside working hours, both of which have provided examples
worth looking at. All the charcoal used in the winter of 1942 by the various
official organizations and schools in Yan'an was provided by teams of people
from those institutions sent up into the hills. If it had been bought, a
substantial sum of money would have been involved. In September the Central
General Affairs Section organized a charcoal-burning team of forty-two people
made up of service personnel, cooks and grooms to spend three months up in
the hills making charcoal. Altogether they prepared 145 pits of charcoal
completing their task of making 140,000 jin. At 1.20
yuan a jin this was worth 168,000
yuan. If during the four winter months the 30,000 people in
the official organizations and schools of the Border Region on average made
1 jin of charcoal per head per day, this would provide 3,600,000
jin of charcoal worth 3,600,000 yuan. If we do
not make the charcoal ourselves, where shall we find such a large amount
of money?

There is also the labour done outside working-hours by the miscellaneous
duties personnel of the official organizations and offices of the Border
Region. For example, the Central General Affairs Section this year mobilized
them to repair buildings, to build surrounding walls, to make bridges, to
build roads and to cut horse-fodder. This saved the government over 110,000
yuan. Similar labour done by miscellaneous personnel of the
Central Party School saved the government over 139,000
yuan; and 359 Brigade did not employ outside workers for any
of its repairs or new construction. All official organizations and schools
should strive to do the same. Mobilize all the people in an official organization
or school to do all the work they can do. If we only consider the labour
done after working hours by miscellaneous duties personnel, the amount from
all the official organizations and schools of the Border Region could be
surprising. We should give rewards to all people who make achievements in
production, and this should also apply to labour outside working-hours.

The above is a summary of the experience of the various official organizations
and schools of the Border Region in self-sufficient production during the
period 1939-42.

According to the comrades doing economic work, in the two years 1941 and
1942 the agricultural, industrial and commercial capital of the Central
Administration Bureau and the Rear Services Department rose from 1,281,917
yuan to 11,690,000 yuan (much of this increase
was due to the fall in the value of the currency and it was not all due to
increased production). The production surplus of the year 1942 was 23,810,000
yuan. Except for the 2,330,000 yuan retained
to increase production capital in 1943 the remaining 21,480,000
yuan was all used to supplement food clothing, bedding and
office expenses for the various official organizations and schools. In terms
of the type of enterprise, agriculture accounted for 17 per cent, industry
8 per cent, salt 7 per cent and commerce 68 per cent. In terms of the official
organizations, the enterprises directly under the control of the Rear Services
Department got 8,400,000 yuan, those directly under the Central
Administration Bureau 3,500,000 yuan, those jointly run by
the above two 800,000 yuan, and those run by the various official
organizations and schools individually 11,100,000 yuan. If
we compare the amount of self-supporting production and the amount supplied
by the people, the former is 57.5 per cent and the latter 42.5 per cent.
The comrades at county level estimate that the monthly running-expenses for
Party and government at county level is roughly 10,000
yuan. Their own production is around 9,000
yuan and the upper levels only issue around 1,000
yuan The proportion is thus 90 per cent to 10 per cent and
is an even greater achievement.

In sum, the self-supporting production work of the official organizations
and schools of Yan'an and of the whole Border Region has had some success.
It has not only supplied the greater part of daily running-expenses and solved
urgent financial problems but has also laid a secure foundation for the public
sector of the economy. Relying on this base, we can continue to develop
production and solve future problems.

What is particularly important and worth raising is that we have gained
experience in running economic enterprises. This is a priceless treasure
that cannot be reckoned in figures. We should not only be able to manage
political, military, Party and cultural affairs, but should also be able
to manage economic affairs. If we could do all the others but not economic
work. we would be a useless bunch of people. We would be overthrown by our
enemies and decline until we collapsed.

In the light of our experience of the past five years and particularly the
past two, production by official organizations and schools must henceforth
improve, expanding its achievements. overcoming its weak points, developing
towards greater consolidation and completing even greater production tasks.
In 1943 we should adopt the following policies:



    Implement the policy of taking agriculture as the chief sector.
    

According to the actual circumstances in the official organizations and schools,
in each system adopt the following methods of running agriculture: (i) Those
with no foundations in agricultural stations should at once set-to to prepare
ploughs and tools, and separately or in partnership with the people grow
grain and vegetables. (ii) Those with agricultural stations, as well as
continuing production, should expand the scope of operations and arrange
for surplus personnel to do more subsidiary work such as raising pigs, sheep,
chickens and ducks, sawing planks and so forth. They should also form
partnerships with the ordinary people and open new farms. With these methods
grain production in 1943 will be greater and better than in 1942. Agriculture
must not be considered backward and must not be neglected.
      
All official organizations and schools, large and small, must allocate the
necessary personnel to specialize in growing vegetables supplemented by light
work done by working personnel and students. According to the area and climate
become self sufficient in vegetables for six or more months of the year,
and strive to become entirely self-sufficient. This is one of the most important
steps in improving livelihood.
    

    Coordinate and develop the various kinds of handicrafts. According to the
    area, system and the principle of better troops and simpler administration,
    join the existing handicrafts of a similar nature run by each section into
    partnerships. At the same time, according to the needs of each area and each
    system, set up new handicraft workshops, such as oil-pressing workshops,
    places to make Soya sauce and condiments, charcoal pits and so forth. The
    principles for running these handicrafts should be first that the workshop
    itself must be self-supporting, and second that it can make a profit.
  
    Develop animal husbandry. All official organizations and schools both large
    and small should raise pigs and strive to equal 359 Brigade's rate of one
    pig for every five people, so as to increase the supply of meat. Treat increasing
    the supply of meat, improving living-standards and raising health-standards
    as extremely important matters. In addition, each large official organization
    and school, and particularly the army, should set aside capital and without
    harming the interests of the people select areas in Sanbian, Longdong, Jinpenwan
    and so forth to run livestock farms. They should raise large numbers of cows,
    sheep, donkeys and horses, preparing for the time after victory in the War
    of Resistance when the Border Region's salt trade declines and it has to
    be replaced by animal exports.
  
    Develop transport undertakings. After a thorough drive for better troops
    and simpler administration, keep only a small number of animals to ensure
    the transport of grain and straw needed by each official organization and
    school itself. All surplus animals together with animals specially purchased
    should be organized into transport teams to transport salt or goods. These
    transport undertakings can be run by area and system as the best way of reducing
    costs.
  
    Regulate commerce. Following the policy of commerce playing a supplementary
    role and the principles of not going against trading policies nor doing
    speculative business, run shops in partnerships or individually according
    to the circumstances in the various systems and units after the drive for
    better troops and simpler administration. Eradicate commerce which goes against
    policy and close unprofitable shops. The various systems should transfer
    the proportion needed from commercial capital to agriculture, animal husbandry,
    handicrafts and transport. Do not hesitate to lay secure foundations in the
    work of becoming self-supporting through agriculture, industry, animal husbandry
    and transport.
  
    Treat improving the livelihood of the working personnel, miscellaneous duties
    personnel and students in the official organizations and schools as an important
    matter. Responsible people in these institutions should think of all kinds
    of ways of doing so. Under the principle of voluntary participation, they
    should encourage and direct miscellaneous duties personnel, working personnel
    and mothers with children to carry out some handicraft or agricultural production
    in ways which do not hinder their work, study or health. However, they should
    not run commerce. This work can be carried out in large production cooperatives,
    in small production groups or individually as the people involved wish. The
    government should provide loans for capital and the earnings should belong
    to the people who take part in the labour. All responsible people who run
    this very well and have the best successes should get rewards. All those
    who are not good at running their official organizations and schools hence
    make the life of the working personnel, miscellaneous duties personnel, students,
    mothers, children, the sick and the convalescent too harsh, or those who
    improve livelihood through ways which are wrong, hinder-work and study, or
    sabotage policies and orders should be criticized and taken to task.
  
    Implement unified leadership. Firmly carry out the principle of unified
    leadership and dispersed operation. The top-levels of the central Committee,
    the Border Region, the special regions [zhuangqu] and the counties
    should all set up strong leadership organizations concerned with unifying
    all production undertakings. According to the system and level, unify the
    policies for running enterprises, unify the coordination between the enterprises,
    and unify the ways of inspecting the running of each enterprise. Furthermore,
    under the condition of permitting each production unit to retain a suitable
    profit for itself, within a suitable area to the nature of production and
    operation, unify the distribution of the profits from production. This is
    necessary to avoid the great evils of lack of coordination, of inequalities
    in profits and losses, and of disparities in hardship and comforts.
  
    All agriculture, industry, animal husbandry, transport and commerce must
    be run as proper enterprises [qiyehua], using the system of
    economic accounting. The food, bedding, clothing and payments for the working
    personnel and employees in each enterprise should be supplied by the enterprise
    itself. They must not be provided at public expense.
  
    All production organs (factories, shops, etc.) should be 'popularized' no
    matter whether they belong to the government, the troops or the official
    organizations and schools. With the exception of the allocation of production
    tasks, the administration and supervision of production and the disposal
    of the results of production, everything else is under the leadership of
    the local Party and government, even including branch life. All personnel
    in production organizations must carry out policies, be law-abiding and pay
    taxes, take off their uniforms and put on ordinary clothing, join in the
    activities of the local masses and be model citizens of the Border Region.
  
    In accordance with the concrete circumstances, the Finance and Economy Office
    and the financial and economic committees of the sub-regions should issue
    specific production tasks for 1943 to the official organizations and schools
    in each county system. They should investigate and examine the production
    plans, and enter all the results of production completed within the plan
    by these production units into the financial accounts. Surplus production
    beyond the plan should be retained by the unit for itself as a means of improving
    livelihood. Upper levels should issue supplements to units whose production
    is not enough Those that made a loss in 1942 should be quickly examined to
    find ways of making up the deficiency.
  
    The four shortcomings pointed out in Chapter 8, 'On the Development of the
    Productive Undertakings of the Troops', also apply to the official organizations
    and schools. All official organizations and schools committing similar abuses
    should pay attention to correcting them.
  
    It must be clearly explained to all personnel engaged in agriculture, industry,
    animal husbandry, transport, commerce and labour outside working-hours (including
    the ordinary people working as hired labour or in partnerships) that their
    work is for the revolution and they are part of a very glorious cause. Setting
    aside a portion of the income from their labour to hand over to the government
    all helps our own, glorious and sacred revolutionary cause. It does not increase
    the assets of any individual. If publicly employed personnel working in the
    public sector of the economy plot to make special profits for themselves,
    they are guilty of immoral conduct within our ranks and crimes of corruption
    before the law. Those who are entirely free of corruption and waste, and
    work loyally for the Party and the country, are considered noble and moral,
    and should receive praise and rewards from the Party and the government.
    This point should be explained to the troops.
  
    All people doing economic, financial, supply and general service work, so
    long as they are not corrupt, do not waste, are loyal and work for the Party
    and the country, should be honoured. All people who treat their work lightly
    or with disdain should be criticized and rebuked.


Previous section       
               Next
  section


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On Grain Work








ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR (10)



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


10. ON GRAIN WORK


We have now completed our discussion of economic work. Our economy is divided
into the two large private and public sectors. The private sector of the
economy includes agriculture, animal husbandry, handicrafts, cooperatives
and salt undertakings. The public sector consists of the undertakings run
by the government, the army, and the official organizations and schools.
We have looked at all these things. We have not discussed commerce in the
private sector since we still lack the necessary information. For the moment
we have to ignore it. Now we must discuss the problems of finance. However,
we shall not look at all of its aspects but just look at three questions:
(i) the question of grain, (ii) the question of taxation, and (iii) the question
of economizing.

Our finances depend on two sources, the people and ourselves. Financial work
for the portion supplied by ourselves is basically distribution and supply
work when the process of production by the three elements of the public sector
of the economy is completed and becomes a process of distribution. The public
sector of the economy is the primary foundation for our finances and supplies.
It provided three-fifths of all finances and supplies during 1942. Thus our
primary financial work consists of properly carrying out the distribution
of the fruits of production in the public sector. We have already discussed
this question at length as a supplementary factor when dealing with the public
sector of the economy and there is no space to say more about the details
here. It can wait for further studies. Now we must discuss the second foundation
for our finances and supplies — the portion obtained from the people,
namely grain and tax. There is also the question of economizing. This is
related to what we get from the people and what we supply ourselves. It is
a question related to the whole of the resources we already possess and to
the correct distribution and use of the funds for running our undertakings.
Therefore it is an important financial problem. The grain question referred
to here is the grain tax alone and not all grain problems. This is part of
the tax system. However, since it is related to all the needs of the army
and government, and to the relationship of 80 to 90 per cent of the people
of the Border Region with the Party, the Eighth Route Army and the government,
it is worth specially setting it aside from the general question of taxation
and dealing with it first.

More than 90 per cent of the 1,400,000 people in the Border Region are peasants.
Landlords and merchants make up less than 10 per cent. Over half of these
peasants have obtained a share of land and the other half have not yet done
so. Why are we striving to the utmost to enable the peasants to develop
agriculture? In the first place our aim is to enable the peasants to grow
richer and improve their life. Secondly, we want the peasants to be capable
of paying grain tax to help meet the needs of the War of Resistance. There
is also a third reason which is that we want the peasants, after obtaining
a reduction in rent and in interest rates, to develop agricultural production
in order to be able to pay part as land rent to the landlords, and thus to
unite the landlords with ourselves in the War of Resistance. We must only
do one thing to achieve these three aims and that is strive to the utmost
to enable the peasants to develop agriculture. The more agricultural production
develops and the greater the amount of agricultural and subsidiary products
tile peasants harvest each year, then the less the amount of grain tax paid
to the government becomes as a proportion of their total harvest. We propose
to levy an annual grain tax of 180,000 tan beginning in 1943.
We intend to keep this amount as fixed in the following few years even if
as a result of agricultural development the total amount of grain produced
in the Border Region increases from its present level of around 1,500,000
tan. (Many comrades estimate that with better use of existing
labour power, we can raise the total production of the Border Region to 2
million tan. All increases will thus accrue to the peasants,
making them keen to work hard to develop their own production, and enabling
them to improve their own livelihood and to dress and eat well.

All comrades throughout the Border Region must learn from the way the comrades
of Yan'an county strive to work in the interests of the peasants,
so that the peasants rapidly get richer. The richer the peasants become,
the less they take exception to handing over a fixed amount of grain tax
and the more they feel close to and inseparable from the Communist Party,
the Eighth Route Army and the Border Region Government The peasant Wu Manyou
of Yan'an county is clear proof of this. On 30 April 1942, the Liberation
Daily carried the following report on him.

THE MODEL RURAL LABOUR HERO, WU MANYOU EXCELS IN OPENING NEW LAND AND
HARVESTING GRAIN FOR SEVERAL YEARS RUNNING, AND INFLUENCES THE MASSES TO
TAKE PART ACTIVELY IN SPRING PLOUGHING

(Our special report.) Rural labour heroes appear one after another in the
spring ploughing movement. In order to express their deep devotion to the
Border Region, to consolidate the Region and to improve their own life, they
display the spirit of labour to a high degree. Among them, Wu Manyou from
Luilin district in Yan'an county is especially respected by most peasants.
Every year his harvest of grain exceeds that of others by one-sixth. The
two labour powers in his family farm over 120 mu of land. This
year they opened up 35 mu of uncultivated land. He is already
publicly recognized as a model labour hero by the peasants of the township.
According to late news last night, the Reconstruction Department of the Border
Region Government has decided to give him a special award.

(Our report from Yan'an.) For successive years the peasant Wu Manyou of
Wujiacaoyuan in Second township, Liulin district, Yan'an county has been
active in spring ploughing and grown good crops. Usually people get an average
of 5 tou from every 3 mu; he gets 6
tou. Thus when the government issued the call for great efforts
in spring ploughing he said; 'I have benefited from the revolution and I
can never forget it. I truly love the Border Region and at the same time
I work to improve my own life'. He redoubled his efforts at opening up new
land and influenced the masses. He created an enthusiastic spring ploughing
movement in his own village. All the peasants in Yan'an county know that
Wu Manyou's township did the best farming this year. Wu Manyou originally
planned to open up 35 mu. He had already opened up 15
mu before it rained, and he was even more active afterwards.
He said: 'I can finish clearing the new land in ten days, and if there is
time I'll exceed the plan'. As for his other l00-odd mu of
cultivated land, some parts have already been seeded and some parts have
already been turned over. All the inhabitants of Wujiacaoyuan, the village
head, the head of the township, and the head of the district unanimously
praise him as 'a model hero in spring ploughing'. Now the district
government has applied to higher levels to reward him. On hearing this the
Border Region Government also decided after practical investigation to give
him a suitable reward as an incentive.

(Our report from Yan'an county.) During the spring ploughing movement many
labour heroes have appeared, but in the final analysis who is best at growing
crops? To clear up this question our reporters spent a month visiting various
villages. Now they have found the model labour hero generally recognized
by the masses. This model hero's name is Wu Manyou. This year he is forty-nine.
He is well built and strong. Before the land revolution he was a tenant farmer.
At that time he had to eat leaves and husks. He 'suffered hardship' [worked
for ethers] by cutting firewood. The money he earned he had to pay as taxes
to the local bad officials and rich gentry, and he himself usually went hungry.
After the Land revolution, he joined the revolution. He was given a share
of land on the hills, roughly 40 shang equal to 120-odd
mu. Apart from this private land, he has actively opened up
and sown uncultivated land in successive years, and he raises cows and sheep.
Now all the hill land is cultivated and he has two bullocks, three cows and
more than a hundred sheep. His prospects grow brighter and brighter. He has
got married, and eats and dresses well. Last year after government examination
his family status was raised from poor peasant to middle peasant. He often
says: 'When I think of the past and then of the present, how can I forget
the benefits, of the revolution and of the Border Region?'

(Our report from Yan'an county). Model labour hero, Wu Manyou, plants crops
like any other peasant. Why does he reap more grain than others? According
to the peasants in his village there are several reasons. First, he gets
up earlier than anyone else and goes to bed later. Before the sky grows light
he has fed his cows and gone up the hill. He only comes back from his land
when the sky is dark. He can really endure hard work. Second, in winter when
there is no work to do, he diligently collects manure. As he also can raise
sheep and cows, he has more manure than others. On average he applies seven
pack loads of manure to every 3 mu. Third, when the crops begin
to shoot, some peasants are afraid to go up into the hills. They do not hoe
the weeds or only hoe once at the most. He hoes twice at least, so his millet
naturally grows well. Fourth, he plough deeply. Other households plough down
5 inches he ploughs down 7 inches at least. Fifth, when breaking up the earth,
he breaks it finely and is not careless. Sixth, he always ploughs and sows
at the correct time, neither early nor late. Because of these fine qualities,
he harvests a top yield per 3 mu of 12 tou on
the old scale (18 tou on the market scale} and a lowest of
4 tou (6 market tou ). The average is 6
tou (9 market tou). The average for other peasants
is 5 tou (7 market tou). In terms of averages,
he is one-sixth better than others.

(Our report from Yan'an county.) Model labour hero, Wu Manyou, is not only
a model at growing crops but is also a model citizen. nest year he harvested
18 market tan of wheat (xiaomai) and 27 market
tan of grains (equivalent to 16 tan 2
tou of hulled grains). He paid 14 tan 3
tou in grain tax, 1,000 jin of hay tax, contributed
two lots of 150 yuan to government bonds, and paid 665
yuan cash substitute for the salt tax. The villagers said to
him: 'Old Wu, you pay out too much, cut down a bit! He said 'During the
revolution, the Eighth Route Army protects our Border Region. People at the
front loose blood. All we have to do is sweat a little more. How can you
say "Too much"?' Afterwards everyone respected his opinion and enthusiastically
gave grain to the State. This year the upper levels moved some refugees to
live in the village. He lent grain and hoes to them and helped them find
uncultivated land. He also often encouraged them materially and in spirit
to open up and plant land. Usually he is also the most fair person in the
village. His prestige among the ordinary people is very high and everyone
trusts him. In May last year he was elected a member of the township council
and director of the township's work in supporting families with dependents
fighting in the War of Resistance. He has a younger brother who is a soldier
with the Eight Route Army, so he himself belongs to such a family but he
declined public support. He said: 'Fighting is the duty of the Chinese people,
there is nothing strange about it. I've enough to eat, what other
support do I need?' However, he is extremely correct towards other families
in the township with dependents at the front. At the same time he is very
fair in his distribution of labour duties. There are twelve families in the
township with dependents fighting in the war. This year he arranged substitute
farming for 220 mu and all the families were grateful to him.
No one in township says he is not good.

(Our report from Yan'an county.) There are fourteen peasants sent households
in Wujiacaoyuan with fourteen heads of family. When you raise the question
of whether Wu Manyou is worthy of being called a model labour hero, everyone
raises his thumb and says 'What else can be said about old Wu. He is the
best at enduring hardship. If he isn't a hero who is fit to be?

On 2 June there was another report in the Liberation Daily.

Because of the influence of the labour hero, Wu Manyou, Wujiacaoyuan which
originally planned to open up 147 mu of undo cultivated land,
had already opened up 225 mu. Wu Manyou himself opened up 15
mu. After Wu Manyou was rewarded the whole town ship (Second
township, Luilin district) opened up 540 mu.

On 29 October, the Liberation Daily carried a further report.

This year the harvest of coarse millet is very good. In Wu Manyou's village
the yield per 3 mu is in general 5 to 6 tou but
he has got 8 tou (each tou is the large kind
equivalent to 45 jin). Most peasants get 3 or 4
tou of hulled grain from husking 1 tan of coarse
grains. He always maintains the official standard for the equivalent amount
of hulled grain. Wu Manyou often puts on a propagandistic air and says to
others: 'If you want to get your crops as good as mine, learn from me! I
have no secret, I am simply willing to labour' .

Wu Manyou is already a rich peasant. Because he got benefits from the soviet
government in the past and the Border Region Government now, he has united
his destiny with that of the Communist Party, the Eighth Route Army and the
Border Region Government. All empty words are useless, we must give the people
visible material wealth. The minds of many of our comrades have still not
fully turned into the minds of communists. They only know how to do one kind
of work, asking the people for this and that, for grain, for hay, for taxes
and for mobilization for various kinds of work. They do not know how to do
the other kind of work, striving to the utmost to help the people develop
production and to improve their cultural level. It is entirely rational for
us to ask things of the people for the sake of the revolution and the War
of Resistance. It is good that our comrades consider that in doing this work
they are doing the work they should do for the revolution. But it is only
doing one aspect of work and it is not the primary aspect. The primary aspect
of our work is not to ask things of the people but to give things to the
people. What can we give the people? Under present conditions in the
Shaan-Kan-Ning Border Region, we can organize, lead and help the people to
develop production and increase their material wealth. And on this basis
we can step-by-step raise their political awareness and cultural level. To
these ends we must endure all discomforts and night and day, diligently and
thoroughly look into the people's problems in their livelihood and production,
including such important matters as plough-oxen; agricultural implements,
seeds, manure, water conservancy, animal fodder, agricultural credit,
immigration, opening up new land, improving agricultural methods, female
labour, labour by loafers, plains for setting up households, cooperatives,
exchange-labour teams, transport teams, textiles, animal husbandry, salt
industry and so forth. Moreover, we must concretely help the people to solve
these problems and not use empty words. This work is the primary work for
all Communist Party members working in the countryside. Only after we have
done this aspect of work and achieved real results can we get the people'
s support when we do the second aspect of our work which is to ask them for
things. Only then will they say that our requests are necessary and correct.
Only then will they understand that if they do not give grain, hay and other
things to the government, their life cannot be good and cannot get better.
Only in this way will our work not be done through coercion. Only in this
way will things run smoothly, and only in this way will we be truly united
with the people. This is the basic line and policy of our party. Every comrade
(including those in the army) should study this thoroughly. Only when our
comrades understand and carry out the complementary nature of these two aspects
of work, can we call ourselves all-round communist revolutionaries. Otherwise,
although we do revolutionary work and although we are revolutionaries, we
shall still not be all round revolutionaries. Furthermore, some comrades
are still bureaucrats remote from the masses. Because they only know how
to ask the masses for things and do not know how to or are unwilling to give
things to the masses, the masses detest them. This question is extremely
important. I hope everyone will pay great attention to it and propagandize
the principle throughout the whole party.

In what follows we shall sum up our past experience in grain work and point
out the policy for 1943.

From 1937 to 1939, the grain tax levied in the Border Region covered only
a part of supplies. The deficiency each year was made up by purchase using
funds issued by the government. With the exception of particular areas and
periods when there were grain difficulties, there were no insurmountable
problems in the whole of grain supply for the four years. During that time
we actually enabled the people to build up their resources. The burdens of
grain tax were heavy on the rich peasants and landlords, very light on the
middle peasants and most poor peasants had none at all. In 1940 outside aid
was cut off and the government had no resources to buy grain. We had to turn
to raising all of it in tax. However, the principle of 'calculating tax on
the basis of income' had not yet changed. Also the grain tax for 1940 was
raised to only 90,000 tan and the policies for collection were
not altered. For supplies in the following year (1941) we put forward the
policy of 'strengthening grain administration and ensuring grain sufficiency'.
However, we could not provide all supplies since we had not levied much grain
in 1940. There was also the related matter of achieving self-sufficiency
in running costs in 1941, in connection with which the various army units
and official organizations paid careful attention to grain in order to solve
problems in livelihood. Another factor was that since the organizational
structure of the departments doing grain work was not yet strong and the
quality of the cadres was not good enough, the various regulations were not
well established and we could not fully control grain income and expenditure
in all places. At the time the problems of making excessive returns and rash
leadership were very serious, was constantly changing, increasing and decreasing,
and was too much occasional expenditure outside the set amount. The grain
tax levied in 1940 provided supplies until March 1941, when some places already
had nothing to eat. Before long there was a panic over grain everywhere.
It was only by successively buying grain once and borrowing twice that we
lasted until November. In order to guarantee supplies for 1942 and to repay
loans taken in 1941, it was estimated that a levy of 200,000
tan was essential. At this time the problem of grain had already
become the most serious financial problem. After repeated study by the Party
and government and under the new principle for collection of 'calculating
tax first on the basis of our expenditure and second on the basis of income',
it was decided to levy 20.000 tan of grain and 26 million
jin of hay. To ensure collection of this amount of grain and
taking the interests of all social strata into account, the base for collection
was expanded. The burden on the middle peasants was increased and the poor
peasants began to bear some of it. We corrected the earlier of bias towards
the minority of wealthy.

The grain accounts at the various county granaries were not clearly kept
in the past, and the great muddle in the formalities for buying and borrowing
grain during 1941 had increased the difficulties of sorting them out. The
Grain Office was deeply afraid that the lack of clarity over the old grain
would influence the new. Therefore 'grasp the new grain, ensure supplies
was made the strategy for work in 1942. Events during the year showed that
although there were deficiencies in implementation, the policy itself was
entirely correct. Grain tax for 1942 was reduced to 160,000
tan and hay tax to 16 million jin. The policy
for collection also reduced the burden on the poor peasants slightly.
Furthermore, we are preparing to implement a unified progressive agricultural
tax in 1943 in place of the grain-tax method. In order to raise the peasants'
enthusiasm for production, we lent them some of the grain and hay during
1942 to help them solve problems during spring ploughing. In supply work
the thing is to concentrate on grain and hay.

As regards the work of collection, we only levied 10,000
tan in 1937 and 1938. The burden on the masses was very light
and everyone was willing to pay. In 1939 the amount was raised to 50,000
tan. The government proclaimed new regulations for collecting
the grain. Work groups were sent down to the countryside to make surveys
and to collect tax according to the regulations. However, in reality, 50,000
tan was still a very slight amount of grain tax for the masses
to bear. The cadres were used to the method of democratic apportionment of
taxes and the survey work was very perfunctory. The so-called collection
to regulations remained a theory. In 1940 it was just the same. Only in 1941
when the grain-tax burden suddenly increased to 200,00 tan
did the government again seriously revise the regulations. The Finance Department
sent large numbers of work groups to the counties to work with the county
and district governments in carrying out fairly thorough-going surveys so
that the masses' burdens were made rational. This grain collection emphasized
'thorough-going surveys' and 'carrying out the regulations'. Summing up
collection in 1941, there is clear proof that if good survey work is done,
it is easy to carry out the regulations. For example, Ganquan county was
very conscientious in making surveys and then implemented the regulations
and rates for collection. Quzi county carried out three surveys and was able
to ensure a fair and rational distribution of the burden. In Baima district
of Huachi county the requirement was not filled after two allocations. Eventually
the head of the grain collection work group, Comrade Wang, himself surveyed
one township to get experience. As a result the whole district over-fulfilled
its quota by several tens of tan. In places where survey work
was poorly done, such as in the special military area, the regulations could
not be carried out. In general county cadres still treated survey work too
lightly. Only a minority of them carried out thorough-going surveys for grain
collection in 1941. The majority still used the old method of democratic
apportionment of taxes. In 1942 the grain collection gained from the experience
of the previous year. The regulations were revised again to bring them more
in line with reality. More thorough surveys were undertaken on the basis
of the surveys carried out in 1941. The Finance Department issued instructions
that the cadres collecting the grain had to follow the regulations. In cases
where carrying out the regulations meant that the task could not be completed,
they could also use the method of democratic apportionment of taxes. At the
same time, during this collection the cadres were given ideological education
which overcame their previously crude work-style and backward conduct such
as following personal preferences and holding things back. According to recent
reports from Longdong there is once again proof of the importance of
thorough-going surveys for the implementation of regulations. One district
in Qingyang county carried out a thorough survey, and because much new land
was cultivated during the year and production increased, it was able to exceed
the original collection target by several hundred tan in line
with the regulations.

A further point to consider is that for several years the figures set for
the grain collection have been achieved and exceeded, but the work of putting
the grain into the granaries has been too muddled. Many cadres involved in
grain collection think that they only have to meet the target. They do not
consider quality or investigate delayed payments. As a result on one hand
the quality is not good enough with 15 to 20 per cent consisting of husks
in some cases, and on the other there are instances where the masses delay
in paying their grain. There is a difference between the amount collected
and the amount put into the granaries. In the 1941 collection, although the
quality was a bit better, there were still a lot of husks mixed with the
grain. The slogan 'Grain to the Granary and Hay to the Cellar' was put forward
to overcome the problem of late payment but there was still too much of it.
In addition, because the 1941 collection was much bigger than any previous
year, the difficulties of getting it into the granaries were much greater.
As a result over 3,900 tan of the grain collected did not go
into the granaries. This was nearly 2 per cent of the total. During the 1942
collection the problem of getting the grain into the granaries was specially
emphasized. According to the latest examination this work has been done a
little better this year. However, the question of whether the full total
had been put in the granaries or not awaits a final summary before it can
be answered.

Another point is that for several years the Finance Department has assigned
work groups to help the county and district governments in the grain-levy
work. Where county and district cadres are too weak, this method is of great
help. Its shortcoming is that it easily creates dependency in the lower-levels
of government, and every time there is a mobilization, the upper levels have
to send people. The cadres have to go back and forth, spending much time
on the road, which leads to waste of manpower and of time. Since collection
in 1942 had the good foundation of work done in 1941, the Finance Department
adopted the principle of 'fewer and better' in its assignment of work teams.
It sent fewer cadres to each county and increased the responsibility of the
county and district government. In 1941, 150 people were sent down. On this
basis they are preparing to move towards not sending down anyone at all,
handing all the grain collection work over to the county and district
governments.

As regards supply work, because general income and expenditure was not firmly
controlled in 1941 so that grain had to be bought once and borrowed twice,
and because mobilization were hurried and almost cruel, the masses were not
satisfied. This was a great shortcoming. In 1942 we were able to control
income and expenditure. we also had the 200,000 tan of grain
levied in 1941 as a guarantee to ensure supplies until December. However,
since the drive for better troops and simpler administration was not thorough,
the budget could not be strictly implemented. Occasional expenditures combined
with unpaid grain tax came to over 18,000 tan. In addition,
troop movements influenced the relationship between supply and demand in
various places, and grain balances in the first half of 1942 could not be
maintained as allocated. Therefore, after July places like Yan'an, Nanniwan
and Linzhen one after another became short of grain. Afterwards the Finance
Department issued supplementary funds of 2 million yuan to
buy grain and a summer collection was made. Only in this way was a grain
panic avoided during 1942, and there was no bad effect on the masses. Next,
for the grain in 194 we adopted the method of 'allocation as a whole and
divide' administration'. Although this saved the bother and waste of transport
to and fro, it brought about cases of uncontrolled selling of grain, which
also entailed a lot of waste. There was still a gap between the amount collected
and the amount needed for supplies, which also led to many shortcomings.
For example the grain and hay allocated to the various counties in 1941 was
biased towards the harvest situation and neglected the supply and demand
situation. The grain requirement in Sanbian for the year was over 10,000
tan but only 1,600 tan was collected. A supplement
of 9,000 tan had to be transported from Longdong, Ansai, Zichang,
Zhidan and so forth. Not only was the year's grain transport work excessive
for the masses of these counties, but the masses in Sanbian were also very
busy handling transshipment. They called out that 'this way is not as good
as collecting more from us'. It is now estimated that just the 4,000
tan of grain moved to Sanbian from Longdong cost 7 million
yuan to transport, which is more than the cost of buying grain
in Sanbian. Another example was the grain collected in Yanchuan. Originally
it should have supplied Yan'an. However in 1941 grain from Dongyang district
was collected at the Majiapan granary which is on the opposite side of the
county near the Yellow River. As a result it took an extra three days to
transport the grain to Yan'an. Quite a few similar situations arose in other
counties. Again, the plan for the 1941 hay collection was not thoroughly
researched. It was decided everywhere to collect the hay after the grain
and no attention was paid to supply and demand. As a result some places kept
hay for which there was no use and it was allowed to go rotten which dissatisfied
the masses. In other places which needed a lot of hay there was an exceptional
shortage and supplies were only enough for eight months. Another example
was the 1941 grain collection in Guanzhong. Millet was made the unit instead
of wheat. The peasants had to go out of the Border Region tp sell wheat and
buy millet in order to pay the tax. As a result too much millet was collected,
the troops were not used to eating it and there were many disputes. After
summer begins millet rots easily which added to the troubles. Again in 1941
the relative proportion between regular and miscellaneous grains was generalized,
and not reckoned according to the grain production circumstances or the
relationship between supply and demand in each place. As a result some places
(such as the special military area ) collected a lot of miscellaneous grain
which could not be issued. Some places (such as Yan'an) needed horse fodder
but could not get miscellaneous grains. The official organizations had to
lower the relative proportions and exchange hulled grain for miscellaneous
grain which in turn led to waste of grain. The above shortcomings illustrate
that grain work is very concrete and meticulous, practical work. If it is
done crudely and in a way divorced from reality then the results will disturb
the people and disrupt the government. In 1942 after the grain collection
work was handed over to the Grain Office, the management of grain collection
and supplying was united. At the same time as a means of balancing resources,
it was decided to accept a money substitute for the hay tax according to
the different supply-and-demand situation in each place. As for the relative
proportions of grains, the earlier way of generalized application was changed
into a system of deciding according to the concrete situation in each place,
thus overcoming the previous shortcoming.

Next, from the winter of 1941 up to the present quite large successes have
been achieved in setting up and consolidating systems for grain supply. As
regards the budget system, for example, in 1942 most official organizations
were able to draw up their budgets at the correct time. They have got rid
of the bad practices of claiming excess grain and eating double rations,
and corrected the situation where counties approved budgets haphazardly and
spent grain without control. In particular they have grasped the policy of
'the final account must not exceed the budget'. During 1942 they have
conscientiously cut down on all irrational expenditure, economizing on over
19,000 tan of grain. As regards the system for paying out grain,
most army units and official organizations have honoured the regulations
that grain cannot be paid out without a grain payment document. The responsible
comrades in the counties have also paid attention to this regulation. They
have not indiscriminately permitted loans from tax grain. At the same time
during 1942 all the counties have used the official tou measure
which considerably reduced the number of disputes. As for the granary
regulations, because of the cadres' limitations, these could only be strengthened
first in the central granaries and then gradually generalized to all granaries.
For keeping accounts, the Finance Department drew up two standard account-books
(one new-style and detailed, the other very simple) which were adopted by
the cadres according to their ability. In 1942 most granaries, good and bad,
had account-books. Gradually we can reach the goal of being able to obtain
at any time statistics for grain income, expenditure and the amounts and
kinds of grain in store. As for the grain coupon regulations, there was much
corruption in 1941 because we issued large numbers of coupons. In 1942 we
abandoned the old grain coupons and issued three kinds of meal-ticket which
were only supplied for circulation among personnel in the official organizations
to cover meals. This was a step forward.

However, there were still many defects in the grain-supply work. For example,
a minority of large units still could not draw up their budget at the stipulated
time. A comparison of the actual personnel totals and the budgets of various
large units showed that there was still quite a proportion of figures without
foundation. Some instances of taking double rations still occurred. The ratio
of livestock was not clearly laid down, which in some cases led to quite
a lot of waste. Instances of individual troop units insisting on grain loans
from granaries because they had wasted grain and overspent could still not
completely be avoided. As for the storage system, most granaries still only
managed to do the work of receiving and paying out grain and of
administration. They were not good enough at supervising collection,
safe-keeping, submitting accounts and other duties. The meal-tickets could
not be circulated among the people, which caused problems for personnel sent
to do outside tasks. This too was a shortcoming. Finally, there was a great
defect in building up and consolidating all regulations which was that the
Grain Office only emphasized its own regulations and difficulties. It could
not comprehensively and concretely concern itself with solutions to the problems
and difficulties facing each official organizations.

In 1942 the official organizations in charge of grain were very successful
in the work of clearing up the granaries' old grain accounts. For several
years the county grain accounts had not been examined and reckoned up, so
that the Grain Office's accounts were no longer any use. For example, according
to the Office's accounts, in the winter of 1941, Ansai should have had over
2,900 tan in store. In fact it had less than 100
tan. Again the account for the grain taken from the granary
by the sanitarium had not been worked out for five years. It was discovered
in 1942 that it had collected over 100 tan too much. There
were many cases like these. Compounded by the muddle over purchases and loans
in 1941, many counties had no accounts to be examined. As a result the Grain
Office sent cadres down to each place to work out the accounts and adopted
all kinds of accounting methods. The old granary accounts were only cleared
up after six months' hard work. Now the Grain Office is able to work out
how much grain is actually held by the granaries and can keep a hold on grain
income and expenditure. The counties' administration of grain was also previously
very poor with losses due to a combination of rats, insects, rotting
and so forth. In addition there was serious corruption among the cadres.
During grain collection in 1941, there were more than ten cases. It
had even gone so far that individual special agents had infiltrated granary
work. For example, Zhang Bingquan, the director of the granary of Taile district
in Fuxian, was a special agent. In February 1942 he embezzled over 10
tan of public grain and fled from the Border Region.
This shows that previously the Grain Office's supervision of granary
cadres was too lax and its inspection work too infrequent. Since the granary
accounts were cleared up in 1942 and the leadership of the granaries by the
five sections of government at county level was strengthened, corruption
and waste have been reduced and many active and hardworking cadres
have been discovered.

In carrying out collection policy in the two years 1939 and 1940 the regulations
were fixed so that the tax threshold began at 1.2 tan (that
is, peasant families whose harvest per person was less than 1.2 tan
were not taxed). Tax was progressively applied to a top level of
36 per cent (that is, the tax rate increased until it leveled 36 per cent
of the harvest and thereafter the percentage did not increase). The failing
here was that the tax burden was biased towards the minority of the well-off.
At the same time the method of collection was that of democratic apportionment
of taxes and not that laid down by the regulations. As a result, there were
cases of going for big households' and 'ignoring everything but the target'.
Also the collection policy was influenced by excessive 'Leftism. 1941 the
regulations were revised. The tax threshold was fixed at 0,5 tan
(for example, a family of five whose annual harvest of regular grain
was less than 2.5 tan was not taxed). Taxation was progressively
applied up to 30 per cent. The implementation of these regulations resulted
in a broadening of the base for collection. Apart from Huanxian which suffered
natural disasters, the tax burden in all other counties was carried by over
80 per cent of the people and in Yan'an county it reached 95 per cent. In
terms of carrying for the interests of all classes and strata, with the exception
of Yan'an, Yanchang and Ansai, the burden in other counties did not exceed
30 per cent of the harvest. However, there were still shortcomings. For example,
the counties were not entirely rational in their allocations to meet the
total collection. The special military area lowered the tax threshold to
0.3 tan and reduced the number of steps in the tax progression.
As a result the poor and middle peasants suffered and the richer middle peasants
and above were let off too lightly Also, during grain collection in 1941
we only paid attention to collecting grain and not to reducing rents and
interest rates at the same time. Some new immigrants who should not have
paid tax had to do so. Family dependants of troops in the War of Resistance
should have received special assistance but this was stopped in some cases.
Some cotton-growers should not have been taxed for grain but were. All these
things contravened the government's pollicies. Other policies such as caring
for the interests of all strata, raising the enthusiasm or production of
the peasants and so forth merely remained general slogans. Actual implementation
was very deficient. With the experience of 1941, the grain collection in
1942 made some advances. However, we still did not pay enough attention to
the cotton-growing policy. For example, the allocation of a quota for grain
tax to the cotton-growing areas in the three eastern counties was the same
as that allocated to other counties. When it came to collection, problems
arose. If grain tax was not collected on the cotton fields the requirement
could not be fulfilled. Yet if it was collected, it would conflict with
government orders. Ultimately they had to make accommodations and reduce
the collection by half. This still damaged the authority of the government.

In any work, going beyond policies depends on whether the cadres are good
or bad. Grain work is no exception. The most hardworking people doing grain
work are the granary cadres. The easiest corrupted are also the granary cadres.
Therefore we shall here specially quote examples of typically good and typically
bad granary cadres, so that everyone can learn from the good and be warned
by the bad.

GOOD EXAMPLES

(A) Comrade He Chuango, director of Panlong granary is an old fellow of
fifty-two. He does not say much but is very careful and thoughtful, enthusiastic
and hardworking. In 1939 he was assigned to work in the Zhenwudong granary
of the Grain Office. In 1940 he was transferred to be director of the Panlong
granary, concurrently responsible for the grain-market balancing station
[diaojizhan] and the transport station. He is responsible for
the work of three men. In the past he has been secretary of a district Party
committee and has been trained at the Border Region Party School. Initially
he was one of seven people including Jia Zhicai and Ren Shengbiao who were
assigned from the Border Region Party School to do grain work but of these
he alone remains at his post today. His cultural level is not among the lowest
of the granary directors. He can write simple letters and keep clear accounts.
He is very conscientious in studying the newly adopted account books and
learns quickly. In 1941 when the 'monthly report tables' were issued to the
granaries some directors could not understand after three days of explanation.
After hearing once he was able to raise questions and opinions. After a few
questions like 'What should be filled in on this section?, Would it be all
right to fill in that section like this?', he could complete and send in
his 'monthly report tables' on time. Many fine qualities are expressed in
his work. The first is meticulous attention to detail. When receiving grain
he writes a receipt for the amount and makes up his accounts every evening.
When paying-out he double-checks on the abacus. The second is a deep sense
of responsibility. He takes great care of the granary. One storage bin was
a little damp and he paid special attention. He often had the grain spread
out to dry in the sun, and when paying-out grain he always paid from this
bin first. Eventually he dug a ditch behind the bin and dug the surface of
the earth around the bin lower than the bin, making it a little drier. When
the granary needs minor repairs he does not hire workers but sets-to himself
to carry bricks and plaster ( under his influence the personnel in charge
of moving the grain also work hard and help). As administrator of the transport
depot, every time a transport team arrives he helps to cut grass, draw water
and prepare food. His third quality is his friendly attitude to others. Some
of the personnel in leading official organizations get in a bad temper when
the grain is paid-out, but he patiently finishes the job and does not get
into arguments. Sometimes some of the masses send bad grain when paying-in.
He just encourages them to take it back. When buying grain to balance the
market, he can discuss things and get close to the masses. But he also has
his own opinions. Once when it was raining and the grain in the market could
not be sold, he took the opportunity to purchase it. The price was fairly
low and the masses were still pleased. For these reasons he enjoys some prestige
among the masses of Panlong. When receiving tax grain in 1941 a peasant from
Yongping district county offered him bribes. He got angry and sent the man
and the goods to the district government. His fourth quality is a plain and
simple way of life. He raises very few questions about his own life and he
expresses concern about receiving welfare expenses. In 1942 he was responsible
for collecting 4.000 tan of tax grain and everyone was concerned
that he might not manage since he is old and has few helpers. But every time
he wrote a letter to the Grain Office, he said that he could manage.

(B) Comrade Bai Heming is director of the Tianzhuang granary in Suide. He
is a graduate of upper primary school. He had worked in the old
baojia office. His qualities include first a deep sense of
responsibility. When receiving grain he compares receipts and invoices every
evening to make sure that there has been no mistake. He also makes out clear
accounts for households owing grain, and supervises the districts and townships,
encouraging them to send in their grain. Before receiving grain, he himself
lays stones and boards in the storage bins, spreads dry straw and puts straw
mats over the straw so as to guard against dampness. After the grain is in
store, he himself seals up the bins which will not be opened soon, using
bricks and plaster and covering-up holes which let in the wind, with broken
mats. Secondly, he is friendly towards others. When receiving grain he inspects
conscientiously. However, to those who send in bad grain he simply says:
'Look everybody, can you feel easy about sending grain like this for the
troops?' He has never raised his voice in abuse. If someone from the army
came to collect grain not in accordance with official procedures, he always
courteously and patiently explained things. On the one hand he would lend
some grain to prevent shortage, and on the other asked the them to make good
the procedures. Before long if anyone from the troops stationed in Suide
went to collect grain from old Bai's granary, they always went through the
procedures to avoid difficulties for old Bai and embarrassment for themselves.
Thirdly, he is very hardworking. He gathers firewood and draws water himself.
He is careful over operating and food costs. He reports excess expenditure
to the fifth government section at county level. He does not indiscriminately
take grain and sell it for the cash to make up deficiencies. Now Comrade
Bai Heming has been promoted to be head of the fifth section of Suide county
government.

BAD EXAMPLES

(A) Hy Dianchang was director of the granary of Fourth district Xinning.
When receiving grain in the winter of 1941, he sold 3 tan
privately, took 1.3 tan home, and lent 3.92 tan
to his relatives and friends. He himself and his relatives and friends,
Hy Diangong, Hu Qingrong and Liu Zixiao should have paid 7 tan
of grain tax. They did not hand over a single grain but he still
issued tax-grain receipts. When receiving grain he did not allow the masses
to sweep up the grain on the floor, but swept it up himself and shared it
with the personnel helping him to receive the grain. After he had finished
issuing tax-grain for deposit in citizens' homes, he was 0.2 tan
short but he falsely reported 1 tan to the fifth section
of the county government. After the fifth section found him out, he was sent
to court, sentenced to prison and ordered to return the embezzled grain.

(B) In September 1939 after grain was sold from the Shuifan district granary
in the Huachi county, 14.7 tan of tax grain was missing. The
granary director, Wang Wenbin reported to the upper levels that rats had
eaten 12.7 tan and another 2 tan had been
contaminated. In 1941 when the grain collection work group went to investigate,
they discovered that Wang Wenbin had gone to the county town for a meeting
during the time when the grain was sold. His place had been taken by the
district secretary Mao Yupeng. During the grain sales Mao Yupeng had lived
exceptionally richly. He had bought a flock of sheep and two skin coats.
He had also bought cloth. There was suspicion of embezzlement. However, at
the time the county government did not investigate. Afterwards Mao Yupeng
was transferred to work elsewhere. This affair is still going on.

Above we have summed up our experience in grain work during the past five
years. Below are the policies for work in 1943.

(1) Implement the unified progressive agricultural tax. In the past we have
used the method of levying national salvation grain tax. It is not an entirely
satisfactory method of taxation. If it is well done it can only achieve the
aim of being fair burden on the people. It cannot give any effective
encouragement to the peasants' feelings towards production. Therefore we
must actively prepare to implement the unified progressive agricultural tax.
How should our preparatory work be done? (i) Under the leadership of the
Finance Department set up a specialist research team consisting of five to
seven cadres selected for their experience in political work and their good
understanding of land and financial problems. This team should gather, study
and arrange materials concerning progressive taxation, and plan the work
for introducing it. In addition, directed by the Border Region Government,
responsible comrades from the relevant official organizations led by the
head of the Finance Department should organize a planning committee to take
charge of policy, to solve problems and to regularly lead the work of the
research team. (ii) Carry out survey work. A detailed summary of grain collection
work in 1942 should be supplied to the progressive taxation research team
as concrete source material. The research team should first study some counties
with different situations, whose collection in 1941 and 1942 was comparatively
good. They should draw up an initial survey plan, and first carry out trial
surveys. Afterwards they should revise the plan, draw up a format and carry
out a general survey. In the light of the materials from the survey they
should determine the regulations and methods. Counties with good successes
who complete the work early can carry out a trial run during 1943. (iii)
Carry out land registration at the same time as the surveys. (iv) Strengthen
the government organization at township level, build up sound clerical records
and survey thoroughly.

(2) Grasp grain and hay, ensure supplies. Supplying grain and hay is complex
and detailed work. Grain and hay resources are widespread and not easily
grasped. If we are unable to pay full attention at all times and cannot suitably
adjust the relationship between supply and demand, it will be hard to make
a good job of it. If we want to be able to grasp grain and hay and ensure
supplies, we must do the following: (i) We must first ensure that all the
160,000 tan enters the granaries, and improve the quality so
that 100 per cent is grain. Do not allow adulteration with husks. At the
same time, call on all counties to eliminate evasion of payment. We must
build up thorough regulations for the administration of grain and hay. Pay
attention to the running and inspection of granaries. Set up central granaries.
Gradually improve equipment. Prevent damage through contamination and rotting,
and corruption and theft. Strictly carry out the budget system. Completely
eradicate excessive claims and taking double rations. Set up grain accounts
in accordance with the cultural level of the cadres in each place. Do not
be too elaborate but require that receipts, issues and stocks of grain are
clearly recorded. Next, the regulations for paying-out grain are even more
important and must be carried out. The reason for building up regulations
soundly is to ensure supplies and to prevent corruption and waste. All instances
of not adhering to discipline must be strictly corrected. However, a mechanical
viewpoint which one-sidedly emphasizes regulations without concern for the
concrete facts must also be guarded against. (ii) To ensure supplies, we
must first handle the relationship between supply and demand of grain and
hay. Prepare supplements for areas deficient in grain through transport,
adjustment of distribution and so forth. In 1943 we should organize any unused
animals owned by the official organizations to transport grain and hay, improve
the work efficiency of every transport team (on average our animals each
carry 1 tou less than those of the common folk and we need
three days to go as far as they do in two) and lay down precise transport
tasks so as to economize on manpower and animal power which can then be used
for production. We must depend on the grain transported by the people, making
plans early and using the slack agricultural periods and unused porters and
animals. Except in special circumstances, mobilizing transport in the busy
agricultural seasons is not allowed. Long distance transport must also be
avoided as much as possible. In areas where the distribution of grain can
be adjusted, coordinated plans should be made by the Grain Office. Grain
should be sold or bought at the right times so as to supplement supplies,
save on transport and avoid waste. In areas where official organizations
and schools are excessively concentrated such as Yan'an, we should consider
the situation, and disperse men and horses to ease the distribution of grain
and straw.

(3) Carry out the drive for better troops and simpler administration, store
grain to prepare for famine. For successive years the Border Region has overdrawn
its tax grain and has not got the slightest reserve. If natural disaster
occurred, grain supplies for the army and people would become an extremely
serious problem. Everyone should be warned by this to take the following
steps: (i) Resolutely carry out the new reorganization plan of the Party
and government and the drive for better troops and simpler administration.
Through simplification and strict economy ensure a balance between grain
income and income and expenditure in 1943. (ii) Collect 180,000
tan of' tax grain in 1943 so that we have a chance to retain
some as reserve against need. (iii) During 1943 the troops, official
organizations and schools should put developing agriculture in first place.
Growing grain should form a considerable proportion of farming work so that
there will be an even greater surplus in 1944 and we will be prepared against
disaster. The troops, official organizations and schools certainly may not
relax their own grain production because we are preparing to levy 180,000
tan during 1943.

(4) Strive to economize, strictly prevent waste of grain. There is a serious
waste of grain among the official organizations and troops. Thus, mounting
a campaign to economize should be one of our central tasks for 1943. Recently
in Yan'an some of official organizations and schools have inspected the amount
of waste and carried out economy campaigns with great success. For example,
the administrators of a training squad in the supply department of the garrison
forces were diligent and responsible. When issuing grain and flour, they
did the weighing themselves. Thus their food supply was just right and they
were often able to eat buns and noodles. The Central Party School has large
kitchens. Recently administration of food has been strict. Grain-cooking
has been supervised. Left-over grain has been kept and eaten as the following
meal. After this was done, only 1 jin of millet was consumed
per head per day. Before a month was up more than 5 tan of
'millet was saved. Another example was the collective meals at the nursery.
In the past when the people there took meals in separate groups, the nursery
consumed 150 jin of flour a meal. After collective meals were
introduced, they only consumed 100 jin saving one-third. You
see, comrades, what a surprising amount this is. Similarly the central
departments and committees have implemented collective mess-halls and have
also got good results. The Central Party School planned in the first half
of the year to raise 2,000 chickens which required 300 bowls of millet a
day. The waste was quite large. Afterwards they killed most of the chickens
and only sixty were left. This saved quite a lot of grain. In addition, it
is necessary to foster the habit of using meal-tickets. It can reduce the
issue of large amounts of grain. In sum, in order to ensure that there are
absolutely no shortages of grain, on the one hand we must levy and produce
it and on the other we must seek to economize. This is the work for leading
comrades and it is a mass-movement. Everyone must pay attention and complete
the task given by the Party.

(Two chapters on taxation and economizing originally planned for this book
could not be written in time because the Senior Cadres' Conference closed.
They had to be left out.) 
the Author

NOTES

1. These figures are the totals paid in agricultural tax
(public grain) by the peasants of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region
from 1940 to 1942.

2. For 'better troops and simpler administration' see 'A
most Important Policy'. Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung
Volume 3 pp, 99-102.

3. The 'Three mountains' refer to three mythical islands
where magic spirits are presumed to live.


   Previous section


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Comintern has Long Ceased to Meddle in Our Internal Affairs 






THE COMINTERN HAS LONG CEASED TO MEDDLE IN  OUR  INTERNAL  AFFAIRS





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  THE COMINTERN HAS LONG CEASED
  TO MEDDLE IN OUR INTERNAL AFFAIRS


May 26, 1943

[Extracted from. a speech explaining the dissolution of the Communist
International, delivered on 26 May 1943, to the cadres of Communist Party.
'Chieh-fang jih-pao', 28 May 1943.]
  

. . . Comrade Mao Tse-tung first pointed out that the dissolution of the
Communist International was exactly as an American press agency had reported,
'a great event marking the dividing line between two epochs'...

Comrade Mao Tse-tung asked: 'Why should the Communist International be disbanded?
Did it not devote all its efforts to the emancipation of the working class
of the whole world and to the war against fascism?'

Comrade Mao Tse-tung said: 'It is true that the Communist International was
created by Lenin himself. During its entire existence it has rendered the
greatest services in helping each country to organize a truly revolutionary
workers' party, and it has also contributed enormously to the great cause
of organizing the anti-fascist war.' Comrade Mao Tse-tung pointed particularly
to the great services of the Communist International in aiding the cause
of the Chinese revolution...

Comrade Mao Tse-tung further pointed out: 'Revolutionary movements can be
neither exported nor imported. Despite the fact that aid was accorded by
the Communist International, the birth and development of the Chinese Communist
Party resulted from the fact that China herself had a conscious working class.
The Chinese working class created its own party - the Chinese Communist Party.
The Chinese Communist Party, although it has a history of only twenty-two
years, has already undertaken three great revolutionary movements' . . .

Since the Communist International has rendered such great services to China
and to various other countries, why should it be necessary to proclaim its
dissolution? To this question Comrade Mao Tse-tung replied: 'It is a principle
of Marxism-Leninism that the forms of revolutionary organizations must be
adapted to the necessities of the revolutionary struggle. If a form of
organization is no longer adapted to the necessities of the struggle, then
this form of organization must be abolished.' Comrade Mao Tse-tung pointed
out that at present the form of revolutionary organization known as the Communist
International is no longer adapted to the necessities of the struggle. To
continue this organizational form would, on the contrary, hinder the development
of the revolutionary struggle in each country. What is needed now is the
strengthening of the national Communist Party [min-tsu kung-chan tang]
of each country, and we no longer need this international leading centre.
There are three main reasons for this. (1) The internal situation in each
country and the relations between the different countries are more complicated
than they have been in the past and are changing more rapidly. It is no longer
possible for a unified international organization to adapt itself to these
extremely complicated and rapidly changing circumstances. Correct leadership
must grow out of a detailed analysis of these conditions, and this makes
it even more necessary for the Communist Party of each country to undertake
this itself. The Communist International, which is far removed from the concrete
struggle in each country, was adapted to the relatively simple condition
of the past, when changes took place rather slowly, but not it is no longer
a suitable instrument. (2) .... The anti-fascist states are of all kinds:
socialist, capitalist, colonial, semi-colonial. Among the fascist states
and their vassals there are also great differences; in addition, there are
also the neutral countries, which find themselves in varying circumstances.
For some time it has been felt that a centralized organization of an
international character was not very appropriate for organizing rapidly and
efficiently the anti-fascists of all these states, and this has become
particularly obvious recently. (3) The leading cadres of the Communist Parties
of the various countries have already grown up and attained political maturity.
Comrade Mao Tse-tung explained this point by using the example of the Chinese
Communist Party. The Chinese Communist Party has been through three revolutionary
movements. These revolutionary movements have been continuous and uninterrupted
and extraordinarily complex, even more complex than the Russian Revolution.
In the course of these revolutionary movements, the Chinese Communist Party
has already acquired its own excellent cadres endowed with rich personal
experience. Since the Seventh World Congress of' the Communist International
in 1935 the Communist International has not intervened in the internal affairs
of the Chinese Communist Party. And yet, the Chinese Communist Party has
done its work very well, throughout the whole Anti-Japanese War of National
Liberation…




Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Letter to the Yenan Peking Opera Theatre After Seeing "Driven to Join the Lianshan Mountain Rebels"






LETTER TO THE YENAN PEKING OPERA THEATRE





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  LETTER TO THE
  YENAN PEKING OPERA THEATRE
  AFTER SEEING
  'DRIVEN TO JOIN THE LIANGSHAN MOUNTAIN REBELS'

January 9, 1944

[The Peking opera 'Driven to Join the Liangshan Mountain Rebels' is an
episode from Shui Hu Chuan ('Heroes of the Marshes', 'Water Margin' or 'All
Men Are Brothers'), the fourteenth-century classical novel. It tells how
Lin Ch'ung spurred on by the strength shown by the people, resolved to join
their rebellion against the reactionary rulers.]
  

Having seen your performance, I wish to express my thanks to you for the
excellent work you have done. Please convey my thanks to the comrades of
the cast! History is made by the people, yet the old opera (and all the old
literature and art, which are divorced from the people ) presents the people
as though they were dirt, and the stage is dominated by lords, and ladies
and their pampered sons and daughters. Now you have reversed this reversal
of history and restored historical truth, and thus a new life is opening
up for the old opera. That is why this merits congratulations. The initiative
you have taken marks an epoch-making beginning in the revolutionization of
the old opera. I am very happy at the thought of this. I hope you will write
more plays and give more performances, and so help make this practice a common
one which will prevail throughout the country.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Mao's Interview with an American Journalist, Gunther Stien








MAO'S INTERVIEW WITH AN AMERICAN JOURNALIST, GUNTHER STIEN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  MAO'S INTERVIEW WITH AN AMERICAN JOURNALIST, GUNTHER STIEN


1944


"Communists in all countries have only one thing in common", Mao Tse-tung
said in reply to my question whether there was really no possibility of a
change of "that awful word Communist" in the name of the party. "What they
have in common is their method of political thinking along the lines of Marxism.

"Communists everywhere have to distinguish between this system of thought
and an entirely different matter: the Communist system of social organization
which is the final political aim of their system of thought.

"Especially we in China must strictly distinguish between the Communist method
of observing, studying, and solving social problems on the one hand, and
the practical policies of our New Democracy on the other, which during the
present stage of China's social development must constitute our immediate
aim. Without the Communist method of thinking we would be unable to direct
the present, democratic stage of our social revolution. And without the political
system of the New Democracy we would not apply our Communist philosophy correctly
to the realities of China.

"Our present New Democracy will have to be continued under any conditions
and for a long period to come. For the concrete conditions existing in China
dictate to us the continuation of that policy.

"What China needs now is democracy and not socialism. To be more precise,
China's needs at present are three: (1) to drive the Japanese out; (2) to
realize democracy on a nationwide scale by giving the people all the forms
of modern liberty and a system of national and local governments elected
by them in genuinely free general elections, which we have already done in
the areas under our control; and (3) to solve the agrarian question, so that
capitalism of a progressive character can develop in China and improve the
standard of living of the people through the introduction of modern methods
of production.

"These, for the present, are the tasks of the Chinese revolution. To speak
of the realization of socialism before these tasks are accomplished would
merely be empty talk. This is what I told our party members in 1940 in my
book The New Democracy. I said already then that this first
democratic phase of our revolution would by no means be short. We are not
Utopians and we cannot isolate ourselves from the actual conditions right
before our eyes."

He added with a smile, "It is quite possible that China may reach the stages
of socialism and communism considerably later than your countries in the
West which are so much more highly developed economically."

Mao Tse-tung gave me his views on the question of the future Communist attitude
toward the landlords when I asked him what he considered the principal economic
and social contents of the New Democracy.

"The central economic feature of the New Democracy", he said, "is the agrarian
revolution. This holds good even during the present period when the fight
against Japan is our main task. For our peasantry is the chief object of
exploitation -- not only of Chinese reactionaries but also of the Japanese
imperialists in the occupied territories. Only the introduction of the New
Democracy in our war regions has enabled us from the beginning to resist
the Japanese as successfully as we do, because of its reforms in the interest
of the peasant masses who constitute the very basis of our war effort.

"The present unreformed agrarian system in the rest of China, with its scattered,
individual peasant economy -- in which the farmers are not free but bound
to the land, in which they have little contact even with one another and
live a stagnant cultural life - has been the foundation of our ancient feudalism
and despotism. The New Democracy of the future cannot rest on such a foundation.
For the progress of Chinese society will mainly depend upon the development
of industry.

"Industry must therefore be the main economic foundation of the New Democracy.
Only an industrial society can be a fully democratic society. But to develop
industry, the land problem must first be solved. Without a revolution against
the feudal landlord system it is impossible to develop capitalism, as the
course of events in Western counties many years ago has shown quite clearly.

"Our agrarian revolution until 1937, during the period of the Civil War,
was fundamentally of the same social character as the great agrarian revolutions
which took place in the past in all progressive countries of the West and
cleared away the feudal obstacles to the growth of the capitalistic system."

I asked whether the radical Civil War policy of confiscating land from the
landlords and distributing it to the peasants would not be resumed after
the present war with Japan, since Mao Tse-tung had still emphasized the need
for a continued agrarian revolution.

He explained, "During the Civil War period we had no reason to prevent the
farmers from confiscating land, because the landlord class not only suppressed
them but actually led the fight against them. Our party only followed the
opinion of the farmers on the subject, formulated their demands into slogans,
and then put them into practice as policy. Land confiscation as such was
not a bad policy under Chinese conditions. The basic demand of the rural
masses has always been concentrated on their desire for land ownership. Dr.
Sun Yat-sen, the late leader of the Kuomintang, recognized it and advocated
the ownership of the land by the tillers. This was one of the main points
in his programme for the improvement of the livelihood of the people.

"During a period of national war against a foreign aggressor things are of
course different. A national war makes it possible to persuade the masses
not to confiscate the land of the landlords, because the masses realize that,
while the landlords are also willing to resist the enemy, a policy of land
confiscation might drive them into the Japanese-held cities and make them
return to their villages together with Japanese troops in order to recover
their land.

"In this way, the peasants understood soon after the beginning of the war
with Japan that our new policy of reducing land rents instead of continuing
confiscation of land had the twofold advantage of improving the peasants'
livelihood and of inducing the landlords to stay on in the villages and join
in the fight against Japan. The general reduction of land rents in favor
of the tenants and the guarantee we gave the landlords for the actual payment
of the reduced rents resulted in improved relations between tenants and landlords
so that the Japanese found practically nobody to cooperate with in our areas."

I wanted to know how this change in the land policy of the Communist party
had been decided at the time.

"This is a characteristic example of the democratic ways in which our party
devises policies," Mao Tse-tung said. "This fundamental change from land
confiscation to a general reduction of land rents and the guarantee for their
payment to the landlords was first suggested by comrades in lower party
organizations. Our Central Committee took up their suggestion, which was
clearly based on the wishes of the masses. We studied and formulated these
demands and put them into effect as general policy.

"If the whole of China becomes a genuine democracy on the basis of cooperation
between all political parties, it will be possible to practice our rent-reduction
policy on a nationwide scale. This would be a great reform indeed, although
it would still be inferior to Dr. Sun Yat-sen's idea of ownership of the
land by those who till it, which will have to be the final solution of the
land problem. But it is conceivable that even the gradual transfer to the
tillers of all the land now under feudal exploitation may be brought about
peacefully all over China. If a genuinely democratic system of government
is introduced everywhere.

"The way of bringing about such a gradual transfer of all land to the tillers
would be to encourage the investment of the landlords' capital in industrial
enterprises and to devise other measures of economic and fiscal policy that
would be beneficial to the landlords, the tenants, and the development of
Chinese economy as a whole.

"But such a solution depends upon genuine internal peace and genuine democracy
in China. The possible need in the future for outright confiscation and
distribution of land to the tenants can therefore not be ruled out entirely.
For in the postwar period there may again be civil war if the Kuomintang
insists on attacking us.

"Yet", Mao Tse-tung said with emphasis, "no matter whether we shall have
internal peace or civil war, we prefer not to resume land confiscation but
to continue our present policy of reduction of rents and guarantee of rent
payment to the landlords; because that would reduce the obstacles to progress
and reform in general.

"I want to remind you," Mao Tse-tung said "that in 1930 the Kuomintang government
in Nanking issued an agrarian law restricting land rents to 37.5 per cent
of the tenant's main crops while no rent was to be paid from secondary crops.
But the Kuomintang has proved unable and unwilling to carry it out in practice.
The law was never enforced. Therefore only the Communist party has proved
really able to realize agrarian reform, even in the shape of a mere reduction
of rents. "

I asked about the postwar attitude the Communist party intended to take toward
commercial and industrial capital in China.

"We are firmly convinced that private capital, Chinese as well as foreign,
must be given liberal opportunities for broad development in postwar China;
for China needs industrial growth," Mao Tse-tung replied.

"In China's postwar commercial relations with the outside world we want to
replace Japan's principle of colonizing China by the principle of free and
equal trade with all nations. In the internal sphere we want to replace the
policies of the Kuomintang government, which depress the living standards
of the people and thereby restrict industrial development in the country
by the policies we are already practicing in Liberated China that is, of
fostering the productive forces of the people, raising their purchasing power,
and thus achieving the main prerequisites for the most rapid and most solid
growth of modern industries.

There will have to be three forms of industrialization according to the ideas
of Dr. Sun Yat-sen. which we consider justified by the conditions prevailing
in China. Key industries in a position to control national economy, like
railroads and mines, can best be developed and run by the state. Other industries
will have to be developed by private capital and for the exploitation of
our great potentialities in handicraft and rural small-scale manufacture
we shall have to depend upon strong, democratically run cooperatives."

What political role did the Communist party plan to play in postwar China,
I asked

"The membership of our party is necessarily a small portion of the Chinese
people," he said. "Only if that small portion reflects the opinions of the
majority of the people's, and only if it works for their interests can the
relationship between the people and the party be healthy.

"Today the Communist party reflects the opinions not only of the peasants
and workers but also of many anti-Japanese landlords, merchants, intellectuals,
etc., that is of all anti-Japanese people in our regions. The Communist party
is willing and will always be ready to cooperate closely with all people
in China who are prepared to cooperate with it.

"This willingness is expressed in our 'Three-thirds' system of democratic
representation which restricts the seats of Communist party members in all
elected bodies to a maximum of one-third of the whole and gives two-thirds
of the seats to members of other parties and non-party elements."

"Yes," Mao Tse-tung replied to my question about relations with the Kuomintang,
"we are also willing to cooperate with the Kuomintang not only while the
war lasts but afterward. That is to say, if the Kuomintang lets us do so.

"And we are willing to practice in the future, as we do today, the four promises
we made to the Kuomintang in 1937."

I asked him about the contents of those promises to which I had often heard
vague reference in Chungking, and about the conditions that had been attached
to them.

"We promised (1) not to continue the kind of agrarian revolution we had practiced
in the past; (2) not to overthrow the Kuomintang government by force; (3)
to reorganize our Soviet government in the Border Region as a democratic,
local government and (4) to reorganize our Red Army as part of a National
Revolutionary Army.

"These promises, we stated at that time, we would carry out if the Kuomintang
on its part (1) stopped Civil War; (2) fought against Japan; (3) adopted
a system of democratic government, and granted the people freedom of speech,
publication, assembly, and association; and (4) took measures to improve
the livelihood of the people."

"Is there any opposition within the Communist party to your present policies?"
I went on, "or to your interpretation of the long-term requirements of China?"
I was referring to the frequent rumors in Chungking about dissension within
the Communist ranks.

"No," he said, "there is no opposition in our party now. In earlier periods
there were two deviations. One was of a Trotskyite nature, identified with
Chen Tu-hsiu, who died in 1942, years after his opposition had ceased to
have any influence. The other was that of Chang Kuo-tao, who had for some
time set himself against out party's correct policy and left it, practically
alone. He is now working in the Special Service of the Kuomintang. Both
deviations never influenced the solidarity of our party and have left no
trace."

I interrupted, "Do you mean to say that none of your policies are ever questioned
or opposed?"

"Naturally, from time to time there may be certain differences of opinion
within our ranks. But they are always solved in democratic way, by discussion
and analysis of the problems in question. If a minority is still not convinced
of the correctness of a majority decision, it submits to it after thorough
debates in party meetings. The decisive factor in our work is that we always
find out which of our policies the masses of the people accept and which
they criticize or reject. Only, policies which prove popular with the masses
become and remain the policies of our party.

"At the time of the introduction of a new measure there may be people inside
and outside the party who do not quite understand it. But in the course of
the execution of any measure a united opinion of an over-whelming majority
inside and outside the party is invariably formed, because our party
organizations are all the time watching out for popular reaction, and because
we modify our measures continuously according to the actual needs and opinions
of the people. All party organizations from the top to down are held to observe
our vital principle of not separating ourselves from the masses of the people
but of being in closest harmony with their needs and wishes.

"The correctness of any of our policies has always to be tested and is always
being tested by the masses themselves. We ourselves constantly examine our
own decisions and policies. We correct our mistakes whenever we find them.
We draw conclusions from all positive and negative experiences and apply
those conclusions as widely as possible. In these ways relations between
the Communist party and the masses of the people are constantly being improved."

Mao Tse-tung had arrived at his favorite topic, his constant demand on all
party members to observe what he calls the "mass viewpoint" in all their
decisions and actions. He spoke with enthusiasm.

"This is the most fundamental point. If the leading elements of a political
party are really working for the interests of the broad masses of the people,
and if they are sincere in this endeavor, they have unlimited opportunities
of listening to the opinions of the people.

"We listen to the people. Through the media of popular meetings in villages,
towns, districts, regions, and everywhere in our territories; through individual
conversations between party members and men and women of all strata of the
population; through special conferences, newspapers, and the telegrams and
letters we receive from the people - through all this we can, and do, always
find out the real, undisguised opinion of the masses.

"Apart from that, our method is to find typical samples both of satisfactory
and unsatisfactory work in every field of activity. We study those samples
thoroughly, learn from them, and sum up our experiences on the subject in
order to draw concrete conclusions for the necessary improvements. The period
of such observation of reality and of studying samples of good and bad work
may in one case be a few weeks, in another several months, and sometimes
even a few years. But in this way we always keep in close touch with actual
developments, discover what the people want and need, and learn from those
among the people inside and outside the party who do the best work.

"Some of our cadres may sometimes fail to understand our policies thoroughly
and make mistakes in their execution, so that such comrades have to be criticized
and taught. For this purpose, too, the thorough study and analysis of a specimen
of good work is of great importance."

Mao Tse-tung showed me a copy of the Liberation Daily. "Take the example
in tonight's newspaper. Here is a long article covering a whole page which
describes in detail the ways in which one of the companies of the Eighth
Route Army got rid of its shortcomings and became one of the best units.
The cadres and fighters of every company in our armies will read and study
and discuss this article. This is the simple way in which the positive
experiences of one company will be taught as policy to five thousand companies.
On other days you may find similar articles about a cooperative, a school,
a hospital, or a local administrative unit.

To come back to the vital matter of close understanding and cooperation between
party comrades and non-party people. There has been a very great and steady
improvement; but mistakes are still being made by some of our comrades.

"Some incidents and misunderstandings still occur. Here and there we still
have some Communists who tend to monopolize affairs.

"We are therefore all the time calling everybody's attention to the importance
of giving non party people actual power under our democratic 'Three-thirds'
system. In the course of the practical execution of our policies we show
all our comrades concretely how genuine cooperation between us and non-party
people helps not only the masses but ourselves. In consequence, mutual trust
between party and non-party people is growing in the process of all the practical
work they have to do together."

I asked Mao Tse-tung whether he considered that the Communist party had made
any mayor mistakes in its policies.

"On all basic points our policies have proved correct from the very beginning.
This is true first of all of our fundamental policies under the New Democracy
-- of letting the masses of the people organize themselves for a revolution
aiming at national independence, democracy, and the improvement of the people's
livelihood on the basis of private property.

"It is only with regard to the application of these basic policies to concrete
conditions that certain deviations are liable to appear from time to time,
deviations partly to the left and partly to the right. They are, however,
not deviations of the party as a whole or of groups in the party, but of
certain people in our ranks. From all those mistakes the party as a whole
has learned.

"Yes, in certain periods there have been a few individuals in our party who
believed that Communism is feasible in China at this time. But the party
as such has never held that view. Even the existence within our party of
a group advocating the immediate practice of a Communist social system is
impossible on account of the concrete conditions in China which make Communism
unfeasible for a very long time to come.

"The Kuomintang allegation that there are groups with diverging views within
our party is completely unfounded. The Kuomintang, which is itself so badly
split by cliques, cannot conceive of a really united political party, and
that is probably why such rumors are believed by some in Chungking."

"Did you ever find yourself in a minority so that your own ideas on a subject
were not carried out"?

"Yes. I have been in the minority myself. The only thing for me to do at
such times was to wait. But there have been very few examples of that in
recent years."

I had bean asked by Chinese friends in Chungking to find out whether the
Communists were "Chinese first" or "Communist first" and put the question
to Mao Tse-tung.

He smiled. "Without a Chinese nation there could be no Chinese Communist
party. You might just as well ask, What is first, children or parents? This
is not a question of theory but of practice, like the other question
people put to you in the Kuomintang regions, whether we are working for our
party or for the people. Go and ask our people, anywhere you want. They know
well enough that the Chinese Communist party serves them. They have had their
experience with us during the most difficult times."

"As to our method of thinking, I told you already that we, like Communists
in any other country, are convinced of the correctness of Marxism. This is
probably what people refer to when they ask whether we are 'Communist first'
or 'Chinese first'. But our belief in Marxism as a correct method of thinking
does not mean that we negate the Chinese cultural heritage or the value of
non-Marxist foreign thought.

"It is certainly true that much is good in what Chinese history has handed
down to us. And this heritage we must make our own There are, however, certain
people in China who worship the obsolete ideas of ancient times which are
not suitable for our nation today- but on the contrary harmful. Those things
must be discarded.

"In foreign cultures, too, there is much that is good and progressive which
we must accept; and, on the other hand, much that is rotten, like Fascism,
which must be destroyed.

"To accept ideas from the Chinese past or from abroad does not mean to take
them over unconditionally. They must be coordinated with actual conditions
in China and practiced in accordance with them. Our attitude is that of critical
acceptance of our own historical heritage and of foreign thought. We are
against blind acceptance as well as blind rejection of any ideas. We Chinese
must think with our own brains and must decide for ourselves what can grow
on our own soil."

"I want to summarize what China needs today," Mao Tsetung took the initiative.
"China needs internal peace and democracy. Without internal peace China will
not be able to win the war against Japan or win the peace. Our failure to
achieve internal peace after the war with Japan might actually disturb peaceful
international relations. For if there were to be another civil war in China,
it would last for a long period and would influence foreign countries as
well.

"Among people abroad there are still many who have not fully understood that
during the last twenty-three years of China's political development the key
problem has always been the relationship between the Kuomintang and Communist
parties. And the same will be true in the future.

"In the first stage of that important twenty-three-year period of our history,
from 1924 to 1927, there would have been no national revolution in China
without cooperation between the Kuomintang and Communist parties.

"In the latter part of the second stage, from 1931 to 1936, Chins's inability
to resist Japan resulted from the fact that the National Government of the
Kuomintang used all its strength, the proceeds of its foreign loans, the
services of its foreign military advisors, and other foreign assistance for
the campaigns it waged against the Chinese Communists.

"In the third stage, from 1937 to the present our war against Japan might
not have been possible or at least China would not have been able to hold
out as long as she did if it had not been for what Kuomintang-Communist
cooperation there was.

"Conversely, China's war effort against Japan today would be infinitely stronger
than it is if the Kuomintang had continued to cooperate with the Communist
party at least to the extent that characterized the first short phase of
the war."

 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Salute the April 8th Martyrs








SALUTE THE APRIL 8th MARTYRS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


  SALUTE THE APRIL 8th MARTYRS


1946

[On 8 April 1946 the communist leaders, Ch'in Pang-hsien (po- ku), Teng
Fa, Wang Jo-fei, and Yeh Ting were killed in an airplane crash and subsequently
there was a commemorative meeting held in Yan'an.] 
  

Dear Comrades-in-Arms-and Immortal Heroes,

In the last few decades you rendered your glorious service to the people.
Now in dying for them your deaths are also glorious.

Your deaths are a clarion call to deepen the Chinese people's understanding
of the CCP and to strengthen their determination to defend peace, democracy,
and unity.

Your deaths are a clarion call to the whole party and the whole nation to
unite in the struggle for a peaceful, democratic, and united China.

The whole party and the whole nation will carry on your unfinished tasks
and continue to struggle till victory is won. They will never relax or shrink
back from their effort.

 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

