# Selected Military Writings of Mao Tse-tung

==========

## Table of contents









Selected Military Writings of Mao Tse-tung




 Selected Military Writings of Mao Tse-tung



Why is it That Red Political Power Can Exist in
China? (October 5, 1928)

The Struggle in the Chingkang Mountains (November
25, 1928)

On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in the Party
(December 1929)

A Single Spark Can Start a Prairie Fire (January
5, 1930)

Problems of Strategy in China's Revolutionary War

(December 1936)

Problems of Strategy in Guerilla War Against Japan
(May 1938)

On Protracted War (May 1938) 

Problems of War and Strategy (November 6, 1938)

Conclusions on the Repulse of the Second Anti-Communist Onslaught (May 8, 1941)

The Turning Point in World War II (October
12, 1942)

On Coalition Government (Two Excerpts,  "The People's War" ,  "The People's Army"  (April 24, 1945)

On Production by the Army for Its Own Support and On the Importance of the Great Movements for Rectification and for Production (April 27, 1945)

Concentrate a Superior Force to Destroy the Enemy Forces One by One (September 16, 1946)

The Concept of Operations for the Northwest War Theatre (April 15, 1947)

Strategy for the Second Year of the War of Liberation (September 1, 1947)

Manifesto of the Chinese Peoples Liberation Army
(October 1947)

On the Reissue of the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for Attention — Instruction of the general Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (October 10,
1947)

The Present Situation and Our Tasks (December
25, 1947)

The Democratic Movement in the Army 
 (January 30, 1948)

On the Great Victory in the Northwest and on the New Type of Ideological Education Movement in the Liberation Army  (March
7, 1948)

The Concept of Operations for the Liaoshi-Shenyang Campaign (September and October 1948)

The Concept of Operations for the Huai-hai Campaign
(October 11, 1948)

The Momentous Change in China's Military Situation
(November 14, 1948)

The Concept of Operations for the Peiping-Tientsin Campaign (December 11, 1948)

Carry the Revolution Through to the End 
 (December 30, 1948)

Turn the Army into a Working Force (February
8, 1949)

Order to the Army for the Country-Wide Advance
(April 21, 1949)

Proclamation of the Chinese People's Liberation Army
(April 25, 1949)
 


Mao Zedong Reference Archive (MIA)







==========

## Why is it That Red Political Power Can Exist in
China?







WHY IS IT THAT RED POLITICAL POWER CAN EXISTIN CHINA?



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  WHY IS IT THAT RED POLITICAL POWER CAN EXIST IN CHINA?

October 5, 1928
 

I. The Internal Political Situation

II. Reasons for the Emergence and Survival of Red Political
    Power in China 
III. The Independent Regime in the Hunan-Kiangsi Border Area
    and the August Defeat 
IV. The Role of the Independent Regime of the Hunan-Kiangsi
    Border Area in Hunan, Hupeh and Kiangsi 
V. Economic Problems 
VI. The Problem of Military Bases 

[This article was part of the resolution, originally entitled "The Political
Problems and the Tasks of the Border Area Party Organization", which was
drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Second Party Congress of the
Hunan-Kiangsi Border Area.]



I. THE INTERNAL POLITICAL SITUATION 


The present regime of the new warlords of the Kuomintang remains a regime
of the comprador class in the cities and the landlord class in the countryside;
it is a regime which has capitulated to imperialism in its foreign relations
and which at home has replaced the old warlords with new ones, subjecting
the working class and the peasantry to an even more ruthless economic
exploitation and political oppression. The bourgeois-democratic revolution
which started in Kwangtung Province had gone only halfway when the comprador
and landlord classes usurped the leadership and immediately shifted it on
to the road of counter-revolution; throughout the country the workers, the
peasants, the other sections of the common people, and even the bourgeoisie,
[1] have remained under counter-revolutionary rule and
obtained not the slightest particle of political or economic emancipation.

Before their capture of Peking and Tientsin, the four cliques of the new
Kuomintang warlords, Chiang Kai-shek, the Kwangsi warlords, Feng Yu-hsiang
and Yen Hsi-shan, [2] formed a temporary alliance against
Chang Tso-lin. [3] As soon as these cities were captured,
this alliance broke up, giving way to bitter struggle among the four cliques,
and now a war is brewing between the Chiang and the Kwangsi cliques. The
contradictions and struggles among the cliques of warlords in China reflect
the contradictions and struggles among the imperialist powers. Hence, as
long as China is divided among the imperialist powers, the various cliques
of warlords cannot under any circumstances come to terms, and whatever
compromises they may reach will only be temporary. A temporary compromise
today engenders a bigger war tomorrow.

China is in urgent need of a bourgeois-democratic revolution, and this revolution
can be completed only under the leadership of the proletariat. Because the
proletariat failed to exercise firm leadership in the revolution of 1926-27
which started from Kwangtung and spread towards the Yangtze River, leadership
was seized by the comprador and landlord classes and the revolution was replaced
by counterrevolution. The bourgeois-democratic revolution thus met with a
temporary defeat. This defeat was a heavy blow to the Chinese proletariat
and peasantry and also a blow to the Chinese bourgeoisie (but not to the
comprador and landlord classes). Yet in the last few months, both in the
north and in the south, there has been a growth of organized strikes by the
workers in the cities and of insurrections by the peasants in the countryside
under the leadership of the Communist Party. Hunger and cold are creating
great unrest among the soldiers of the warlord armies. Meanwhile, urged on
by the clique headed by Wang Ching-wei and Chen Kung-po, the bourgeoisie
is promoting a reform movement of considerable proportions
[4] in the coastal areas and along the Yangtze River. This
is a new development.

According to the directives of the Communist International and the Central
Committee of our Party, the content of China's democratic revolution consists
in overthrowing the rule of imperialism and its warlord tools in China so
as to complete the national revolution, and in carrying out the agrarian
revolution so as to eliminate the feudal exploitation of the peasants by
the landlord class. Such a revolutionary movement has been growing day by
day since the Tsinan Massacre [5] in May 1928

II. REASONS FOR THE EMERGENCE AND SURVIVAL OF RED POLITICAL
  POWER IN CHINA [6]


The long-term survival inside a country of one or more small areas under
Red political power completely encircled by a White regime is a phenomenon
that has never occurred anywhere else in the world. There are special reasons
for this unusual phenomenon. It can exist and develop only
under certain conditions.

First, it cannot occur in any imperialist country or in any colony under
direct imperialist rule, [7] but can only occur in China
which is economically backward, and which is semi-colonial and under indirect
imperialist rule. For this unusual phenomenon can occur only in conjunction
with another unusual phenomenon, namely, war within the White regime. It
is a feature of semicolonial China that, since the first year of the Republic
[1912] the various cliques of old and new warlords have waged incessant wars
against one another, supported by imperialism from abroad and by the comprador
and landlord classes at home. Such a phenomenon is to be found in none of
the imperialist countries nor for that matter in any colony under direct
imperialist rule, but only in a country like China which is under indirect
imperialist rule. Two things account for its occurrence, namely, a localized
agricultural economy (not a unified capitalist economy) and the imperialist
policy of marking off spheres of influence in order to divide and exploit.
The prolonged splits and wars within the White regime provide a condition
for the emergence and persistence of one or more small Red areas under the
leadership of the Communist Party amidst the encirclement of the White regime.
The independent regime carved out on the borders of Hunan and Kiangsi Provinces
is one of many such small areas. In difficult or critical times some comrades
often have doubts about the survival of Red political power and become
pessimistic The reason is that they have not found the correct explanation
for its emergence and survival. If only we realize that splits and wars will
never cease within the White regime in China, we shall have no doubts about
the emergence, survival and daily growth of Red political power.

Second, the regions where China's Red political power has first emerged and
is able to last for a long time have not been those unaffected by the democratic
revolution, such as Szechuan, Kweichow, Yunnan and the northern provinces,
but regions such as the provinces of Hunan, Kwangtung, Hupoh and Kiangsi,
where the masses of workers, peasants and soldiers rose in great numbers
in the course of the bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1926 and 1927. In
many parts of these provinces trade unions and peasant associations were
formed on a wide scale, and many economic and political struggles were waged
by the working class and the peasantry against the landlord class and the
bourgeoisie. This is why the people held political power for three days in
the city of Canton and why independent regimes of peasants emerged in Haifeng
and Lufeng, in eastern and southern Hunan, in the Hunan-Kiangsi border area
and in Huangan, Hupeh Province. [8] As for the present
Red Army, it is a split-off from the National Revolutionary Army which underwent
democratic political training and came under the influence of the masses
of workers and peasants. The elements that make up the Red Army cannot possibly
come from armies like those of Yen Hsi-shan and Chang Tso-lin, which have
not received any democratic political training or come under the influence
of the workers and peasants.

Third, whether it is possible for the people's political power in small areas
to last depends on whether the nation-wide revolutionary situation continues
to develop. If it does, then the small Red areas will undoubtedly last for
a long time, and will, moreover, inevitably become one of the many forces
for winning nation-wide political power. If the nation-wide revolutionary
situation does not continue to develop but stagnates for a fairly long time,
then it will be impossible for the small Red areas to last long. Actually,
the revolutionary situation in China is continuing to develop with the continuous
splits and wars within the ranks of the comprador and landlord classes and
of the international bourgeoisie. Therefore the small Red areas will undoubtedly
last for a long time, and will also continue to expand and gradually approach
the goal of seizing political power throughout the country.

Fourth, the existence of a regular Red Army of adequate strength is a necessary
condition for the existence of Red political power. If we have local Red
Guards [9] only but no regular Red Army, then we cannot
cope with the regular White forces, but only with the landlords' levies.
Therefore, even when the masses of workers and peasants are active, it is
definitely impossible to create an independent regime, let alone an independent
regime which is durable and grows daily, unless we have regular forces of
adequate strength. It follows that the idea of "establishing independent
regimes of the workers and the peasants by armed force" is an important one
which must be fully grasped by the Communist Party and by the masses of workers
and peasants in areas under the independent regime.

Fifth another important condition in addition to the above is required for
the prolonged existence and development of Red political power, namely, that
the Communist Party organization should be strong and its policy correct.

III. THE INDEPENDENT REGIME IN THE HUNAN KIANGSI BORDER AREA
  AND THE AUGUST DEFEAT


Splits and wars among the warlords weaken the power of the White regime.
Thus opportunities are provided for the rise of Red political power in small
areas. But fighting among the warlords does not go on every day. Whenever
the White regime in one or more provinces enjoys temporary stability, the
ruling classes there inevitably combine and do their utmost to destroy Red
political power. In areas where all the necessary conditions for its
establishment and persistence are not fulfilled, Red political power is in
danger of being overthrown by the enemy. This is the reason why many Red
regimes emerging at favourable moments before last April in places like Canton,
Haifeng and LuFeng, the Hunan-Kiangsi border area, southern Hunan, Liling
and Huangan were crushed one after another by the White regime. From April
onward the independent regime in the Hunan-Kiangsi border area was confronted
with a temporarily stable ruling power in the south, and Hunan and Kiangsi
would usually dispatch eight, nine or more regiments--sometimes as many as
eighteen--to "suppress" us. Yet with a force of less than four regiments
we fought the enemy for four long months, daily enlarging the territory under
our independent regime, deepening the agrarian revolution, extending the
organizations of the people's political power, and expanding the Red Army
and the Red Guards. This was possible because the policies of the Communist
Party organizations (local and army) in the Hunan-Kiangsi border area were
correct. The policies of the Border Area Special Committee and the Army Committee
of the Party were then as follows:

Struggle resolutely against the enemy, set up political power in the middle
section of the Lohsiao mountain range, [10] and oppose
flightism.

Deepen the agrarian revolution in areas under the independent regime.

Promote the development of the local Party organization with the help of
the army Party organization and promote the development of the local armed
forces with the help of the regular army.

Concentrate the Red Army units in order to fight the enemy confronting them
when the time is opportune, and oppose the division of forces so as to avoid
being destroyed one by one.

Adopt the policy of advancing in a series of waves to expand the area under
the independent regime, and oppose the policy of expansion by adventurist
advance.

Thanks to these proper tactics, to a terrain favourable to our struggle,
and to the inadequate co-ordination between the troops invading from Hunan
and those invading from Kiangsi, we were able to win a number of victories
in the four months from April to July. Although several times stronger than
we, the enemy was unable to prevent the constant expansion of our regime,
let alone to destroy it, and our regime tended to exert an ever-growing influence
on Hunan and Kiangsi. The sole reason for the August defeat was that, failing
to realize that the period was one of temporary stability for the ruling
classes, some comrades adopted a strategy suited to a period of political
splits within the ruling classes and divided our forces for an adventurous
advance, thus causing defeat both in the border area and in southern Hunan.
Comrade Tu Hsiu-ching, the representative of the Hunan Provincial Committee,
failed to grasp the actual situation and disregarded the resolutions of the
joint meeting of the Special Committee, the Army Committee and the Yunghsin
County Committee of the Party; he just mechanically enforced the order of
the Hunan Provincial Committee and echoed the views of the Red Army's 28th
Regiment which wanted to evade struggle and return home, and his mistake
was exceedingly grave. The situation arising from this defeat was salvaged
as a result of the corrective measures taken by the Special Committee and
the Army Committee of the Party after September.

IV. THE ROLE OF THE INDEPENDENT REGIME OF THE HUNAN- KIANGSI
  BORDER AREA IN HUNAN, HUPEH AND KIANGSI 


The significance of the armed independent regime of workers and peasants
in the Hunan-Kiangsi border area, with Ningkang as its centre, is definitely
not confined to the few counties in the border area; this regime will play
an immense role in the process of the seizure of political power in Hunan,
Hupeh and Kiangsi through the insurrection of the workers and peasants in
these three provinces. The following are tasks of great importance for the
Party in the border area in connection with the insurrections unfolding in
Hunan, Hupeh and Kiangsi: Extend the influence of the agrarian revolution
and of the people's political power in the border area to the lower reaches
of the rivers in Hunan and Kiangsi and as far as Hupeh; constantly expand
the Red Army and enhance its quality through struggle so that it can fulfil
its mission in the coming general insurrection of the three provinces; enlarge
the local armed forces in the counties, that is, the Red Guards and the workers'
and peasants' insurrection detachments, and enhance their quality so that
they are able to fight the landlords' levies and small armed units now and
safeguard the political power of the border area in the future; gradually
reduce the extent to which local work is dependent on the assistance of the
Red Army personnel, so that the border area will have its own personnel to
take charge of the work and even provide personnel for the Red Army and the
expanded territory of the independent regime.

V. ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


The shortage of necessities and cash has become a very big problem for the
army and the people inside the White encirclement. Because of the tight enemy
blockade, necessities such as salt, cloth and medicines have been very scarce
and dear all through the past year in the independent border area, which
has upset, sometimes to an acute degree, the lives of the masses of the workers,
peasants and petty bourgeoisie, [11] as well as of the
soldiers of the Red Army. The Red Army has to fight the enemy and to provision
itself at one and the same time. It even lacks funds to pay the daily food
allowance of five cents per person, which is provided in addition to grain;
the soldiers are undernourished, many are ill, and the wounded in the hospitals
are worse off. Such difficulties are of course unavoidable before the nation-wide
seizure of political power; yet there is a pressing need to overcome them
to some extent, to make life somewhat easier, and especially to secure more
adequate supplies for the Red Army. Unless the Party in the border area can
kind proper ways to deal with economic problems, the independent regime will
have great difficulties during the comparatively long period in which the
enemy's rule will remain stable. An adequate solution of these economic problems
undoubtedly merits the attention of every Party member.

VI. THE PROBLEM OF MILITARY BASES


The Party in the border area has another task, namely, the consolidation
of the military bases at Five Wells [12] and Chiulung.
The Five Wells mountain area at the juncture of Yunghsin, Linghsien, Ningkang
and Suichuan Counties, and the Chiulung mountain area at the juncture of
Yunghsin, Ningkang, Chaling and Lienhua Counties, both of which have
topographical advantages, are important military bases not only for the border
area at present, but also for insurrections in Hunan, Hupeh and Kiangsi in
the future, and this is particularly true of Five Wells, where we have the
support of the people as well as a terrain that is especially difficult and
strategically important. The way to consolidate these bases is, first, to
construct adequate defences, second, to store sufficient grain and, third,
to set up comparatively good Red Army hospitals. The Party in the border
area must strive to perform these three tasks effectively.

NOTES 

1.By the term "bourgeoisie", Comrade Mao Tse-tung means
the national bourgeoisie. For his detailed account of the distinction between
this class and the big comprador bourgeoisie, see "On Tactics
Against Japanese Imperialism" (December 1955) and "The Chinese Revolution
and the Chinese Communist Party" (December 1939).
2. These four cliques of warlords fought together against
Chang Tso-lin and occupied Peking and Tientsin in June 1928.
3. Chang Tso-lin, who headed the Fengtien clique of warlords,
became the most powerful warlord in northern China after defeating Wu Pei-fu
in the second Chihli-Fengden War in 1924. In 1926, with Wu Pei-fu as his
ally, he marched on and occupied Peking. In June 1928, while retreating to
the Northeast by rail, he was killed en route by a bomb planted by the Japanese
imperialists whose tool he had been.
4. This reform movement arose after the Japanese invaders
occupied Tsinan on May 3, 1928, and after Chiang Kai-shek openly and brazenly
compromised with Japan.
Within the national bourgeoisie which had identified itself with the
counter-revolutionary coup d'état of 1927, a section acting in its
own interests gradually began to form an opposition to the Chiang Kai-shek
regime. The careerist counter-revolutionary group of Wang Ching-wei, Chen
Kung-po and others which was active in this movement formed what became known
as the "Reorganization Clique" in the Kuomintang.
5. In 1928 Chiang Kai-shek, backed by British and U.S.
imperialism, drove north to attack Chang Tso-lin. The Japanese imperialists
then occupied Tsinan, the provincial capital of Shantung, and cut the
Tientsin-Pukow railway line to check the northward spread of British and
American influence. On May 3 the invading Japanese troops slaughtered large
numbers of Chinese in Tsinan. This became known as the Tsinan Massacre.
6. The organizational form of China's Red political power
was similar to that of Soviet political power. A Soviet is a representative
council, a political institution created by the Russian working class during
the 1905 Revolution. Lenin and Stalin, on the basis of Marxist theory, drew
the conclusion that a Soviet republic is the most suitable form of social
and political organization for the transition from capitalism to socialism.
Under the leadership of the Bolshevik Party of Lenin and Stalin, the Russian
October Socialist Revolution in 1917 brought into being for the first time
in world history such a socialist Soviet republic, a dictatorship of the
proletariat. After the defeat of the 1927 revolution in China, the representative
council was adopted as the form of people's political power in various places
in the mass revolutionary uprisings led by the Chinese Communist Party and,
first and foremost, by Comrade Mao Tse-tung. In its nature political power
at that stage of the Chinese revolution was a people's democratic dictatorship
of the anti-imperialist, anti-feudal, new-democratic revolution led by the
proletariat, which was different from the proletarian dictatorship in the
Soviet Union.
7. During World War II, many colonial countries in the East
formerly under the imperialist rule of Britain, the United States, Prance
and the Netherlands were occupied by the Japanese imperialists. Led by their
Communist Parties, the masses of workers, peasants and urban petty bourgeoisie
and members of the national bourgeoisie in these countries took advantage
of the contradictions between the British, U.S., French and Dutch imperialists
on the one hand and the Japanese imperialists on the other, organized a broad
united from against fascist aggression, built anti-Japanese base areas and
waged bitter guerrilla warfare against the Japanese. Thus the political situation
existing prior to World War II began to change. When the Japanese imperialists
were driven out of these countries at the end of World War II, the imperialists
of the United States, Britain, France and the Netherlands attempted to restore
their colonial rule, but, having built up armed forces of considerable strength
during the and-Japanese war, these colonial peoples refused to return to
the old way of life. Moreover, the imperialist system all over the world
was profoundly shaken because the Soviet Union had become strong, because
all the imperialist powers, except the United States, had either been overthrown
or weakened in the war, and finally because the imperialist front was breached
in China by the victorious Chinese revolution. Thus, much as in China, it
has become possible for the peoples of all, or at least some, of the colonial
countries in the East to maintain big and small revolutionary base areas
and revolutionary regimes over a long period of time, and to carry on long-term
revolutionary wars in which to surround the cities from the countryside,
and then gradually to advance to take the cities and win nation-wide victory.
The view held by Comrade Mao Tse-tung in 1928 on the question of establishing
independent regimes in colonies under direct imperialist rule has changed
as a result of the changes in the situation.
8. These were the first counter-attacks which the people
under Communist leadership launched in various places against the forcer
of the counter-revolution after Chiang Kai-shek and Wang Ching-wei successively
turned traitor to the revolution in 1927 On December 11, 1927, the workers
and revolutionary soldiers of Canton united to stage an uprising, and set
up the people's political power. They fought fiercely against the
counter-revolutionary forces, which were directly supported by imperialism'
but failed because the disparity in strength was too great. Peasants in Haifeng
and Luteng on the eastern coast of Kwangtung Province had started a powerful
revolutionary movement during 1923-25 under the leadership of Comrade Peng
Pai, a member of the Communist Party, and this movement contributed greatly
to the victory of the two eastern campaigns launched from Canton by the National
Revolutionary Army against the counter-revolutionary clique headed by Chen
Chiung-ming. After Chiang Kai-shek's betrayal of the revolution on April
l2, 1927, these peasants staged three uprisings in April, September and October,
and established a revolutionary regime which held out until April 1928. In
eastern Hunan Province, insurrectionary peasants captured an area embracing
Linyang, Pingkiang, Liling and Chuchow in September 1927. At about the same
time, tens of thousands of peasants staged an armed uprising in Hsiaokan,
Macheng and Huangan in northeastern Hupeh Province and occupied the county
town of Huangan for over thirty days. In southern Hunan, peasants in the
counties of Yichang, Chenchow, Leiyang, Yungheing and Tzehsing rose in arms
in January 1928 and set up a revolutionary regime, which lasted for three
months.
9.The Red Guards were armed units of the masses in the
revolutionary base areas, whose members carried on their regular productive
work.
10.The Lohsiao mountain range is a large range running
along the borders of Kiangsi and Hunan Provinces. The Chingkang Mountains
are in its middle section.
11. By the term "petty bourgeoisie" Comrade Mao Tse-tung
means those elements other than the peasants--handicraftsmen, small merchants,
professional people of various kinds and petty-bourgeois intellectuals. In
China they mostly live in cities but there are quite a number in the countryside.
12. Five Wells designates the villages of Big Well, Small
Well, Upper Well, Middle Well and Lower Well, in the Chingkang Mountains,
which are situated between Yunghsin, Ningkang and Suichuan in western Kiangsi
and Linghsien County in eastern Hunan.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Struggle in the Chingkang Mountains








THE STRUGGLE IN THE CHINGKANG MOUNTAINS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung
THE STRUGGLE IN THE CHINGKANG MOUNTAINS
November 25, 1928

The Independent Regime in the Hunan-Kiangsi Border Area and
    the August Defeat
The Current Situation in the Area Under the Independent
    Regime
Military Questions
Land Questions
Questions of Political Power
Questions of Party Organization
The Question of the Character of the Revolution
The Question of the Location of Our Independent Regime

THE INDEPENDENT REGIME IN THE HUNAN-KIANGSI BORDER AREA AND THE AUGUST DEFEAT
[This was a report submitted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung to the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China comparatively stable, as it was in the southern
provinces after April this year, our strategy must be one of gradual advance.
In such a period, the worst thing in military affairs is to divide our forces
for an adventurous advance, and the worst thing in local work (distributing
land, establishing political power, expanding the Party and organizing local
armed forces) is to scatter our personnel and neglect to lay a solid foundation
in the central districts. The defeats which many small Red areas have suffered
have been due either to the absence of the requisite objective conditions
or to subjective mistakes in tactics. Mistakes in tactics have been made
solely because of failure to distinguish clearly between the two kinds of
period, that in which the regime of the ruling classes is temporarily stable
and that in which it is split up. In a period of temporary stability, some
comrades advocated dividing our forces for an adventurous advance and even
proposed leaving the defence of extensive areas to the Red Guards alone,
as though oblivious of the fact that the enemy could attack not merely with
the landlords' levies but even in concentrated operations with regular troops.
In local work, they utterly neglected to lay a solid foundation in the central
districts and attempted unrestricted expansion regardless of whether it was
within our capacity. If anyone advocated a policy of gradual advance in military
operations or a policy of concentrating our effort in local work on laying
a solid foundation in the central districts so as to secure an invincible
position, they dubbed him a "conservative". Their wrong ideas were the root
cause of the defeats sustained last August by the Hunan-Kiangsi border area
and by the Fourth Red Army in southern Hunan.]

China is the only country in the world today where one or more small areas
under Red political power have emerged in the midst of a White regime which
encircles them. We find on analysis that one reason for this phenomenon lies
in the incessant splits and wars within China's comprador and landlord classes.
So long as these splits and wars continue, it is possible for an armed
independent regime of workers and peasants to survive and grow. In addition,
its survival and growth require the following conditions: (1) a sound mass
base, (2) a sound Party organization, (3) a fairly strong Red Army, (4) terrain
favourable to military operations, and (5) economic resources sufficient
for sustenance.

An independent regime must vary its strategy against the encircling ruling
classes, adopting one strategy when the ruling class regime is temporarily
stable and another when it is split up. In a period when the ruling classes
are split up, as during the wars between Li Tsung-jen and Tang Sheng-chih
in Hunan and Hupoh Provinces [1] and between Chang Fa-kuei
and Li Chi-shen in Kwangtung Province, [2] our strategy
can be comparatively adventurous and the area carved out by military operations
can be comparatively large. However, we must take care to lay a solid foundation
in the central districts so that we shall have something secure to rely on
when the White terror strikes. In a period when the regime of the ruling
classes is comparatively stable, as it was in the souther provinces after
April this year, our strategy must be one of gradual advance.  In such
a period, the worst thing in military affairs is to divide our forces for
an adventurous advance, and the worst thing in local work (distributing land,
establishing political power, expanding the Party and organizing local armed
forces) is to scatter our personnel and neglect to lay a solid foundation
in the central districts.  The defeats which many small Red areas have
suffered have been due either to the absence of the requisite objective
conditions or to subjective mistakes in tactics.  Mistakes in tactics
have been made solely because of failure to distinguish clearly between the
two kinds of period, that in which the regime of the ruling classes is
temporarily stable and that in which it is split up.  In a period of
temporary stability, some comrades advocated dividing our forces for an
adventurous advance and even proposed leaving the defence of extensive areas
to the Red Guards alone, as thought oblivious of the fact that the enemy
could attack not merely with the landlords' levies but even in concentrated
operations with regular troops.  In local work, they utterly neglected
to lay a solid foundation in the central districts and attempted unrestricted
expansion regardless of whether it was within our capacity.  If anyone
advocated a policy of gradual advance in military operations or a policy
of concentrating our effort in local work on laying a solid foundation in
the central districts so as to secure an invincible position, they dubbed
him a "conservative".  Their wrong ideas were the root cause of the
defeats sustained last August by the Hunan-Kiangsi border area and by the
Fourth Red Army in souther Hunan.

Our work in the Hunan-Kiangsi border area began in October last year. At
the start, all our Party organizations in the counties were defunct. The
local armed forces consisted only of the two units under Yuan Wen-tsai and
Wang Tso in the vicinity of the Chingkang Mountains, each unit having sixty
rifles in bad repair, while the peasant self-defence corps in the counties
of Yunghsin, Lienhua, Chaling and Linghsien had been totally disarmed by
the landlord class and the revolutionary ardour of the masses had been stifled.
By February this year Ningkang, Yunghsin, Chaling and Suichuan had county
Party committees, Linghsien had a special district Party committee, and in
Lienhua a Party organization was beginning to function and establish connections
with the Wanan County Committee. All the counties except Linghsien had a
few local armed units.  In Ningkang, Chaling, Suichuan and Yunghsin,
and especially in the two latter counties, there were a good many guerrilla
uprisings against the landlords which aroused the masses, and all were fairly
successful. In that period the agrarian revolution had not yet been carried
very far. The organs of political power were called governments of the workers,
peasants and soldiers. Soldiers' committees [3] were set
up in the army. When units went on separate missions, action committees were
set up to direct them. The leading body of the Party there was the Front
Committee (with Mao Tse-tung as secretary), which had been appointed by the
Hunan Provincial Committee during the Autumn Harvest Uprising. In early March,
upon the request of the Southern Hunan Special Committee, the Front Committee
was abolished and reorganized as the Divisional Party Committee (with Ho
Ting-ying as secretary), which thus became a body in charge of Party
organizations in the army only and without authority over the local Party
organizations. Meanwhile, Mao Tse-tung's forces were dispatched to southern
Hunan upon the request of the Special Committee there, and consequently the
Hunan-Kiangsi border area was occupied by the enemy for more than a month.
At the end of March came the defeat in southern Hunan, and in April the forces
under Chu Teh and those under Mao Tse-tung, together with the peasant army
of southern Hunan, withdrew to Ningkang and began to re-establish the independent
regime in the border area.

From April onward the independent regime in the Hunan-Kiangsi border area
was confronted with a temporarily stable ruling power in the south, and Hunan
and Kiangsi would dispatch at least eight or nine regiments of reactionary
forces to "suppress" us and sometimes as many as eighteen. Yet with a force
of less than four regiments we fought the enemy for four long months, daily
enlarging the territory under our independent regime, deepening the agrarian
revolution, extending the people's political power and expanding the Red
Army and the Red Guards. This was possible because the policies of the Party
organizations (local and army) in the border area were correct. The policies
of the Border Area Special Committee (with Mao Tse-tung as secretary) and
the Army Committee (with Chen Yi as secretary) of the Party were then as
follows:



  Struggle resolutely against the enemy, set up political power in the middle
  section of the Lohsiao mountain range, and oppose flightism.

  Deepen the agrarian revolution in areas under the independent regime.

  Promote the development of the local Party organization with the help of
  the army Party organization and promote the development of the local armed
  forces with the help of the regular army.

  Be on the defensive against Hunan with its comparatively strong ruling power,
  and take the offensive against Kiangsi with its comparatively weak ruling
  power.

  Devote great efforts to the development of Yunghsin, set up an independent
  regime of the people there and prepare for a prolonged struggle.

  Concentrate the Red Army units in order to fight the enemy confronting them
  when the time is opportune, and oppose the division of forces so as to avoid
  being destroyed one by one.

  Adopt the policy of advancing in a series of waves to expand the area under
  the independent regime, and oppose the policy of expansion by adventurist
  advance.

Thanks to these proper tactics, to the terrain of the border area which favoured
our struggle, and to the inadequate co-ordination between the troops invading
from Hunan and those invading from Kiangsi, we were able to win a number
of military victories and expand the people's independent regime in the four
months from April to July. Although several times stronger than we, the enemy
was unable to prevent the expansion of our regime, let alone to destroy it.
Our regime tended to exert an ever-growing influence on Hunan and Kiangsi.
The sole reason for the August defeat was that, failing to realize that the
period was one of temporary stability for the ruling classes, some comrades
adopted a policy suited to a period of splits within the ruling classes and
divided our forces for an adventurous advance on southern Hunan, thus causing
defeat both in the border area and in southern Hunan. Tu Hsiu-ching, the
representative of the Hunan Provincial Committee, and Yang Kai-ming, the
secretary of the Border Area Special Committee who had been appointed by
the Provincial Committee, failed to grasp the actual situation and, taking
advantage of the fact that Mao Tse-tung, Wan Hsi-hsien and other strongly
dissenting comrades were far away in Yunghsin, they disregarded the resolutions
of the joint meeting of the Army Committee, the Special Committee and the
Yunghsin County Committee of the Party, which disapproved of the views of
the Hunan Provincial Committee. They just mechanically enforced the order
of the Hunan Provincial Committee to march to southern Hunan and fell in
with the desire of the Red Army's 28th Regiment (composed of peasants from
Yichang) to evade struggle and return home, thus causing defeat both in the
border area and in southern Hunan.

Originally, in mid-July, the Eighth Army from Hunan, under Wu Shang, had
invaded Ningkang, penetrated to Yunghsin, sought battle with us in vain (our
men tried to attack them from a side road but missed them) and then, being
afraid of the masses who supported us, hurriedly retreated to Chaling via
Lienhua. In the meantime, the major detachment of the Red Army, which was
advancing from Ningkang to attack Linghsien and Chaling, changed its plans
on reaching Linghsien and turned towards southern Hunan, while the enemy
forces from Kiangsi, consisting 5 regiments of the Third Army under Wang
Chun and Chin Han-ting and 6 regiments of the Sixth Army under Hu Wen-tou,
launched a joint assault on Yunghsin. At that point we had only 1 regiment
in Yunghsin which, under the cover provided by the broad masses of the people,
pinned down these 11 regiments within a radius of thirty li of Yunghsin
county town for as long as twenty-five days by means of guerrilla attacks
from every direction. In the end we lost Yunghsin because of the enemy's
fierce assault, and also lost Lienhua and Ningkang shortly afterwards. At
that moment internal dissensions suddenly flared up among the Kiangsi enemy
forces; the Sixth Army under Hu Wen-tou withdrew in haste and presently engaged
Wang Chun's Third Army at Changshu. The other 5 Kiangsi regiments then hastily
withdrew to the county town of Yunghsin. Had our major detachment not moved
to southern Hunan, it would have been entirely possible to rout this enemy
force and extend the area of the independent regime to include Kian, Anfu
and Pinghsiang and to link it up with Pingkiang and Liuyang. But as the major
detachment was away and the one remaining regiment was much too exhausted,
it was decided that some men should remain to defend the Chingkang Mountains
in co-operation with the two units under Yuan Wen-tsai and Wang Tso, and
that I should take the rest to Kueitung to meet the major detachment and
to invite it back. By that time the major detachment was retreating from
southern Hunan to Kueitung, and on August 23 we joined forces there.

When the major detachment of the Red Army had arrived in Linghsien in mid-July,
the officers and men of the 29th Regiment, who were wavering politically
and wanted to return to their homes in southern Hunan, refused to obey orders,
while the, 8th Regiment was against going to southern Hunan and wanted to
go to southern Kiangsi, but in any case did not want to return to Yunghsin.
As Tu Hsiu-ching encouraged the 29th Regiment in their mistaken ideas and
the Army Committee failed to dissuade them, the major detachment set out
from Linghsien for Chenchow on July 17. In an engagement with the enemy forces
under Fan Shih-sheng in Chenchow on July 24, it was initially successful
but was later defeated and withdrew from the battle. Thereupon, acting on
its own, the 29th Regiment hurried homeward to Yichang with the result that
one section was annihilated at Lochang by Hu Feng-chang's bandits, another
scattered in the Chenchow-Yichang area and has never been heard of since,
and no more than a hundred men were mustered again that day. Fortunately,
the 28th Regiment, which was the main force, had not suffered great losses
and on August 18 it occupied Kueitung. On August ,3 the regiment was joined
by the troops from the Chingkang Mountains, to which it was decided that
the combined forces should return by way of Chungyi and Shangyu. When we
reached Chungyi, battalion commander Yuan Chung-chuan defected with an infantry
company and an artillery company, and though the two companies were brought
back, our regimental commander Wang Erh-cho lost his life in this action.
When our men were returning but had not yet reached their destination, enemy
units from Hunan and Kiangsi seized the opportunity to attack the Chingkang
Mountains on August 30. Using their points of vantage, the defending troops,
numbering less than one battalion, fought back, routed the enemy and saved
the base.

The causes of our August defeat were as follows: (1) some officers and men,
who were wavering and homesick, lost their fighting capacity, while others,
who were unwilling to go to southern Hunan, were lacking in enthusiasm; (2)
our men were exhausted by long marches in the sweltering summer heat; (3)
having ventured several hundred li away from Linghsien, our men lost
contact with the border area and became isolated; (4) as the masses in southern
Hunan had not yet been aroused, the expedition proved to be pure military
adventurism; (5) we were uninformed about the enemy situation; and (6) the
preparations were inadequate, and officers and men did not understand the
purpose of the operation.

THE CURRENT SITUATION IN THE AREA UNDER THE INDEPENDENT REGIME


Since April this year the Red areas have been gradually extended. After the
battle of Lungyuankou (on the borders of Yunghsin and Ningkang) on June ,3,
in which we defeated the Kiangsi enemy forces for the fourth time, the border
area reached the peak of its development, embracing the three counties of
Ningkang, Yunghsin and Lienhua, small sections of Kian and Anfu, the northern
section of Suichuan, and the southeastern section of Linghsien. In the Red
areas the greater part of the land had been distributed and the remainder
was being distributed. Organs of political power were set up everywhere in
the districts and townships. County governments were set up in Ningkang,
Yunghsin, Lienhua and Suichuan, and a border area government was formed.
Insurrectionary detachments of workers and peasants were organized in the
villages, and Red Guards were formed at the district and county levels. In
July the Kiangsi enemy forces launched attacks, and in August the Hunan and
Kiangsi enemy forces jointly attacked the Chingkang Mountains. All the county
towns and the plains in the border area were occupied by the enemy. The enemy's
jackals--the peace preservation corps and the landlords' levies--ran amuck,
and White terror raged throughout the towns and countryside. Most of the
Party and government organizations collapsed. The rich peasants and the
opportunists in the Party went over to the enemy in great numbers. It was
not until the battle of the Chingkang Mountains was fought on August 30 that
the Hunan enemy forces retreated to Linghsien; but the Kiangsi forces still
held all the county towns and most of the villages. However, the enemy has
never been able to capture the mountain areas, which include the western
and northern districts of Ningkang; the Tienlung, Hsiaohsikiang and Wannienshan
districts in the northern, western and southern sections of Yunghsin
respectively; the Shanghsi district of Lienhua; the Chingkangshan district
of Suichuan; and the Tsingshihkang and Tayuan districts of Linghsien. In
July and August, in co-ordination with the Red Guards of the various counties,
one regiment of the Red Army fought scores of battles, big and small, losing
only thirty rifles, before it finally withdrew to the mountains.

As our men were marching back to the Chingkang Mountains via Chungyi and
Shangyu, the enemy force from southern Kiangsi, the Independent 7th Division
under Liu Shih-yi, pursued us as far as Suichuan. On September 13 we defeated
Liu Shih-yi, captured several hundred rifles and took Suichuan. On September
,6 we returned to the Chingkang Mountains. On October 1, at Ningkang, we
engaged and defeated one of Hsiung Shih-hui's brigades commanded by Chou
Hun-yuan, recovering the entire county of Ningkang. Meanwhile 126 men of
the Hunan enemy forces under Yen Chung-ju, which had been stationed in Kueitung,
came over to us and were organized into a special task battalion with Pi
Chan-yun as commander. On November 9 we routed one regiment of Chou's brigade
at Lungyuankou and the county town of Ningkang. On the next day we advanced
and occupied Yunghsin, but withdrew to Ningkang shortly afterwards. At present
our area, extending from the southern slopes of the Chingkang Mountains in
Suichuan County in the south to the border of Lienhua County in the north,
embraces the whole of Ningkang and parts of Suichuan, Linghsien and Yunghsin,
forming a narrow unbroken stretch running north to south. The Shanghsi district
of Lienhua and the Tienlung and Wannienshan districts of Yunghsin, however,
are not firmly linked with this unbroken stretch. The enemy is attempting
to destroy our base area by military attacks and economic blockade, and we
are now preparing to defeat his attacks.

MILITARY QUESTIONS

Since the struggle in the border area is exclusively military, both the Party
and the masses have to be placed on a war footing. How to deal with the enemy,
how to fight, has become the central problem In our daily life. An independent
regime must be an armed one Wherever such an area is located, it will be
immediately occupied by the enemy if armed forces are lacking or inadequate,
or if wrong tactics are used in dealing with the enemy. As the struggle is
getting fiercer every day, our problems have become extremely complex and
serious.

The Red Army in the border area is drawn from: (1) troops formerly under
Yeh Ting and Ho Lung in Chaochow and Swatow; [4] (2) the
Guards Regiment of the former National Government at Wuchang;
[5] (3) peasants from Pingkiang and Liuyang;
[6] (4) peasants from southern Hunan [7]
and workers from Shuikoushan; [8] (5) men captured from
the forces under Hsu Keh-hsiang, Tang Sheng-chih, Pai Chung-hsi, Chu Pei-teh,
Wu Shang and Hsiung Shih-hui; and (6) peasants from the counties in the border
area. However, of the troops formerly commanded by Yeh Ting and Ho
Lung, the Guards Regiment and the peasants from Pingkiang and Liuyang, only
one-third is left after more than a year's fighting. Casualties have also
been heavy among the peasants from southern Hunan. Thus although the first
four categories remain the backbone of the Fourth Red Army to this day, they
are now far outnumbered by the last two categories. Furthermore, in the latter
the peasants are outnumbered by the captured soldiers; without replacement
from this source, there would be a serious manpower problem. Even so, the
increase in men does not keep pace with the increase in rifles. Rifles are
not easily lost, but men are wounded or killed, fall sick or desert and so
are lost more easily. The Hunan Provincial Committee has promised to send
us workers from Anynan, [9] and we earnestly hope it will
do so.

As to class origin, the Red Army consists partly of workers and peasants
and partly of lumpen-proletarians. Of course, it is inadvisable to have too
many of the latter. But they are able to fight, and as fighting is going
on every day with mounting casualties, it is already no easy matter to get
replacements even from among them. In these circumstances the only solution
is to intensify political training.

The majority of the Red Army soldiers come from the mercenary armies, but
their character changes once they are in the Red Army. First of all, the
Red Army has abolished the mercenary system, making the men feel they are
fighting for themselves and for the people and not for somebody else. So
far the Red Army has no system of regular pay, but issues grain, money for
cooking oil, salt, firewood and vegetables, and a little pocket money. Land
has been allotted to all Red Army officers and men who are natives of the
border area, but it is rather difficult to allot land to those from other
parts of the country.

After receiving political education, the Red Army soldiers have become
class-conscious, learned the essentials of distributing land, setting up
political power, arming the workers and peasants, etc., and they know they
are fighting for themselves, for the working class and the peasantry. Hence
they can endure the hardships of the bitter struggle without complaint. Each
company, battalion or regiment has its soldiers' committee which represents
the interests of the soldiers and carries on political and mass work.

Experience has proved that the system of Party representatives
[10] must not be abolished. The Party representative is
particularly important at company level, since Party branches are organized
on a company basis. He has to see that the soldiers' committee carries out
political training, to guide the work of the mass movements, and to serve
concurrently as the secretary of the Party branch. Facts have shown that
the better the company Party representative, the sounder the company, and
that the company commander can hardly play this important political role.
As the casualties among the lower cadres are heavy, captured enemy soldiers
often become platoon leaders or company commanders in a very short time;
some of those captured in February or March are already battalion commanders.
It might seem that since our army is called the Red Army it could do without
Party representatives, but this is a gross error. At one time the 28th Regiment
in southern Hunan abolished the system, only to restore it later. To rename
the Party representatives "directors" would be to confuse them with the directors
in the Kuomintang army who are detested by the captured soldiers. A change
of name does not affect the nature of the system. Hence we have decided to
make no change. Casualties among Party representatives are very heavy, and
while we have started classes for training and replenishment, we hope that
the Central Committee and the Hunan and Kiangsi Provincial Committees will
send us at least thirty comrades who are able to serve as Party representatives.

Ordinarily a soldier needs six months' or a year's training before he can
fight, but our soldiers, recruited only yesterday, have to fight today with
practically no training. Poor in military technique, they fight on courage
alone. As long periods of rest and training are out of the question, the
only thing to do is to try and avoid certain engagements if possible and
thus gain time for training. We now have a corps of 150 people in training
as lower-ranking officers, and we intend to make this course a permanent
institution. We hope that the Central Committee and the two Provincial Committees
will send us more officers from platoon leader and company commander upwards.

The Hunan Provincial Committee has asked us to attend to the material conditions
of the soldiers and make them at least a little better than those of the
average worker or peasant. Actually they are worse. In addition to grain,
each man receives only five cents a day for cooking oil, salt, firewood and
vegetables, and even this is hard to keep up. The monthly cost of these items
alone amounts to more than ten thousand silver dollars, which is obtained
exclusively through expropriation of the local tyrants.
[11] We now have cotton padding for winter clothing for
the whole army of five thousand men but are still short of cloth. Cold as
the weather is, many of our men are still wearing only two layers of thin
clothing. Fortunately we are inured to hardships. What is more, all of us
share the same hardships; from the commander of the army to the cook everyone
lives on the daily food allowance of five cents, apart from grain. As for
pocket money, everybody gets the same amount, whether it is twenty cents,
or forty cents. [12] Consequently the soldiers have no
complaints against anyone.

After each engagement there are some wounded. Also many officers and men
have fallen ill from malnutrition, exposure to cold or other causes. Our
hospitals up in the mountains give both Chinese and Western treatment, but
are short of doctors and medicines. At present they have over eight hundred
patients. The Hunan Provincial Committee promised to obtain drugs for us,
but so far we have received none. We still hope the Central Committee and
the two Provincial Committees will send us a few doctors with Western training,
and some iodine.

Apart from the role played by the Party, the reason why the Red Army has
been able to carry on in spite of such poor material conditions and such
frequent engagements is its practice of democracy. The officers do not beat
the men; officers and men receive equal treatment, soldiers are free to hold
meetings and to speak out; trivial formalities have been done away with;
and the accounts are open for all to inspect. The soldiers handle the mess
arrangements and, out of the daily five cents for cooking oil, salt, firewood
and vegetables, they can even save a little for pocket money, amounting to
roughly six or seven coppers per person per day, which is called "mess savings".
All this gives great satisfaction to the soldiers. The newly captured soldiers
in particular feel that our army and the Kuomintang army are worlds apart.
They feel spiritually liberated, even though material conditions in the Red
Army are not equal to those in the White army. The very soldiers who had
no courage in the White army yesterday are very brave in the Red Army today;
such is the effect of democracy. The Red Army is like a furnace in which
all captured soldiers are transmuted the moment they come over. In China
the army needs democracy as much as the people do. Democracy in our army
is an important weapon for undermining the feudal mercenary army.
[13]

The Party organization now has four levels, the company branch, the battalion
committee, the regimental committee and the army committee. In a company
there is the branch, with a group in each squad. "The Party branch is organized
on a company basis"; this is an important reason why the Red Army has been
able to carry on such arduous fighting without falling apart. Two years ago,
when we were in the Kuomintang army, our Party had no organizational roots
among the soldiers, and even among Yeh Ting's troops [14]
there was only one Party branch to each regiment; that is why we could not
stand up to any serious test. In the Red Army today the ratio of Party to
non-Party people is approximately one to three, or an average of one Party
member in every four men. Recently we decided to recruit more Party members
among the combat soldiers, so as to attain a fifty-fifty ratio.
[15] At present the company branches are short of good
Party secretaries, and we ask the Central Committee to send us a number of
activists from among those who can no longer function where they are now.
Almost all the cadres from southern Hunan are doing Party work in the army.
But since some of them were scattered during the retreat in southern Hunan
in August, we now have no people to spare.

The local armed forces consist of Red Guards and insurrectionary detachments
of workers and peasants. Armed with spears and shotguns, these detachments
are organized on a township basis, each township having one detachment whose
strength varies with the population. Its job is to suppress counter-revolution,
protect the township government and assist the Red Army and Red Guards in
battle when the enemy appears. The insurrectionary detachments started in
Yunghsin as an underground force, but they have come into the open since
we captured the entire county. The organization has now been extended to
other counties in the border area and the name remains unchanged. The arms
of the Red Guards are mainly five-round rifles but also include some nine-round
and single-round rifles. There are 140 rifles in Ningkang, 220 in Yunghsin,
43 in Lienhua, so in Chaling, 90 in Linghsien, 130 in Suichuan and 10 in
Wanan, making a total of 683. Most of the rifles have been supplied by the
Red Army, but a small number were captured from the enemy by the Red Guards
themselves. Fighting constantly against the peace preservation corps and
levies of the landlords, most of the Red Guards in the counties are steadily
increasing their fighting capacity. Before the May 21st Incident,
[16] all the counties had peasant self-defence corps.
There were 300 rifles in Yuhsien, 300 in Chaling, 60 in Linghsien, 50 in
Suichuan, 80 in Yunghsin, 60 in Lienhua, 60 in Ningkang (Yuan Wen-tsai's
men) and 60 in the Chingkang Mountains (Wang Tso's men), totalling 970. After
the incident, apart from the rifles in the hands of Yuan's and Wang's men,
which remained intact, only 6 rifles were left in Suichuan and 1 in Lienhua,
all the rest having been seized by the landlords. The peasant self-defence
corps were not able to hold on to their rifles as a result of the opportunist
line. At present the Red Guards in the counties still have far too few rifles,
fewer than those of the landlords; the Red Army should continue to help them
with arms. The Red Army should do everything, short of reducing its own fighting
capacity, to help arm the people. We have laid it down that each battalion
of the Red Army should consist of four companies, each with 75 rifles, and,
counting the rifles of the special task company, machine-gun company,
trench-mortar company, regimental headquarters and the three battalion
headquarters, each regiment will have 1,075 rifles. Those captured in action
should be used as far as possible for arming the local forces. The commanders
of the Red Guards should be people who have been sent from the counties to
the Red Army training corps and have finished their training. The Red Army
should send fewer and fewer people from outside areas to command local forces.
Chu Pei-teh is arming his peace preservation corps and levies, while the
armed forces of the landlords in the border counties are of considerable
size and fighting capacity. This makes it all the more urgent to enlarge
our local Red forces.

The principle for the Red Army is concentration, and that for the Red Guards
dispersion. At the present time when the reactionary regime is temporarily
stable, the enemy can mass huge forces to attack the Red Army, and dispersion
would not be to the Red Army's advantage. In our experience, the dispersion
of forces has almost always led to defeat, while the concentration of forces
to fight a numerically inferior, equal or slightly superior enemy force has
often led to victory. The Central Committee has instructed us to develop
guerrilla warfare in much too large an area, extending several thousand
li in both length and breadth; this is probably due to an overestimation
of our strength. For the Red Guards dispersion is an advantage, and they
are now using this method in their operations in all the counties.

The most effective method in propaganda directed at the enemy forces is to
release captured soldiers and give the wounded medical treatment. Whenever
soldiers, platoon leaders, or company or battalion commanders of the enemy
forces are captured, we immediately conduct propaganda among them; they are
divided into those wishing to stay and those wishing to leave, and the latter
are given travelling expenses and set free. This immediately knocks the bottom
out of the enemy's slander that "the Communist bandits kill everyone on sight'.
Writing about this measure, the Ten-Day Review the journal of Yang
Chih-sheng's 9th Division, exclaimed: "How vicious!" The Red Army soldiers
show great concern for the prisoners and arrange warm farewells for them,
and at every "Farewell Party for Our New Brothers" the prisoners respond
with speeches of heartfelt gratitude. Medical treatment for the enemy wounded
also has a great effect. Clever people on the enemy side like Li Wen-pin
have recently imitated us by stopping the killing of prisoners and by giving
medical attention to the wounded. Nevertheless, our men rejoin us at the
very next engagement, bringing their arms with them, and this has happened
twice already. In addition, we do as much written propaganda as possible,
for instance, painting slogans. Wherever we go, we cover the walls with them.
But we are short of people who can draw and hope the Central Committee and
the two Provincial Committees will send us a few.

As for the military bases, the first base, the Chingkang Mountains is at
the juncture of four counties, Ningkang, Linghsien, Suichuan and Yunghsin.
The distance between Maoping on the northern slope in Ningkang County and
Huangao on the southern slope in Suichuan is 90 li. The distance between
Nashan on the eastern slope in Yunghsin county and Shuikou on the western
slope in Linghsien is 80 li. The circumference measures 550 li, stretching
from Nashan to Lungyuankou (both in Yunghsin County), Hsincheng, Maoping,
Talung (all in Ningkang County), Shihtu, Shuikou, Hsiatsun (all in Linghsien
county), Yingpanhsu, Taichiapu, Tafen, Tuitzechien, Huangao, Wutoukiang and
Che-ao (all in Suichuan County) and back to Nashan. In the mountains there
are paddy-fields and villages at Big Well, Small Well, Upper Well, Middle
Well, Lower Well, Tzeping, Hsiachuang, Hsingchow, Tsaoping, Painihu and Lofu.
All these places use to be infested by bandits and deserters but have now
been turned into our base area. Its population is under two thousand, and
the yield of unhusked rice is less than ten thousand piculs, and so the entire
grain for the army has to be supplied from Ningkang, Yunghsin and Suichuan
Counties. All the strategic passes in the mountains refortified. Our hospitals,
bedding and clothing workshops, ordnance department and regimental rear offices
are all here. At the present moment grain is being transported to the mountains
from Ningkang.

Provided we have adequate supplies, the enemy can never break in. The second
base, the Chiulung Mountains, is at the juncture of the four counties of
Ningkang, Yunghsin, Lienhua and Chaling. It is less important than the Chingkang
Mountains, but serves as the rearmost base for the local armed forces of
the four counties, and it too has been fortified. It is essential for an
independent Red regime encircled by the White regime to make use of the strategic
advantages offered by mountains.

LAND QUESTIONS


The land situation in the border areas. Roughly speaking, more than
60 per cent of the land belonged to the landlords and less than 40 per cent
to the peasants. In the Kiangsi sector, land ownership was most concentrated
in Suichuan County, where about 80 per cent of the land belonged to the
landlords. Yunghsin came next with about 70 per cent. In Wanan, Ningkang
and Lienhua there were more owner-peasants, but the landlords still owned
the bulk of the fan, i.e., about 60 per cent of the total, while the
peasants owned only 40 per cent. In the Hunan sector, about 70 per cent of
the land in both Chaling and Linghsien Counties belonged to the landlords.

The question of the intermediate class. Given this land situation,
it is possible to win the support of the majority for the confiscation and
redistribution of all the land. [17] The rural population
is roughly divided into three classes, the class of big and middle landlords,
the intermediate class of small landlords and rich peasants, and the class
of middle and poor peasants. The interests of the rich peasants are often
interwoven with those of the small landlords. The land of the rich peasants
forms only a small percentage of the total, yet if the land of the small
landlords is counted in, the amount is considerable. Probably this is more
or less the case throughout the country. The land policy which has been adopted
in the border areas is complete confiscation and thorough distribution;
consequently, in the Red area the big and middle landlord class and the
intermediate class are being attacked. Such is the policy, but in its actual
execution we have met with a great deal of obstruction from the intermediate
class. In the early days of the revolution the intermediate class ostensibly
capitulated to the poor peasant class, but in reality they exploited their
traditional social position and clan authority to intimidate the poor peasants
for the purpose of delaying the distribution of land. When no further delay
was possible, they concealed their actual holdings, or retained the good
land and gave up the poor land. In this period the poor peasants, having
long been trampled down and feeling that the victory of the revolution was
uncertain, frequently yielded to the intermediate class and dared not take
vigorous action. It is taken against the intermediate class in the villages
only when the revolution is on the upsurge, for instance, when political
power has been seized m one or more counties, the reactionary army has suffered
several defeats and the prowess of the Red Army has been repeatedly demonstrated.
The most serious instances of delay in land distribution and concealment
of land holdings occurred in the southern section of Yunghsin County, where
the intermediate class was the largest. The actual land distribution in this
area was carried out only after the Red Army won its great victory at Lungyuankou
on June 3 and the district government punished several people for delaying
distribution. But as the feudal family system prevails in every county, and
as all the families in a village or group of villages belong to a single
clan, it will be quite a long time before people become conscious of their
class and clan sentiment is overcome in the villages.

The defection of the intermediate class under the White terror. Having
been under attack during the revolutionary upsurge, the inter mediate class
deserted to the enemy as soon as the White terror struck. In Yunghsin and
Ningkang it was precisely the small landlords and rich peasants who led the
reactionary troops in setting fire to the houses of revolutionary peasants.
On the instructions of the reactionaries, they burned down houses and made
arrests, and quite brazenly too. When the Red Army returned to the area of
Ningkang, Hsincheng, Kucheng and Lungshih, several thousand peasants fled
with the reactionaries to Yunghsin, because they were duped by the reactionary
propaganda that the Communists would kill them. It was only after we had
conducted propaganda to the effect that "peasants who have defected will
not be killed" and "peasants who have defected are welcome to come back to
reap their crops" that some of them slowly came back.

When the revolution is at a low ebb in the country as a whole the most difficult
problem in our areas is to keep a firm hold on the intermediate class. The
main reason for betrayal by this class is that it has received too heavy
a blow from the revolution. But when there is a revolutionary upsurge in
the country as a whole, the poor peasant class has something to rely on and
becomes bolder, while the inter class has something to fear and dare not
get out of hand. When the war between Li Tsung-jen and Tang Sheng-chih spread
to he small landlords in Chaling tried to placate the peasants, d some even
sent them pork as a New Year gift (though by then the Red Army had already
withdrawn from Chaling to Suichuan). But after the war ended, no one ever
heard of such things again. Now that there is a nation-wide tide of
counter-revolution, the intermediate class in the White areas, having suffered
heavy blows, has attached itself almost wholly to the big landlord class,
and the poor peasant class has become isolated. This is indeed a very serious
problem. [18]

The pressure of daily life as a cause of the defection of the intermediate
class. The Red and the White areas are now facing each other like two
countries at war. Owing to the tight enemy blockade and to our mishandling
of the petty bourgeoisie, trade between the two areas has almost entirely
ceased; necessities such as salt, cloth and medicines are scarce and costly,
and agricultural products such as timber, tea and oil cannot be sent out,
so that the peasants cash income is cut off and the people as a whole are
affected. Poor peasants are more able to bear such hardships, but the
intermediate class will go over to the big landlord class when it can bear
them no longer. Unless the splits and wars within the landlord class and
among the warlords in China continue, and unless a nation-wide revolutionary
situation develops, the small independent Red regimes will come under great
economic pressure and it is doubtful whether they will be able to last. For
not only is such economic strain intolerable to the intermediate class, but
some day it will prove too much even for the workers, poor peasants and Red
Army men. In the counties of Yunghsin and Ningkang there was at one time
no salt for cooking, and supplies of cloth and medicines, not to mention
other things, were entirely cut off. Now salt can be had again but is very
expensive. Cloth and medicines are still unobtainable. Timber, tea and oil,
which are all produced abundantly in Ningkang, western Yunghsin and northern
Suichuan (all within our areas at present), cannot be sent out.
[19]

The criterion for land distribution. The township is taken as the
unit for land distribution. In hillier regions with less farm land, for instance,
in the Hsiaokiang district of Yunghsin, three or four townships were sometimes
taken as the unit, but such cases were extremely rare. All the inhabitants,
men and women, old and young, received equal shares. A change has now been
made in accordance with the Central Committee's plan whereby labour-power
is taken as the criterion, so that a person with labour-power is allotted
twice as much land as one without. [20]

The question of concessions to the owner This has not yet been discussed
in detail. Among the owner-peasants, the rich peasants have requested that
productive capacity should be taken as the criterion, that is, that those
with more manpower and capital (such as farm implements) should be allotted
more land. They feel that neither equal distribution nor distribution according
to labour-power is to their advantage. They have indicated that they are
willing to put in more effort, which, coupled with the use of their capital,
would enable them to raise bigger crops. They will not like It if they are
allotted the same amount of land as everybody else and their special efforts
and extra capital are ignored (left unused). Land distribution here is still
being carried out in the way laid down by the Central Committee. But this
question deserves further discussion and a report will be submitted when
conclusions are reached.

The land tax. In Ningkang the tax rate is 20 per cent of the crop
or 5 per cent more than the rate fixed by the Central Committee, it is
inadvisable to make any change now as collection is already under way, but
the rate will be reduced next year. Then there are the sections of Suichuan,
Linghsien and Yunghsin under our regime which are all hilly areas, and where
the peasants are so poverty-stricken that any taxation is inadvisable. We
have to rely on expropriating the local tyrants in the White areas to cover
the expenses of the government and the Red Guards. As for the provisioning
of the Red Army, rice is obtained for the time being from the land tax in
Ningkang, while cash is obtained solely from expropriation of the local tyrants.
During our guerrilla operations in Suichuan in October, we collected more
than ten thousand yuan, which will last us some time, and we shall see what
can be done when it is spent.

QUESTIONS OF POLITICAL POWER


People's political power has been established everywhere at county, district
and township levels, but more in name than in reality. In many places there
is no council of workers, peasants and soldiers. The executive committees
of the township, district or even county governments were invariably elected
at some kind of mass meeting. But mass meetings called on the spur of the
moment can neither discuss questions nor help in training the masses politically,
and, what is more, they are only too apt to be manipulated by intellectuals
or careerists. Some places do have a council, but it is regarded merely as
a temporary body for electing the executive committee; once the election
is over, authority is monopolized by the committee and the council is never
heard of again. Not that there are no councils of workers, peasants and soldiers
worthy of the name, but they are very few. The reason is the lack of propaganda
and education concerning this new political system. The evil feudal practice
of arbitrary dictation is so deeply rooted in the minds of the people and
even of the ordinary Party members that it cannot be swept away at once;
when anything crops up, they choose the easy way and have no liking for the
bothersome democratic system. Democratic centralism can be widely and effectively
practised in mass organizations only when its efficacy is demonstrated in
revolutionary struggle and the masses understand that it is the best means
of mobilizing their forces and is of the utmost help in their struggle. We
are drafting a detailed organic law for the councils at all levels (based
on the outline drawn up by the Central Committee) in order gradually to correct
previous mistakes. In the Red Army, conferences of soldiers' representatives
are now being established on a permanent basis and at all levels so as to
correct the mistake of having only soldiers' committees and not conferences.

At present, what the masses of the people generally understand by the "government
of workers, peasants and soldiers" is the executive committee, because they
are still unaware of the powers of the council, and think that the executive
committee alone is the real power. An executive committee without a council
behind it often acts without regard for the views of the masses, and there
are instances everywhere of hesitation and compromise on the confiscation
and redistribution of land, of squandering or embezzling funds, and of recoiling
before the White forces or fighting only half-heartedly. In addition, the
committee seldom meets in full session, all business being decided and handled
by its standing committee. In the district and township governments even
the standing committee rarely meets, and business is decided and handled
separately by the four individuals who work in the office, namely, the chairman,
secretary, treasurer and commander of the Red Guards (or insurrectionary
detachment). Thus democratic centralism has not become a regular practice
even in the work of the government.

In the early days the small landlords and rich peasants scrambled to
get on to government committees, especially at the township level. Wearing
red ribbons and feigning enthusiasm, they wormed their way into the government
committees by trickery and seized control of everything, relegating the
poor-peasant members to a minor role. They can be cleared out only when they
are unmasked in the course of struggle and the poor peasants assert themselves.
Though not widespread, such a state of affairs exists in quite a number of
places.

The Party enjoys immense prestige and authority among the masses, the government
much less. The reason is that for the sake of convenience the Party handles
many things directly and brushes aside the government bodies. There are many
such instances. In some places there are no leading Party members' groups
in the government organizations, while in others they exist but are not
functioning properly. From now on the Party must carry out its task of giving
leadership to the government; with the exception of propaganda, the Party's
policies and the measures it recommends must be carried out through the
government organizations. The Kuomintang's wrong practice of directly imposing
orders on the government must be avoided.

QUESTIONS OF PARTY ORGANIZATION


The struggle against opportunism. It may be said that around the time
of the May 21st Incident the Party organizations in the border area counties
were controlled by opportunists. When the counterrevolution set in, there
was very little resolute struggle. In October last year, when the Red Army
(the First Regiment of the First Division of the First Army of the Workers'
and Peasants' Revolutionary Army) arrived in the border area counties, only
a few Party members who had gone into hiding were left and the Party
organizations had been entirely destroyed by the enemy. The period from last
November to April was one of rebuilding the Party, and the period since May
has been one of great expansion. But in the last twelve months manifestations
of opportunism continued to be widespread. On the approach of the enemy,
some members, lacking the will to fight, hid in remote hills, which they
called "lying in ambush". Other members, though very active, resorted to
blind insurrection. These were both expressions of petty-bourgeois ideology.
After a long period of tempering through struggle and of inner-Party education,
such things have become less frequent. In the past year, the same petty-bourgeois
ideology also existed in the Red Army. On the approach of the enemy, either
reckless battle or precipitate flight would be proposed. Often both ideas
emanated from the same individual in the course of the discussions on what
military action to take. This opportunist ideology has been gradually corrected
through prolonged inner-Party struggle and through lessons learned from actual
events, for instance, from the losses incurred in reckless battle and the
reverses suffered during precipitate flight.

Localism. The economy in the border area is agricultural, with some
places still in the age of the hand-pestle (in the hilly regions the wooden
pestle is still in general use for husking rice, while in the plains there
are many stone pestles). The unit of social organization everywhere is the
clan, consisting of people having the same family name. In the Party
organizations in the villages, it often happens that a branch meeting virtually
becomes a clan meeting, since branches consist of members bearing the same
family name and living close together. In these circumstances it is very
hard indeed to build a "militant Bolshevik Party". Such members do not quite
understand when they are told that the Communists draw no sharp line of
demarcation between one nation and another or between one province and another,
or that a sharp line should not be drawn between different counties, districts
and townships. Localism exists to a serious extent in the relations between
counties and even between districts and townships within the same county.
In eliminating localism, reasoning can at best produce only limited results,
and it takes White oppression, which is by no means localized, to do much
more. For instance, it is only when counter-revolutionary "joint suppression"
campaigns by the two provinces make the people share a common lot in struggle
that their localism is gradually broken down. Localism is declining as a
result of many such lessons.

The question of the native inhabitants and the settlers. There is
another peculiar feature in the border counties, namely, the rift between
the native inhabitants and the settlers. A very wide rift has long existed
between the native inhabitants and the settlers whose forefathers came from
the north several hundred years ago; their traditional feuds are deep-seated
and they sometimes erupt in violent clashes. The settlers, numbering several
millions, live in a zone extending from the Fukien-Kwangtung border all the
way along the Hunan-Kiangsi border to southern Hupeh. These settlers, who
live in the hilly regions, have been oppressed by the native inhabitants
in the plains and have never had any political rights. They welcomed the
national revolution of the past two years, thinking that the day had come
for them to raise their heads. But unfortunately the revolution failed and
they continue to be oppressed by the native inhabitants. Within our own area
the problem of the native inhabitants and the settlers exists in Ningkang,
Suichuan, Linghsien and Chaling, and is most serious in Ningkang. Under the
leadership of the Communist Party, the revolutionaries among the native
inhabitants of Ningkang, together with the settlers, overthrew the political
power of the native landlords and gained control of the whole county in 1926-27.
In June last year the Kiangsi government under Chu Pei-teh turned against
the revolution; in September the landlords acted as guides for Chu's troops
in the "suppression" campaign against Ningkang and once again stirred up
the conflict between the native inhabitants and the settlers. In theory,
this rift between the native inhabitants and the settlers ought not to extend
into the exploited classes of workers and peasants, much less into the Communist
Party. But it does, and it persists by force of long tradition. Here is an
example. After the August defeat in the border area, when the native landlords
returned to Ningkang, bringing with them the reactionary troops and spreading
the rumour that the settlers were going to massacre the native inhabitants,
most of the native peasants defected, put on white ribbons and guided the
White troops in burning down houses and searching the hills. And when the
Red Army routed the White troops in October and November, the native peasants
fled with the reactionaries, and their property in turn was seized by the
settler-peasants. This situation, reflected in the Party, often leads to
senseless conflicts. Our solution is, on the one hand, to announce that "peasants
who have defected will not be killed" and "peasants who have defected will
also be given land when they return", in order to help them shake off the
influence of the landlords and return home without misgivings; on the other
hand, it is to get our county governments to order the restoration by
settler-peasants of any property they have seized, and to post notices that
the native peasants will be protected. Inside the Party, education must be
intensified to ensure unity between these two sections of the membership.

The defection of the careerists. During the revolutionary upsurge
(in June), many careerists took advantage of the Party's open recruitment
of members and sneaked into the Party, with the result that the membership
in the border area rapidly rose to more than ten thousand. Since the leaders
of the branches and district committees were mostly new members, good inner-Party
education was out of the question. As soon as the White terror struck, the
careerists defected and acted as guides for the counter-revolutionaries in
rounding up our comrades, and the Party organizations in the White areas
mostly collapsed. After September the Party carried out a drastic house cleaning
and set strict class qualifications for membership. All the Party organizations
in Yunghsin and Ningkang Counties were dissolved and a re-registration was
undertaken. Though greatly reduced in numbers, the membership has gained
in fighting capacity. All Party organizations used to be in the open, but
since September underground organizations have been built up to prepare the
Party for carrying on its activities when the reactionaries come. At the
same time, we have been making every effort to penetrate into the White areas
and operate inside the enemy camp. But in the nearby towns the foundations
have not yet been laid for Party organization. The reasons are that, first,
the enemy is stronger in the towns and, second, our army hurt the interests
of the bourgeoisie too much during its occupation of the towns, so that it
is difficult for Party members to keep a foothold there. We are now correcting
these mistakes and doing our best to build Party organizations in the towns,
but so far without much success.

The leading bodies of the Party. The branch executive has been renamed
the branch committee. Above the branch there is the district committee, and
above that the county committee. Where there are special circumstances, a
special district committee is formed between the district and the county
levels, as for instance the Peihsiang Special District Committee and the
Southeastern Special District Committee in Yunghsin County. In the border
area there are altogether five county committees, in Ningkang, Yunghsin,
Lienhua, Suichuan and Linghsien. There used to be a county committee in Chaling,
but as the work there did not take root, most of the organizations formed
last winter and this spring have been crushed by the Whites; consequently,
for the last six months we have been able to work only in the hilly regions
near Ningkang and Yunghsin, and so the Chaling County Committee has been
changed into a special district committee. Comrades were sent to Yuhsien
and Anjen Counties, which can be reached only via Chaling, but they have
returned without accomplishing anything. The Wanan County Committee was cut
off from us by the Whites for more than six months after its joint meeting
with us in Suichuan in January, and it was not until September, when the
Red Army reached Wanan in a guerrilla operation, that we resumed contact.
From Wanan eighty revolutionary peasants returned with our men to the Chingkang
Mountains and were organized as the Wanan Red Guards. There is no Party
organization in Anfu. The County Committee of Kian, which borders on Yunghsin,
has got in touch with us only twice and has given us no help, which is very
strange. In the Shatien area of Kueitung County land distribution was carried
out on two occasions, in March and in August, and Party organizations have
been built up and placed under the Southern Hunan Special Committee with
its centre at Shiherhtung in Lunghsi. Above the county committees there is
the Special Committee of the Hunan-Kiangsi Border Area. On May 20 the first
Party congress of the border area was held at Maoping in Ningkang County,
and it elected twenty-three people as members of the First Special Committee,
with Mao Tse-tung as secretary. In July the Hunan Provincial Committee sent
over Yang Kai-ming and he became acting secretary. In September Yang fell
ill and Tan Chen-lin took his place. In August, when the major detachment
of the Red Army had gone to southern Hunan and the White forces were pressing
hard on the border area, we held an emergency meeting at Yunghsin. In October
after the Red Army's return to Ningkang, the second Party congress of the
border area was held at Maoping In its three-day session beginning on October
14, it adopted a number of resolutions, including "The Political Problems
and the Tasks of the Border Area Party Organization", and elected the following
nineteen people as members of the Second Special Committee, Tan Chen-lin,
Chu The, Chen Yi, Lung Chao-ching, Chu Chang-chieh, Liu Tien-chien, Yuan
Pan-chu, Tan Szu-tsung, Tan Ping, Li Chueh-fei, Sung Yi-yueh, Yuan Wen-tsai,
Wang Tso-nung, Chen Cheng-jen, Mao Tse-tung, Wan Hsi-hsien, Wang Tso, Yang
Kai-ming and Ho Ting-ying. A standing committee of five was formed, with
Tan Chen-lin (a worker) as secretary and Chen Cheng-jen (an intellectual)
as deputy secretary. The Sixth Party Congress of the Red Army was held on
November 14 and it elected an Army Committee of twenty-three members, five
of them forming a standing committee with Chu The as secretary. Both the
Border Area Special Committee and the Army Committee are subordinate to the
Front Committee. The Front Committee was reorganized on November 6, with
the following five members designated by the Central Committee: Mao Tse-tung,
Chu The, the secretary of the local Party headquarters (Tan Chen-lin), a
worker comrade (Sung Chiao-sheng) and a peasant comrade (Mao Ko-wen), with
Mao Tse-tung as secretary. For the time being, this committee has set up
a secretariat, a propaganda section, an organization section, a labour movement
commission and a military affairs commission. The Front Committee is in charge
of the local Party organizations. It is necessary to retain the Special Committee
because sometimes the Front Committee has to move about with the troops.
In our opinion the question of proletarian ideological leadership is very
important. The Party organizations in the border area counties, which are
composed almost exclusively of peasants, will go astray without the ideological
leadership of the proletariat. Besides paying close attention to the labour
movement in the county towns and other big towns, we should increase the
workers' representation in the government bodies. The proportion of workers
and poor peasants should also be increased in the leading organs of the Party
at all levels.

THE QUESTION OF THE CHARACTER OF THE REVOLUTION


We fully agree with the Communist International's resolution on China. There
is no doubt that China is still at the stage of the bourgeois-democratic
revolution. The programme for a thorough democratic revolution in China
comprises, externally, the overthrow of imperialism so as to achieve complete
national liberation, and, internally, the elimination of the power and influence
of the comprador class in the cities, the completion of the agrarian revolution
in order to abolish feudal relations in the villages, and the overthrow of
the government of the warlords. We must go through such a democratic revolution
before we can lay a real foundation for the transition to socialism. In the
past year we have fought in many places and are keenly aware that the
revolutionary tide is on the ebb in the country as a whole. While Red political
power has been established in a few small areas, in the country as a whole
the people lack the ordinary democratic rights, the workers, the peasants
and even the bourgeois democrats do not have freedom of speech or assembly,
and the worst crime is to join the Communist Party. Wherever the Red Army
goes, the masses are cold and aloof, and only after our propaganda do they
slowly move into action. Whatever enemy units we face, there are hardly any
cases of mutiny or desertion to our side and we have to fight it out. This
holds even for the enemy's Sixth Army which recruited the greatest number
of "rebels" after the May 21st Incident. We have an acute sense of our isolation
which we keep hoping will end. Only by launching a political and economic
struggle for democracy, which will also involve the urban petty bourgeoisie,
can we turn the revolution into a seething tide that will surge through the
country.

Up to February this year we applied our policy towards the petty bourgeoisie
fairly well. In March the representative of the Southern Hunan Special Committee
arrived in Ningkang and criticized us for having leaned to the Right, for
having done too little burning and killing, and for having failed to carry
out the so-called policy of "turning the petty bourgeois into proletarians
and then forcing them into the revolution", whereupon the leadership of the
Front Committee was reorganized and the policy was changed. In April, after
the whole of our army arrived in the border area, there was still not much
burning and killing, but the expropriation of the middle merchants in the
towns and the collection of compulsory contributions from the small landlords
and rich peasants in the countryside were rigorously enforced. The slogan
of "All factories to the workers", put forward by the Southern Hunan Special
Committee, was also given wide publicity. This ultra-Left policy of attacking
the petty bourgeoisie drove most of them to the side of the landlords, with
the result that they put on white ribbons and opposed us. With the gradual
change of this policy, the situation has been steadily improving. Good results
have been achieved in Suichuan in particular, for the merchants in the county
town and other market towns no longer fight shy of us, and quite a few speak
well of the Red Army. The fair in Tsaolin (held every three days at noon)
attracts some twenty thousand people, an attendance which breaks all previous
records. This is proof that our policy is now correct. The landlords imposed
very heavy taxes and levies on the people; the Pacification Guards
[21] of Suichuan levied five toll charges along the
seventy-li road from Huangao to Tsaolin, no farm produce being exempt.
We crushed the Pacification Guards and abolished these tolls, thus winning
the support of all the peasants as well as of the small and middle merchants.

The Central Committee wants us to issue a political programme which takes
into account the interests of the petty bourgeoisie, and we for our part
propose that the Central Committee work out, for general guidance, a programme
for the whole democratic revolution which takes into account the workers'
interests, the agrarian revolution and national liberation.

A special characteristic of the revolution in China, a country with a
predominantly agricultural economy, is the use of military action to develop
insurrection. We recommend that the Central Committee should devote great
effort to military work.

THE QUESTION OF THE LOCATION OF OUR INDEPENDENT REGIME


The area stretching from northern Kwangtung along the Hunan-Kiangsi border
into southern Hupeh lies entirely within the Lohsiao mountain range. We have
traversed the whole range, and a comparison of its different sections shows
that the middle section, with Ningkang as its centre, is the most suitable
for our armed independent regime. The northern section has terrain which
is less suitable for our taking either the offensive or the defensive, and
it is too close to the enemy's big political centres. Besides, stationing
large forces in the area of Liuyang, Liling, Pinghsiang and Tungku would
involve a considerable risk, unless we plan a quick seizure of Changsha or
Wuhan. The southern section has better terrain than the northern, but our
mass base there is not as good as in the middle section, nor can we exert
as great a political influence on Hunan and Kiangsi from it as we can from
the middle section, from which any move can affect the lower river valleys
of the two provinces. The middle section has the following advantages: (1)
a mass base, which we have been cultivating for more than a year; (2) a fairly
good basis for the Party organizations; (3) local armed forces which have
been built up for more than a year and are well experienced in struggle--a
rare achievement--and which, coupled with the Fourth Red Army, will prove
indestructible in the face of any enemy force; (4) an excellent military
base, the Chingkang Mountains, and bases for our local armed forces in all
the counties; and (5) the influence it can exert on the two provinces and
on the lower valleys of their rivers, an influence endowing it with much
more political importance than that possessed by southern Hunan or southern
Kiangsi, the influence of either of which can reach out only to its own province,
or only to the upper river valley and the hinterland of its own province.
The disadvantage of the middle section is that, since it has long been under
the independent regime and is confronted by the enemy's large "encirclement
and suppression" forces, its economic problems, especially the shortage of
cash, are extremely difficult.

As for a plan of action here, the Hunan Provincial Committee advocated three
different plans within a few weeks in June and July. First Yuan The-sheng
came and approved our plan to establish political power in the middle section
of the Lohsiao mountain range. Then Tu Hsiu-ching and Yang Kai-ming came
and urged that the Red Army should move towards southern Hunan without the
least hesitation and leave a force of only two hundred rifles behind to defend
the border area together with the Red Guards; this, they said, was the
"absolutely correct" policy. The third time, barely ten days later, Yuan
The-sheng came again with a letter which, besides rebuking us at great length,
urged that the Red Army should set out for eastern Hunan; this was again
described as the "absolutely correct" policy, to be carried out "without
the least hesitation". These rigid directives put us in a real dilemma, because
failure to comply would be tantamount to disobedience, while compliance would
mean certain defeat. When the second message came, the Army Committee, the
Border Area Special Committee and the Yunghsin County Committee of the Party
met in a joint session and decided against carrying out the Provincial
Committee's instructions, as it was considered dangerous to move towards
southern Hunan. But a few days later, Tu Hsiu-ching and Yang Kai-ming, persisting
in the Provincial Party Committee's plan and taking advantage of the 29th
Regiment's homesickness, dragged the Red Army off to attack the county town
of Chenchou, thus bringing defeat both to the border area and to the Red
Army. The Red Army lost about half its men, and countless houses were burned
down and innumerable people massacred in the border area; county after county
fell to the enemy and some of them have not been recovered to this day. As
for moving to eastern Hunan, it was certainly inadvisable for the main forces
of the Red Army to do so unless there was a split among the ruling landlords
of Hunan, Hupeh and Kiangsi Provinces. If we had not advanced on southern
Hunan in July, we would not only have averted the August defeat in the border
area, but we could also have exploited the fighting between the Kuomintang's
Sixth Army and Wang Chun's Kuomintang forces in Changshu, Kiangsi Province,
to crush the enemy forces in Yunghsin, overrun Kian and Anfu, and make it
possible for our advanced guard to reach Pinghsiang and establish contact
with the Fifth Red Army in the northern section of the Lohsiao mountain range.
Even if all that had happened, the proper place for our general headquarters
should have still been Ningkang, and only guerrilla forces should have been
dispatched to eastern Hunan. Since fighting had not broken out among the
landlords and since formidable enemy forces were still in Pinghsiang, Chaling
and Yuhsien on the Hunan border, we would have been giving the enemy his
chance if we had moved our main forces northward. The Central Committee asked
us to consider an advance on eastern or on southern Hunan, but either course
was very dangerous; although the proposed expedition to eastern Hunan has
not been carried out, the expedition to southern Hunan has proved a failure.
This painful experience is always worth remembering.

We are not yet in a period when the regime of the landlord class has split
up, and the "suppression" forces of the enemy deployed round the border area
still number more than ten regiments. But if we can continue to find ways
of getting cash (food and clothing no longer being a big problem), then,
with the foundation for our work established in the border area, we shall
be able to cope with these enemy forces, and even with larger ones. As far
as the border area is concerned, it would at once suffer devastation, just
as it did in August, if the Red Army moved away. Although not all our Red
Guards would be wiped out, the Party and our mass base would receive a crippling
blow, and while there are places in the mountains where we might retain a
foothold, in the plains we would all have to go underground as in August
and September. If the Red Army does not move away, then, building on the
foundations we already have, we shall be able gradually to expand to surrounding
areas and our prospects will be very bright. If we want to enlarge the Red
Army, the only way is to engage the enemy in a prolonged struggle in the
vicinity of the Chingkang Mountains where we have a good mass base, namely,
in the counties of Ningkang, Yunghsin, Linghsien and Suichuan, utilizing
in this struggle the divergence of interests between the enemy forces of
Hunan and Kiangsi Provinces, their need to defend themselves on all sides
and their consequent inability to concentrate their forces. We can gradually
enlarge the Red Army by the use of correct tactics, fighting no battle unless
we can win it and capture arms and men. With the preparatory work that had
already been done among the masses in the border area between April and July,
the Red Army could undoubtedly have been enlarged in August had its major
detachment not made its expedition to southern Hunan. Despite that mistake,
the Red Army has returned to the border area where the terrain is favourable
and the people are friendly, and the prospects are not bad even now. Only
through the determination to fight and stamina in fighting in places such
as the border area can the Red Army add to its arms and train up good men.
The Red Flag has been kept flying in the border area for a whole year. It
has incurred the bitter hatred of the landlord class of Hunan, Hupeh and
Kiangsi and indeed of that of the whole country, but it is steadily raising
the hopes of the workers, peasants and soldiers in the surrounding provinces.
Consider the soldiers. Because the warlords are making the "bandit-suppression"
campaign against the border area their major task and are issuing such statements
as "a year has been spent and a million dollars used up in the effort to
suppress the bandits" (Lu Ti-ping), or the Red Army "has 20,000 men with
5,000 rifles" (Wang Chun), the attention of their soldiers and disheartened
junior officers is gradually turned towards us, and more and more of them
will break away from the enemy to join our ranks, thus providing the Red
Army with another source of recruitment. Besides, the fact that the Red Flag
has never been lowered in the border area shows at once the strength of the
Communist Party and the bankruptcy of the ruling classes, and this is of
nation-wide political significance. Therefore, we hold, as we have always
held, that it is absolutely necessary and correct to build up and expand
Red political power in the middle section of the Lohsiao mountain range.


NOTES


1 This war took place in October 1927.
2 This war took place in November and December 1927.
3 The system of the soldiers' representative conferences
and soldiers' committees m the Red Army was later abolished. In 1947, the
People's Liberation Army inaugurated a system of armymen's conferences and
soldiers' committees, both under the leadership of cadres.
4 These troops, originally under the command of Comrades
Yeh Ting and Ho Lung, staged the Nanchang Uprising of August 1, 1927. They
were defeated in their advance on Chaochow and Swatow, Kwangtung Province,
and some units, led by Comrades Chu The, Lin Piao and Chen Yi, withdrew to
southern Hunan via Kiangsi to carry on guerrilla operations. They joined
Comrade Mao Tse-tung's forces in the Chingkang Mountains in April 1928.
5 In the revolutionary days of 1927 most of the cadres in
the Guards Regiment of the National Government at Wuchang were members of
the Communist Party. At the end of July 1927, after Wang Ching-wei and his
associates had betrayed the revolution, the regiment left Wuchang to join
in the uprising at Nanchang. Learning en route that the revolutionary
forces had already gone south from Nanchang, the regiment made a detour to
Hsiushui in western Kiangsi to join the peasant armed forces of Pingkiang
and Liuyang.
6 In the spring of 1927 peasant armed forces of considerable
strength were formed in the area of Pingkiang and Liuyang, Hunan Province.
On May 21, Hsu Keh-hsiang staged a counter-revolutionary coup in Changsha
and massacred the revolutionary masses. The peasant armed forces then marched
on Changsha on May 31 to hit back at the counter-revolutionaries, but were
stopped by the opportunist Chen Tu-hsiu and turned back. Thereupon a section
was reorganized into an independent regiment to engage in guerrilla warfare.
After the Nanchang Uprising on August 1, these armed peasants joined forces
with the former Guards Regiment of the Wuchang National Government at Hsiushui
and Tungku in Kiangsi Province and at Pingkiang and Liuyang in Hunan Province,
and staged the Autumn Harvest Uprising in co-ordination with the armed coal
miners of Pinghsiang, Kiangsi. In October Comrade Mao Tse-tung led these
forces to the Chingkang Mountains.
7 In early 1928, while Comrade Chu The was directing
revolutionary guerrilla warfare in southern Hunan, peasant armies were organized
in the counties of Yichang, Chenchow, Leiyang, Yunghsing and Tzehsing, where
the peasant movement had already taken firm root. Comrade Chu The subsequently
led them to the Chingkang Mountains to join the forces under Comrade Mao
Tse-tung.
8 Shuikoushan in Changning, Hunan Province, is well known
for is lead mines. In 1922 the miners there led by the Communist Party formed
a trade union and for years conducted struggles against the counter-revolution.
Many of the miners joined the Red Army after the Autumn Harvest Uprising
of 1927.
9 The Anyuan Coal Mines in Pinghsiang County, Kiangsi Province,
employing twelve thousand workers, were owned by the Han-Yeh-Ping Iron and
Steel Company. From 1921 onwards Party organizations and a miners' union
were set up there by the organizers sent by the Hunan Provincial Committee
of the Communist Party.
10 In 1929 the Party representatives in the Red Army were
renamed political commissars. In 1931 the company political commissars were
renamed political instructors.
11 Expropriation of the local tyrants was only a temporary
measure to defray part of the army's expenses. The expansion of the base
areas and the growth of the army made it possible and necessary to defray
army expenses through taxation.
12 This practice of equal cash payment, necessary at the
time, remained in force over many years in the Red Army. Later on, however,
officers and men received payments which differed slightly according to rank.
13 Here Comrade Mao Tse-tung lays special stress on the
need for a definite measure of democracy in the revolutionary army, since,
in the early period of the Red Army, without the stress on democracy it would
not have been possible to arouse the revolutionary enthusiasm of the new
peasant recruits and the captured White troops who had joined our ranks,
nor would it have been possible to eliminate the warlord ways of the reactionary
armies which had infected our cadres. Of course, democracy in the army must
not transcend the limits of military discipline, which it must serve to
strengthen and not weaken. Therefore, while a necessary measure of democracy
should be promoted, the demand for ultra-democracy, which amounts to
indiscipline, must be combated. Such indiscipline became a matter of serious
concern at one point in the early days of the Red Army. For Comrade Mao
Tse-tung's struggle against ultra-democracy in the army, see "On Correcting
Mistaken Ideas in the Party", pp. 105-16 of this volume.
14 Comrade Yeh Ting commanded an independent regiment during
the Northern Expedition in 1926. With Communists as its nucleus the regiment
became famous as a crack force. It was expanded into the 24th Division after
the capture of Wuchang by the revolutionary army and then into the Eleventh
Army after the Nanchang Uprising.
15 Subsequent experience in the Red Army showed that a
ratio of one Party member to two non-Party men was adequate. This proportion
was generally maintained in the Red Army and later in the People's Liberation
Army.
16 Instigated by Chiang Kai-shek and Wang Ching-wei, the
counter-revolutionary Kuomintang army commanders in Hunan, including Hsu
Keh-hsiang and Ho Chien, ordered a raid on the provincial headquarters of
the trade unions, the peasant associations and other revolutionary organizations
in Changsha on May 21, 1927. Communists and revolutionary workers and peasants
were arrested and killed en masse. This signalized the open collaboration
of the two counter-revolutionary Kuomintang cliques, the Wuhan clique headed
by Wang Ching-wei and the Nanking clique headed by Chiang Kai-shek.
17 Confiscation and redistribution of all the land was
a provision in the Land Law promulgated in the Hunan-Kiangsi border area
in 1928. Comrade Mao Tse-tung later pointed out that the confiscation of
all land, instead of only the land of the landlords, was a mistake stemming
from inexperience in agrarian struggles. In the Land Law of Hsingkuo County,
Kiangsi, adopted in April 1929, the provision "confiscate all the land" was
changed into "confiscate the public land and the land of the landlord class".
18 In view of the importance of winning over the intermediate
class in the countryside, Comrade Mao Tse-tung soon corrected the erroneous
policy of dealing too sharply with it. Apart from the present article, Comrade
Mao Tse-tung's views on policy towards this class were also set forth in
proposals to the Sixth Party Congress of the Red Army (November 1928), including
"The Prohibition of Reckless Burning and Killing" and "Protection of the
Interests of the Middle and Small Merchants"; in the January 1929 proclamation
of the Fourth Red Army which declared "merchants in the towns who have gradually
built up some property are to be left alone so long as they obey the
authorities"; in the Land Law of Hsingkuo County adopted in April 1929 (see
Note 17), etc.
19 With the spread of the revolutionary war, the extension
of the revolutionary base areas and the adoption of the policy of protecting
industry and commerce by the revolutionary government, it became possible
to change this situation, and a change did in fact occur later. What was
crucial was resolutely to protect the industry and commerce of the national
bourgeoisie and oppose ultra-Left policies.
20 Labour-power is not an appropriate criterion for land
distribution. In the Red areas land was in fact redistributed equally on
a per capita basis.
21 The Pacification Guards were a kind of local
counter-revolutionary armed force.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in the Party








ON CORRECTING MISTAKEN IDEAS IN THE PARTY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

    ON CORRECTING MISTAKEN IDEAS IN THE PARTY

December 1929


On the Purely Military Viewpoint

On Ultra-Democracy

On the Disregard of Organizational Discipline

On Absolute Equalitarianism

On Subjectivism

On Individualism

On the Ideology of Roving Rebel Bands

On the Remnants of Putschism

[This article was a resolution drawn up by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Ninth
Party Congress of the Fourth Army of the Red Army. The building of the Chinese
people's armed forces was a difficult process. The Chinese Red Army (which
became the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies during the War of Resistance
Against Japan and is now the People's Liberation Army) was created on August
1, 1927, during the Nanchang Uprising, and by December 1929 had been in existence
for over two years. During this period the Communist Party organization in
the Red army learned a great deal and gained quite a rich store of experience
in the course of combating various mistaken ideas. The resolution summed
up this experience. It enabled the Red Army to build itself entirely on a
Marxist-Leninist basis and to eliminate all the influences of armies of the
old type. It was carried out not only in the Fourth Army but also in all
other units of the Red Army successively, in this way the whole Chinese Red
Army became a genuine army of the people in every respect. In the last thirty
years or so the Chinese people's armed forces have made tremendous developments
and innovations in their Party activities and political work which now present
a very different picture, but the basic line remains the same as that laid
down in this resolution.]



There are various non-proletarian ideas in the Communist Party organization
in the Fourth Red Army which greatly hinder the application of the Party's
correct line. Unless these ideas are thoroughly corrected, the Fourth Army
cannot possibly shoulder the tasks assigned to it in China's great revolutionary
struggle. The source of such incorrect ideas in this Party organization lies,
of course, in the fact that its basic units are composed largely of peasants
and other elements of petty-bourgeois origin; yet the failure of the Party's
leading bodies to wage a concerted and determined struggle against these
incorrect ideas and to educate the members in the Party's correct line is
also an important cause of their existence and growth. In accordance with
the spirit of the September letter of the Central Committee, this congress
hereby points out the manifestations of various non-proletarian ideas in
the Party organization in the Fourth Army, their sources, and the methods
of correcting them, and calls upon all comrades to eliminate them thoroughly.
ON THE PURELY MILITARY VIEWPOINT

The purely military viewpoint is very highly developed among a number of
comrades in the Red Army. It manifests itself as follows:

1. These comrades regard military affairs and politics as opposed to each
other and refuse to recognize that military affairs are only one means of
accomplishing political tasks. Some even say, "If you are good militarily,
naturally you are good politically; if you are not good militarily, you cannot
be any good politically"--this is to go a step further and give military
affairs a leading position over politics.

2. They think that the task of the Red Army like that of the White army,
is merely to fight. They do not understand that the Chinese Red Army is an
armed body for carrying out the political tasks of the revolution. Especially
at present, the Red Army should certainly not confine itself to fighting;
besides fighting to destroy the enemy's military strength, it should shoulder
such important tasks as doing propaganda among the masses, organizing the
masses, arming them, helping them to establish revolutionary political power
and setting up Party organizations. The Red Army fights not merely for the
sake of fighting but in order to conduct propaganda among the masses, organize
them, arm them, and help them to establish revolutionary political power.
Without these objectives, fighting loses its meaning and the Red Army loses
the reason for its existence.

3. Hence, organizationally, these comrades subordinate the departments of
the Red Army doing political work to those doing military work, and put forward
the slogan, "Let Army Headquarters handle outside matters." If allowed to
develop, this idea would involve the danger of estrangement from the masses,
control of the government by the army and departure from proletarian leadership--
it would be to take the path of warlordism like the Kuomintang army.

4. At the same time, in propaganda work they overlook the importance of
propaganda teams. On the question of mass organization, they neglect the
organizing of soldiers' committees in the army and the organizing of the
local workers and peasants. As a result, both propaganda and organizational
work are abandoned.

5. They become conceited when a battle is won and dispirited when a battle
is lost.

6. Selfish departmentalism--they think only of the Fourth Army and do not
realize that it is an important task of the Red Army to arm the local masses.
This is cliquism in a magnified form.

7. Unable to see beyond their limited environment in the Fourth Army, a few
comrades believe that no other revolutionary forces exist. Hence their extreme
addiction to the idea of conserving strength and avoiding action. This is
a remnant of opportunism.

8. Some comrades, disregarding the subjective and objective conditions, suffer
from the malady of revolutionary impetuosity; they will not take pains to
do minute and detailed work among the masses, but, riddled with illusions,
want only to do big things. This is a remnant of
putschism.[1]

The sources of the purely military viewpoint are:

1. A low political level. From this flows the failure to recognize the role
of political leadership in the army and to recognize that the Red Army and
the White army are fundamentally different.

2. The mentality of mercenaries. Many prisoners captured in past battles
have joined the Red Army, and such elements bring with them a markedly mercenary
outlook, thereby providing a basis in the lower ranks for the purely
military viewpoint.

3. From the two preceding causes there arises a third, overconfidence in
military strength and absence of confidence in the strength of the masses
of the people.

4 The Party's failure actively to attend to and discuss military work is
also a reason for the emergence of the purely military viewpoint among a
number of comrades.

The methods of correction are as follows:

1. Raise the political level in the Party by means of education, destroy
the theoretical roots of the purely military viewpoint, and be dear on the
fundamental difference between the Red Army and the White army. At the same
time, eliminate the remnants of opportunism and putschism and break down
the selfish departmentalism of the Fourth Army.

2. Intensify the political training of officers and men and especially the
education of ex-prisoners. At the same time, as far as possible let the local
governments select workers and peasants experienced in struggle to join the
Red Army, thus organizationally weakening or even eradicating the purely
military viewpoint.

3. Arouse the local Party organizations to criticize the Party organizations
in the Red Army and the organs of mass political power to criticize the Red
Army itself, in order to influence the Party organizations and the officers
and men of the Red Army.

4. The Party must actively attend to and discuss military work. All the work
must be discussed and decided upon by the Party before being carried out
by the rank and file.

5. Draw up Red Army rules and regulations which dearly define its tasks,
the relationship between its military and its political apparatus, the
relationship between the Red Army and the masses of the people, and the powers
and functions of the soldiers' committees and their relationship with the
military and political organizations.

ON ULTRA-DEMOCRACY 

Since the Fourth Army of the Red Army accepted the directives of the Central
Committee, there has been a great decrease in the manifestations of
ultra-democracy. For example, Party decisions are now carried out fairly
well; and no longer does anyone bring up such erroneous demands as that the
Red Army should apply "democratic centralism from the bottom to the top"
or should "let the lower levels discuss all problems first, and then let
the higher levels decide". Actually, however, this decrease is only temporary
and superficial and does not mean that ultra-democratic ideas have already
been eliminated. In other words, ultra-democracy is still deep-rooted in
the minds of many comrades. Witness the various expressions of reluctance
to carry out Party decisions.

The methods of correction are as follows:

1. In the sphere of theory, destroy the roots of ultra-democracy. First,
it should be pointed out that the danger of ultra-democracy lies in the fact
that it damages or even completely wrecks the Party organization and weakens
or even completely undermines the Party's fighting capacity, rendering the
Party incapable of fulfilling its fighting tasks and thereby causing the
defeat of the revolution. Next, it should be pointed out that the source
of ultra-democracy consists in the petty bourgeoisie's individualistic aversion
to discipline. When this characteristic is brought into the Party, it develops
into ultra-democratic ideas politically and organizationally. These ideas
are utterly incompatible with the fighting tasks of the proletariat.

2. In the sphere of organization, ensure democracy under centralized guidance.
It should be done on the following lines:

(1) The leading bodies of the Party must give a correct line of guidance
and kind solutions when problems arise, in order to establish themselves
as centres of leadership.

(2) The higher bodies must be familiar with the life of the masses and with
the situation in the lower bodies so as to have an objective basis for correct
guidance.

(3) No Party organization at any level should make casual decisions in solving
problems. Once a decision is reached, it must be firmly carried out.

(4) All decisions of any importance made by the Party's higher bodies must
be promptly transmitted to the lower bodies and the Party rank and file.
The method is to call meetings of activists or general membership meetings
of the Party branches or even of the columns [2] (when
circumstances permit) and to assign people to make reports at such meetings.

(5) The lower bodies of the Party and the Party rank and file must discuss
the higher bodies' directives in detail in order to understand their meaning
thoroughly and decide on the methods of carrying them out.
ON THE DISREGARD OF ORGANIZATIONAL DISCIPLINE

Disregard of organizational discipline in the Party organization in the Fourth
Army manifests itself as follows:

A. Failure of the minority to submit to the majority. For example, when a
minority finds its motion voted down, it does not sincerely carry out the
Party decisions.

The methods of correction are as follows:

1. At meetings, all participants should be encouraged to voice their opinions
as fully as possible. The rights and wrongs in any controversy should be
clarified without compromise or glossing over. In order to reach a clear-cut
conclusion, what cannot be settled at one meeting should be discussed at
another, provided there is no interference with the work.

2. One requirement of Party discipline is that the minority should submit
to the majority. If the view of the minority has been rejected, it must support
the decision passed by the majority. If necessary, it can bring up the maker
for reconsideration at the next meeting, but apart from that it must not
act against the decision in any way.

B. Criticism made without regard to organizational discipline:

1. Inner-Party criticism is a weapon for strengthening the Party organization
and increasing its fighting capacity. In the Party organization of the Red
Army, however, criticism is not always of this character, and sometimes turns
into personal attack. As a result, it damages the Party organization as well
as individuals. This is a manifestation of petty-bourgeois individualism.
The method of correction is to help Party members understand that the purpose
of criticism is to increase the Party's fighting capacity in order to achieve
victory in the class struggle and that it should not be used as a means of
personal attack.

2. Many Party members make their criticisms not inside, but outside, the
Party. The reason is that the general membership has not yet grasped the
importance of the Party organization (its meetings and so forth), and sees
no difference between criticism inside and outside the organization. The
method of correction is to educate Party members so that they understand
the importance of Party organization and make their criticisms of Party
committees or comrades at Party meetings.
ON ABSOLUTE EQUALITARIANISM

Absolute equalitarianism became quite serious in the Red Army at one time.
Here are some examples. On the matter of allowances to wounded soldiers,
there were objections to differentiating between light and serious cases,
and the demand was raised for equal allowances for all. When officers rode
on horseback, it was regarded not as something necessary for performing their
duties but as a sign of inequality. Absolutely equal distribution of supplies
was demanded, and there was objection to somewhat larger allotments in special
cases. In the hauling of rice, the demand was made that all should carry
the same load on their backs, irrespective of age or physical condition.
Equality was demanded in the allotment of billets, and the Headquarters would
be abused for occupying larger rooms. Equality was demanded in the assignment
of fatigue duties, and there was unwillingness to do a little more than the
next man. It even went so far that when there were two wounded men but only
one stretcher, neither could be carried away because each refused to yield
priority to the other. Absolute equalitarianism, as shown in these examples,
is still very serious among officers and soldiers of the Red Army.

Absolute equalitarianism, like ultra-democracy in political matters, is the
product of a handicraft and small peasant economy--the only difference being
that the one manifests itself in material affairs, while the other manifests
itself in political affairs.

The method of correction: We should point out that, before the abolition
of capitalism, absolute equalitarianism is a mere illusion of peasants and
small proprietors, and that even under socialism there can be no absolute
equality, for material things will then be distributed on the principle of
"from each according to his ability, to each according to his work" as well
as on that of meeting the needs of the work. The distribution of material
things in the Red Army must be more or less equal, as in the case of equal
pay for officers and men, because this is required by the present circumstances
of the struggle. But absolute equalitarianism beyond reason must be opposed
because it is not required by the struggle; on the contrary, it hinders the
struggle.
ON SUBJECTIVISM 

Subjectivism exists to a serious degree among some Party members, causing
great harm to the analysis of the political situation and the guidance of
the work. The reason is that subjective analysis of a political situation
and subjective guidance of work inevitably result either in opportunism or
in putschism. As for subjective criticism, loose and groundless talk or
suspiciousness, such practices inside the Party often breed unprincipled
disputes and undermine the Party organization.

Another point that should be mentioned in connection with inner-Party criticism
is that some comrades ignore the major issues and confine their attention
to minor points when they make their criticism. They do not understand that
the main task of criticism is to point out political and organizational mistakes.
As to personal shortcomings, unless they are related to political and
organizational mistakes, there is no need to be overcritical and to embarrass
the comrades concerned. Moreover, once such criticism develops, there is
the great danger that the Party members will concentrate entirely on minor
faults, and everyone will become timid and overcautious and forget the Party's
political tasks.

The main method of correction is to educate Party members so that a political
and scientific spirit pervades their thinking and their Party life. To this
end we must: (1) teach Party members to apply the Marxist-Leninist method
in analysing a political situation and appraising the class forces, instead
of making a subjective analysis and appraisal; (2) direct the attention of
Party members to social and economic investigation and study, so as to determine
the tactics of struggle and methods of work, and help comrades to understand
that without investigation of actual conditions they will fall into the pit
of fantasy and putschism; and (3) in inner-Party criticism, guard against
subjectivism, arbitrariness and the vulgarization of criticism; statements
should be based on facts and criticism should centre on politics.
ON INDIVIDUALISM


The tendency towards individualism in the Red Army Party organization manifests
itself as follows:

1. Retaliation. Some comrades, after being criticized inside the Party by
a soldier comrade, look for opportunities to retaliate outside the Party,
and one way is to beat or abuse the comrade in question. They also seek to
retaliate within the Party. "You have criticized me at this meeting, so I'll
find some way to pay you back at the next." Such retaliation arises from
purely personal considerations, to the neglect of the interests of the class
and of the Party as a whole. Its target is not the enemy class, but individuals
in our own ranks. It is a corrosive which weakens the organization and its
fighting capacity.

2. "Small group" mentality. Some comrades consider only the interests of
their own small group and ignore the general interest. Although on the surface
this does not seem to be the pursuit of personal interests, in reality it
exemplifies the narrowest individualism and has a strong corrosive and
centrifugal effect. "Small group" mentality used to be rife in the Red Army,
and although there has been some improvement as a result of criticism, there
are still survivals and further effort is needed to overcome it.

3. The "employee" mentality. Some comrades do not understand that the Party
and the Red Army, of which they are members, are both instruments for carrying
out the tasks of the revolution. They do not realize that they themselves
are makers of the revolution, but think that their responsibility is merely
to their individual superiors and not to the revolution. This passive mentality
of an "employee" of the revolution is also a manifestation of individualism.
It explains why there are not very many activists who work unconditionally
for the revolution. Unless it is eliminated, the number of activists will
not grow and the heavy burden of the revolution will remain on the shoulders
of a small number of people, much to the detriment of the struggle.

4. Pleasure-seeking. In the Red Army there are also quite a few people whose
individualism finds expression in pleasure-seeking. They always hope that
their unit will march into big cities. They want to go there not to work
but to enjoy themselves. The last thing they want is to work in the Red areas
where life is hard.

5. Passivity. Some comrades become passive and stop working whenever anything
goes against their wishes. This is mainly due to. lack of education, though
sometimes it is also due to the leadership's improper conduct of affairs,
assignment of work or enforcement of discipline.

6. The desire to leave the army. The number of people who ask for transfers
from the Red Army to local work is on the increase The reason for this does
not lie entirely with the individuals but also with: (1) the material hardships
of life in the Red Army, (2) exhaustion after long struggle, and (3) the
leadership's improper conduct of affairs, assignment of work or enforcement
of discipline.

The method of correction is primarily to strengthen education so as to rectify
individualism ideologically. Next, it is to conduct affairs, make assignments
and enforce discipline in a proper way. In addition, ways must be found to
improve the material life of the Red Army, and every available opportunity
must be utilized for rest and rehabilitation in order to improve material
conditions. In our educational work we must explain that in its social origin
individualism is a reflection within the Party of petty-bourgeois and bourgeois
ideas.
ON THE IDEOLOGY OF ROVING REBEL BANDS

The political ideology of roving rebel bands has emerged in the Red Army
because the proportion of vagabond elements is large and because there are
great masses of vagabonds in China, especially in the southern provinces.
This ideology manifests itself as follows: (1) Some people want to increase
our political influence only by means of roving guerrilla actions, but are
unwilling to increase it by undertaking the arduous task of building up base
areas and establishing the people's political power. (2) In expanding the
Red Army, some people follow the line of "hiring men and buying horses" and
"recruiting deserters and accepting mutineers", [3] rather
than the line of expanding the local Red Guards and the local troops and
thus developing the main forces of the Red Army. (3) Some people lack the
patience to carry on arduous struggles together with the masses, and only
want to go to the big cities to eat and drink to their hearts' content. All
these manifestations of the ideology of roving rebels seriously hamper the
Red Army in performing its proper tasks; consequently its eradication is
an important objective in the ideological struggle within the Red Army Party
organization. It must be understood that the ways of roving rebels of the
Huang Chao [4] or Li Chuang [5] type
are not permissible under present-day conditions.

The methods of correction are as follows:

1. Intensify education, criticize incorrect ideas, and eradicate the ideology
of roving rebel bands.

2. Intensify education among the basic sections of the Red Army and among
recently recruited captives to counter the vagabond outlook.

3. Draw active workers and peasants experienced in struggle into the ranks
of the Red Army so as to change its composition.

4. Create new units of the Red Army from among the masses of militant workers
and peasants.

ON THE REMNANTS OF PUTSCHISM

The Party organization in the Red Army has already waged struggles against
putschism, but not yet to a sufficient extent. Therefore, remnants of this
ideology still exist in the Red Army. Their manifestations are: (1) blind
action regardless of subjective and objective conditions; (2) inadequate
and irresolute application of the Party's policies for the cities; (3) slack
military discipline, especially in moments of defeat; (4) acts of house-burning
by some units; and (5) the practices of shooting deserters and of inflicting
corporal punishment, both of which smack of putschism. In its social origins,
putschism is a combination of lumpen-proletarian and petty- bourgeois
ideology.

The methods of correction are as follows:

1. Eradicate putschism ideologically.

2. Correct putschist behaviour through rules, regulations and policies.

NOTES

1. For a brief period after the defeat of the revolution
in 1927, a "Left" putschist tendency arose in the Communist Party. Regarding
the Chinese revolution as a "permanent revolution" and the revolutionary
situation in China as a "permanent upsurge", the putschist comrades refused
to organize an orderly retreat and, adopting the methods of commandism and
relying only on a small number of Party members and a small section of the
masses, erroneously attempted to stage a series of local uprisings throughout
the country, which had no prospect of success. Such putschist activities
were widespread at the end of 1927 but gradually subsided in the beginning
of 1928, though sentiments in favour of putschism still survived among some
comrades.
2 In the guerrilla system of organization a column corresponded
to a division in the regular army, with a complement much more flexible and
usually much smaller than that of a regular division.
3 These two Chinese idioms refer to the methods which some
rebels in Chinese history adopted to expand their forces. In the application
of these methods, attention was paid to numbers rather than to quality, and
people of all sorts were indiscriminately recruited to swell the ranks.
4 Huang Chao was the leader of the peasant revolts towards
the end of the Tang Dynasty. In A.D. 875, starting from his home district
Tsaochow (now Hotse County in Shantung), Huang led armed peasants in victorious
battles against the imperial forces and styled himself the "Heaven-Storming
General". In the course of a decade he swept over most of the provinces in
the Yellow, Yangtse, Huai and Pearl river valleys, reaching as far as Kwangsi.
He finally broke through the Tungkuan pass, captured the imperial capital
of Changan (now Sian in Shensi), and was crowned Emperor of Chi. Internal
dissensions and attacks by the non-Han tribal allies of the Tang forces compelled
Huang to abandon Changan and retreat to his native district, where he committed
suicide. The ten years' war fought by him is one of the most famous peasant
wars in Chinese history. Dynastic historians record that "all people suffering
from heavy taxes and levies rallied to him". But as he merely carried on
roving warfare without ever establishing relatively consolidated base areas,
his forces were called "roving rebel bands".
5 Li Chuang, short for Li Tzu-cheng the King Chuang
(the Dare-All King), native of Michih, northern Shensi, was the leader
of a peasant revolt which led to the overthrow of the Ming Dynasty. The revolt
first started in northern Shensi in 1628. Li joined the forces led by Kao
Ying-hsiang and campaigned through Honan and Anhwei and back to Shensi. After
Kao's death in 1636, Li succeeded him, becoming King Chuang, and campaigned
in and out of the provinces of Shensi, Szechuan, Honan and Hupeh Finally
he captured the imperial capital of Peking in 1644, whereupon the last Ming
emperor committed suicide. The chief slogan he spread among the masses was
"Support King Chuang, and pay no grain taxes". Another slogan of his to enforce
discipline among his men ran: "Any murder means the killing of my father,
any rape means the violation of my mother." Thus he won the support of the
masses and his movement became the main current of the peasant revolts raging
all over the country. As he, too, roamed about without ever establishing
relatively consolidated base areas, he was eventually defeated by Wu San-kuei,
a Ming general who colluded with the Ching troops in a joint aback on Li.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## A Single Spark Can Start a Prairie Fire








A SINGLE SPARK CAN START A PRAIRIE FIRE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  A SINGLE SPARK CAN START A PRAIRIE FIRE

January 5, 1930 
[This was a letter written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung in criticism of certain
pessimistic views then existing in the Party.]



Some comrades in our Party still do not know how to appraise the current
situation correctly and how to settle the attendant question of what action
to take. Though they believe that a revolutionary high tide is inevitable,
they do not believe it to be imminent. Therefore, they disapprove of the
plan to take Kiangsi and only approve of roving guerrilla actions in the
three areas on the borders of Fukien, Kwangtung and Kiangsi; at the same
time, as they do not have a deep understanding of what it means to establish
Red political power in the guerrilla areas, they do not have a deep understanding
of the idea of accelerating the nation-wide revolutionary high tide through
the consolidation and expansion of Red political power. They seem to think
that, since the revolutionary high tide is still remote, it will be labour
lost to attempt to establish political power by hard work. Instead, they
want to extend our political influence through the easier method of roving
guerrilla actions, and, once the masses throughout the country have been
won over, or more or less won over, they want to launch a nation-wide armed
insurrection which, with the participation of the Red Army, would become
a great nationwide revolution. Their theory that we must first win over the
masses on a country-wide scale and in all regions and then establish political
power does not accord with the actual state of the Chinese revolution. This
theory derives mainly from the failure to understand clearly that China is
a semi-colonial country for which many imperialist powers are contending.
If one clearly understands this, one will understand first why the unusual
phenomenon of prolonged and tangled warfare within the ruling classes is
only to be found in China, why this warfare is steadily growing fiercer and
spreading, and why there has never been a unified regime. Secondly, one will
understand the gravity of the peasant problem and hence why rural uprisings
have developed on the present country-wide scale. Thirdly, one will understand
the correctness of the slogan of workers' and peasants' democratic political
power. Fourthly, one will understand another unusual phenomenon, which is
also absent outside China, and which follows from the first (that in China
alone there is prolonged and tangled warfare within the ruling classes),
namely, the existence and development of the Red Army and the guerrilla forces,
and together with them, the existence and development of small Red areas
encircled by the White regime. Fifthly, one will understand that in semi-colonial
China the establishment and expansion of the Red Army, the guerrilla forces
and the Red areas is the highest form of peasant struggle under the leadership
of the proletariat, the inevitable outcome of the growth of the semi-colonial
peasant struggle, and undoubtedly the most important factor in accelerating
the revolutionary high tide throughout the country. And sixthly, one will
also understand that the policy which merely calls for roving guerrilla actions
cannot accomplish the task of accelerating this nation-wide revolutionary
high tide, while the kind of policy adopted by Chu Teh and Mao Tse-tung and
also by Fang Chih-min [1] is undoubtedly correct--that
is, the policy of establishing base areas; of systematically setting up political
power; of deepening the agrarian revolution; of expanding the people's armed
forces by a comprehensive process of building up first the township Red Guards,
then the district Red Guards, then the county Red Guards, then the local
Red Army troops, all the way up to the regular Red Army troops; of spreading
political power by advancing in a series of waves; etc., etc. Only thus is
it possible to build the confidence of the revolutionary masses throughout
the country, as the Soviet Union has built it throughout the world. Only
thus is it possible to create tremendous difficulties for the reactionary
ruling classes, shake their foundations and hasten their internal disintegration.
Only thus is it really possible to create a Red Army which will become the
chief weapon for the great revolution of the future. In short, only thus
is it possible to hasten the revolutionary high tide.

Comrades who suffer from revolutionary impetuosity overestimate the subjective
forces of the revolution [2] and underestimate the forces
of the counter-revolution. Such an appraisal stems mainly from subjectivism.
In the end, it undoubtedly leads to putschism. On the other hand, underestimating
the subjective forces of the revolution and overestimating the forces of
the counter-revolution would also constitute an improper appraisal and be
certain to produce bad results of another kind. Therefore, in judging the
political situation in China it is necessary to understand the following:

1. Although the subjective forces of the revolution in China are now weak,
so also are all organizations (organs of political power, armed forces, political
parties, etc.) of the reactionary ruling classes, resting as they do on the
backward and fragile social and economic structure of China. This helps to
explain why revolution cannot break out at once in the countries of Western
Europe where, although the subjective forces of revolution are now perhaps
somewhat stronger than in China, the forces of the reactionary ruling classes
are many times stronger. In China the revolution will undoubtedly move towards
a high tide more rapidly, for although the subjective forces of the revolution
at present are weak, the forces of the counter-revolution are relatively
weak too.

2. The subjective forces of the revolution have indeed been greatly weakened
since the defeat of the revolution in 1927. The remaining forces are very
small and those comrades who judge by appearances alone naturally feel
pessimistic. But if we judge by essentials, it is quite another story. Here
we can apply the old Chinese saying, "A single spark can start a prairie
fire." In other words, our forces, although small at present, will grow very
rapidly. In the conditions prevailing in China, their growth is not only
possible but indeed inevitable, as the May 30th Movement and the Great Revolution
which followed have fully proved. When we look at a thing, we must examine
its essence and treat its appearance merely as an usher at the threshold,
and once we cross the threshold, we must grasp the essence of the thing;
this is the only reliable and scientific method of analysis.

3. Similarly, in appraising the counter-revolutionary forces, we must never
look merely at their appearance, but should examine their essence. In the
initial period of our independent regime in the Hunan-Kiangsi border area,
some comrades genuinely believed the incorrect appraisal made by the Hunan
Provincial Committee and regarded the class enemy as not worth a rap; the
two descriptive terms, "terribly shaky" and "extremely panicky", which are
standing jokes to this day, were used by the Hunan Provincial Committee at
the time (from May to June 1928) in appraising the Hunan ruler Lu Ti-ping.
[3] Such an appraisal necessarily led to putschism in
the political sphere. But during the four months from November of that year
to February 1929 (before the war between Chiang Kai-shek and the Kwangsi
warlords), [4] when the enemy's third "joint suppression
expedition" [5] was approaching the Chingkang Mountains,
some comrades asked the question, "How long can we keep the Red Flag flying?"
As a matter of fact, the struggle in China between Britain, the United States
and Japan had by then become quite open, and a state of tangled warfare between
Chiang Kai-shek, the Kwangsi clique and Feng Yu-hsiang was taking shape;
hence it was actually the time when the counter-revolutionary tide had begun
to ebb and the revolutionary tide to rise again. Yet pessimistic ideas were
to be found not only in the Red Army and local Party organizations, even
the Central Committee was misled by appearances and adopted a pessimistic
tone. Its February letter is evidence of the pessimistic analysis made in
the Party at that time.

4. The objective situation today is still such that comrades who see only
the superficial appearance and not the essence of what is before them are
liable to be misled. In particular, when our comrades working in the Red
Army are defeated in battle or encircled or pursued by strong enemy forces,
they often unwittingly generalize and exaggerate their momentary, specific
and limited situation, as though the situation in China and the world as
a whole gave no cause for optimism and the prospects of victory for the
revolution were remote. The reason they seize on the appearance and brush
aside the essence in their observation of things is that they have not made
a scientific analysis of the essence of the overall situation. The question
whether there will soon be a revolutionary high tide in China can be decided
only by making a detailed examination to ascertain whether the contradictions
leading to a revolutionary high tide are really developing. Since contradictions
are developing in the world between the imperialist countries, between the
imperialist countries and their colonies, and between the imperialists and
the proletariat in their own countries, there is an intensified need for
the imperialists to contend for the domination of China. While the imperialist
contention over China becomes more intense, both the contradiction between
imperialism and the whole Chinese nation and the contradictions among the
imperialists themselves develop simultaneously on Chinese soil, thereby creating
the tangled warfare which is expanding and intensifying daily and giving
rise to the continuous development of the contradictions among the different
cliques of China's reactionary rulers. In the wake of the contradictions
among the reactionary ruling cliques--the tangled warfare among the
warlords--comes heavier taxation, which steadily sharpens the contradiction
between the broad masses of taxpayers and the reactionary rulers. In the
wake of the contradiction between imperialism and China's national industry
comes the failure of the Chinese industrialists to obtain concessions from
the imperialists, which sharpens the contradiction between the Chinese
bourgeoisie and the Chinese working class, with the Chinese capitalists trying
to find a way out by frantically exploiting the workers and with the workers
resisting. In the wake of imperialist commercial aggression, Chinese
merchant-capitalist extortions, heavier government taxation, etc., comes
the deepening of the contradiction between the landlord class and the peasantry,
that is, exploitation through rent and usury is aggravated and the hatred
of the peasants for the landlords grows. Because of the pressure of foreign
goods, the exhaustion of the purchasing power of the worker and peasant masses,
and the increase in government taxation, more and more dealers in Chinese-made
goods and independent producers are being driven into bankruptcy. Because
the reactionary government, though short of provisions and funds, endlessly
expands its armies and thus constantly extends the warfare, the masses of
soldiers are in a constant state of privation. Because of the growth in
government taxation, the rise in rent and interest demanded by the landlords
and the daily spread of the disasters of war, there are famine and banditry
everywhere and the peasant masses and the urban poor can hardly keep alive.
Because the schools have no money, many students fear that their education
may be interrupted; because production is backward, many graduates have no
hope of employment. Once we understand all these contradictions, we shall
see in what a desperate situation, in what a chaotic state, China finds herself.
We shall also see that the high tide of revolution against the imperialists,
the warlords and the landlords is inevitable, and will come very soon. All
China is littered with dry faggots which will soon be aflame. The saying,
"A single spark can start a prairie fire", is an apt description of how the
current situation will develop. We need only look at the strikes by the workers,
the uprisings by the peasants, the mutinies of soldiers and the strikes of
students which are developing in many places to see that it cannot be long
before a "spark" kindles "a prairie fire".

The gist of the above was already contained in the letter from the Front
Committee to the Central Committee on April 5, 1929, which reads in part:

The Central Committee's letter [dated February 9, 1929] makes too pessimistic
an appraisal of the objective situation and our subjective forces. The
Kuomintang's three "suppression" campaigns against the Chingkang Mountains
was the high water mark reached by the counter-revolutionary tide. But there
it stopped, and since then the counter-revolutionary tide has gradually receded
while the revolutionary tide has gradually risen. Although our Party's fighting
capacity and organizational strength have been weakened to the extent described
by the Central Committee, they will be rapidly restored, and the passivity
among comrades in the Party will quickly disappear as the counter-revolutionary
tide gradually ebbs. The masses will certainly come over to us. The Kuomintang's
policy of massacre only serves to "drive the fish into deep waters",
[6] as the saying goes, and reformism no longer has any
mass appeal. It is certain that the masses will soon shed their illusions
about the Kuomintang. In the emerging situation, no other party will be able
to compete with the Communist Party in winning over the masses. The political
line and the organizational line laid down by the Party's Sixth National
Congress [7] are correct, i.e., the revolution at the
present stage is democratic and not socialist, and the present task of the
Party [here the words "in the big cities" should have been added]
[8] is to win over the masses and not to stage immediate
insurrections. Nevertheless the revolution will develop swiftly, and we should
take a positive attitude in our propaganda and preparations for armed
insurrections. In the present chaotic situation we can lead the masses only
by positive slogans and a positive attitude. Only by taking such an attitude
can the Party recover its fighting capacity.... Proletarian leadership is
the sole key to victory in the revolution. Building a proletarian foundation
for the Party and setting up Party branches in industrial enterprises in
key districts are important organizational tasks for the Party at present;
but at the same time the major prerequisites for helping the struggle in
the cities and hastening the rise of the revolutionary tide are specifically
the development of the struggle in the countryside, the establishment of
Red political power in small areas, and the creation and expansion of the
Red Army. Therefore, it would be wrong to abandon the struggle in the cities,
but in our opinion it would also be wrong for any of our Party members to
fear the growth of peasant strength lest it should outstrip the workers'
strength and harm the revolution. For in the revolution in semi-colonial
China, the peasant struggle must always fail if it does not have the leadership
of the workers, but the revolution is never harmed if the peasant struggle
outstrips the forces of the workers.

The letter also contained the following reply on the question of the Red
Army's operational tactics:

To preserve the Red Army and arouse the masses, the Central Committee asks
us to divide our forces into very small units and disperse them over the
countryside and to withdraw Chu Teh and Mao Tse-tung from the army, so concealing
the major targets. This is an unrealistic view. In the winter of 1927-28,
we did plan to disperse our forces over the countryside, with each company
or battalion operating on its own and adopting guerrilla tactics in order
to arouse the masses while trying not to present a target for the enemy;
we have tried this out many times, but have failed every time. The reasons
are: (1) most of the soldiers in the main force of the Red Army come from
other areas and have a background different from that of the local Red Guards;
(2) division into small units results in weak leadership and inability to
cope with adverse circumstances, which easily leads to defeat; (3) the units
are liable to be crushed by the enemy one by one; (4) the more adverse the
circumstances, the greater the need for concentrating our forces and for
the leaders to be resolute in struggle, because only thus can we have internal
unity against the enemy. Only in favourable circumstances is it advisable
to divide our forces for guerrilla operations, and it is only then that the
leaders need not stay with the ranks all the time, as they must in adverse
circumstances.

The weakness of this passage is that the reasons adduced against the division
of forces were of a negative character, which was far from adequate. The
positive reason for concentrating our forces is that only concentration will
enable us to wipe out comparatively large enemy units and occupy towns. Only
after we have wiped out comparatively large enemy units and occupied towns
can we arouse the masses on a broad scale and set up political power extending
over a number of adjoining counties. Only thus can we make a widespread impact
(what we call "extending our political influence"), and contribute effectively
to speeding the day of the revolutionary high tide. For instance, both the
regime we set up in the Hunan-Kiangsi border area the year before last and
the one we set up in western Fukien last year [9] were
the product of this policy of concentrating our troops. This is a general
principle. But are there not times when our forces should be divided up?
Yes, there are. The letter from the Front Committee to the Central Committee
says of guerrilla tactics for the Red Army, including the division of forces
within a short radius:

The tactics we have derived from the struggle of the past three years are
indeed different from any other tactics, ancient or modern, Chinese or foreign.
With our tactics, the masses can be aroused for struggle on an ever-broadening
scale, and no enemy, however powerful, can cope with us. Ours are guerrilla
tactics. They consist mainly of the following points:

"Divide our forces to arouse the masses, concentrate our forces to deal with
the enemy."

"The enemy advances, we retreat; the enemy camps, we harass; the enemy tires,
we attack; the enemy retreats, we pursue."

"To extend stable base areas, [10] employ the policy
of advancing in waves; when pursued by a powerful enemy, employ the policy
of circling around."

"Arouse the largest numbers of the masses in the shortest possible time and
by the best possible methods."

These tactics are just like casting a net; at any moment we should be able
to cast it or draw it in. We cast it wide to win over the masses and draw
it in to deal with the enemy. Such are the tactics we have used for the past
three years.

Here, "to cast the net wide" means to divide our forces within a short radius.
For example, when we first captured the county town of Yunghsin in the
Hunan-Kiangsi border area, we divided the forces of the 29th and 31st Regiments
within the boundaries of Yunghsin County. Again, when we captured Yunghsin
for the third time, we once more divided our forces by dispatching the 28th
Regiment to the border of Anfu County, the 29th to Lienhua, and the 31st
to the border of Kian County. And, again, we divided our forces in the counties
of southern Kiangsi last April and May, and in the counties of western Fukien
last July. As to dividing our forces over a wide radius, it is possible only
on the two conditions that circumstances are comparatively favourable and
the leading bodies fairly strong. For the purpose of dividing up our forces
is to put us in a better position for winning over the masses, for deepening
the agrarian revolution and establishing political power, and for expanding
the Red Army and the local armed units. It is better not to divide our forces
when this purpose cannot be attained or the division of our forces would
lead to defeat and to the weakening of the Red Army, as happened in August
two years ago when our forces were divided on the Hunan-Kiangsi border for
an attack on Chenchou. But there is no doubt that, given the two above-mentioned
conditions, we should divide our forces, because division is then more
advantageous than concentration. The Central Committee's February letter
was not in the right spirit and had a bad effect on a number of Party comrades
in the Fourth Army. At that time the Central Committee also issued a circular
stating that war would not necessarily break out between Chiang Kai-shek
and the Kwangsi warlords. Since then, however, the appraisals and directives
of the Central Committee have in the main been correct. It has already issued
another circular correcting the one containing the wrong appraisal. Although
it has not made any correction of the letter to the Red Army, its subsequent
directives have not been couched in the same pessimistic tone and its views
on the Red Army's operations now coincide with ours. Yet the bad effect which
this letter had on some comrades persists. Therefore, I feel that it is still
necessary to give some explanation.

The plan to take Kiangsi Province within a year was also proposed last April
by the Front Committee to the Central Committee, and a decision to that effect
was later made at Yutu. The following reasons were given in the letter to
the Central Committee:

The armies of Chiang Kai-shek and the Kwangsi warlords are
approaching each other in the vicinity of Kiukiang, and a big battle
is imminent. The resumption of mass struggle, coupled with the spread of
contradictions among the ruling reactionaries, makes it probable that there
will soon be a high tide of revolution. As for how our work should be arranged
under these circumstances, we feel that, so far as the southern provinces
are concerned, the armed forces of the compradors and landlords in Kwangtung
and Hunan Provinces are too strong, and that in Hunan, more over, we have
lost almost all our mass following, inside as well as outside the Party,
because of the Party's putschist mistakes. In the three provinces of Fukien,
Kiangsi and Chekiang, however, the situation is different. First, militarily
the enemy is weakest there. In Chekiang, there is only a small provincial
force under Chiang Po-cheng. [11] In Fukien, although
there are five groups of enemy troops totalling fourteen regiments in all,
Kuo Fengming's troops have already been smashed; the troops under Chen Kuo-hui
and Lu Hsing-pang [12] are bandits of small fighting
capacity; the two brigades of marines stationed along the coast have never
seen action and their fighting capacity is undoubtedly not high; Chang Chen
[13] alone can put up some sort of a fight, but, according
to an analysis made by the Fukien Provincial Committee, even he has only
two relatively strong regiments. In addition, Fukien is now in a state of
complete chaos, confusion and disunity. In Kiangsi, there are sixteen regiments
under the two commands of Chu Pei-teh [14] and Hsiung
Shih-hui; [15] they are stronger than the armed forces
of either Fukien or Chekiang, but far inferior to those of Hunan. Secondly,
fewer putschist mistakes have been made in these three provinces. We are
not clear about the situation in Chekiang, but the Party's organizational
and mass base is somewhat better in Kiangsi and Fukien than in Hunan. Take
Kiangsi for example. In northern Kiangsi we still have some basis in Tehan,
Hsiushui and Tungku; in western Kiangsi the Party and the Red Guards still
have some strength in Ningkang, Yunghsin, Lienhua and Suichuan; in southern
Kiangsi the prospects are still brighter, as the 2nd and 4th Regiments of`
the Red Army are steadily growing in strength in the counties of Kian, Yungfeng
and Hsingkuo; and what is more, the Red Army under Fang Chih-min has by no
means been wiped out. All this places us in a position to close in on Nanchang.
We hereby recommend to the Central Committee that during the period of prolonged
warfare among the Kuomintang warlords, we should contend with Chiang Kai-shek
and the Kwangsi clique for Kiangsi Province and also for western Fukien and
western Chekiang. In these three provinces we should enlarge the Red Army
and create an independent regime of the masses, with a time limit of one
year for accomplishing this plan.

This proposal to contend for Kiangsi erred only in setting a time limit of
one year. It was based not only on conditions within the province itself,
but also on the prospect that a nation-wide high tide of revolution would
soon arise. For unless we had been convinced that there would soon be a high
tide of revolution, we could not possibly have concluded that we could take
Kiangsi in a year. The only weakness in the proposal was that it set a time
limit of one year, which it should not have done, and so gave a flavour of
impetuosity to the word "soon" in the statement, "there will soon be a high
tide of revolution". As to the subjective and objective conditions in Kiangsi,
they well deserve our attention. Besides the subjective conditions described
in the letter to the Central Committee, three objective conditions can now
be clearly pointed out. First, the economy of Kiangsi is mainly feudal, the
merchant-capitalist class is relatively weak, and the armed forces of the
landlords are weaker than in any other southern province. Secondly, Kiangsi
has no provincial troops of its own and has always been garrisoned by troops
from other provinces. Sent there for the "suppression of Communists" or
"suppression of bandits", these troops are unfamiliar with local conditions,
their interests are much less directly involved than if they were local troops,
and they usually lack enthusiasm. And thirdly, unlike Kwangtung which is
close to Hongkong and under British control in almost every respect, Kiangsi
is comparatively remote from imperialist influence. Once we have grasped
these three points, we can understand why rural uprisings are more widespread
and the Red Army and guerrilla units more numerous in Kiangsi than in any
other province.

How then should we interpret the word "soon" in the statement, "there will
soon be a high tide of revolution"? This is a common question among comrades.
Marxists are not fortune-tellers. They should, and indeed can, only indicate
the general direction of future developments and changes; they should not
and cannot fix the day and the hour in a mechanistic way. But when I say
that there will soon be a high tide of revolution in China, I am emphatically
not speaking of something which in the words of some people "is possibly
coming", something illusory, unattainable and devoid of significance for
action. It is like a ship far out at sea whose mast-head can already be seen
from the shore; it is like the morning sun in the east whose shimmering rays
are visible from a high mountain top; it is like a child about to be born
moving restlessly in its mother's womb.
 NOTES
1. Comrade Fang Chih-min, a native of Yiyang, Kiangsi Province,
and a member of the Sixth Central Committee of the Communist Party of China,
was the founder of the Red area in northeastern Kiangsi and of the Tenth
Red Army. In 1934 he led the vanguard detachment of the Red Army in marching
north to resist the Japanese invaders. In January 1935 he was captured in
battle against the counter-revolutionary Kuomintang troops and in July he
died a martyr's death in Nanchang, Kiangsi.
2. The subjective forces of the revolution mean the organized
forces of the revolution.
3. Lu Ti-ping, a Kuomintang warlord, was the Kuomintang
governor of Hunan Province in 1928.
4. The war of March-April 1929 between Chiang Kai-shek,
the Kuomintang warlord in Nanking, and Li Tsung-jen and Pai Chung-hsi, the
Kuomintang warlords in Kwangsi Province.
5. The third invasion of the Red Army's base area on the
Chingkang Mountains by the Kuomintang warlords in Hunan and Kiangsi lasting
from the cad of 1928 to the beginning of 1929.
6. The quotation is from Mencius, who compared a tyrant
who drove his people into seeking a benevolent ruler to the otter which "drives
the fish into deep waters".
7. The Sixth National Congress of the Communist Party of
China was held in July 1928. It pointed out that after the defeat in 1927,
China's revolution remained bourgeois-democratic in nature, i.e.,
anti-imperialist and anti-feudal, and that since the inevitable new high
tide in the revolution was not yet imminent, the general line for the revolution
should be to win over the masses. The Sixth Congress liquidated the 1927
Right capitulationism of Chen Tu-hsiu and also repudiated the "Left" putschism
which occurred in the Party at the end of 1927 and the beginning of 1928.
8. The statement in brackets has been added by the author.
9. The regime set up in western Fukien came into bang in 1929, when the Red
Army in the Chingkang Mountains sallied eastward to build a new revolutionary
base area and established the people's revolutionary political power in the
counties of Lungyen, Yungting and Shanghang in the western part of that province.
10. Stable base areas were the relatively stable revolutionary
base areas established by the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army.
11. Chiang Po-cheng was then the commander of the Kuomintang
peace preservation corps in Chekiang Province.
12. Chen Kuo-hui and Lu Hsing-pang were two notorious
Fukien bandits whose forces had been incorporated into the Kuomintang army.
13. Chang Chen was a divisional commander of the Kuomintang
army.
14. Chu Pei-the, a Kuomintang warlord, was then the Kuomintang
governor of Kiangsi Province.
15. Hsiung Shih-hui was then a divisional commander of
the Kuomintang army in Kiangsi Province.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Problems of Strategy in China's Revolutionary War









PROBLEMS OF STRATEGY IN CHINA'S REVOLUTIONARY WAR



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung
PROBLEMS OF STRATEGY IN CHINA'S REVOLUTIONARY WAR


December 1936


[Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrote this work to sum up the experience of the Second
Revolutionary Civil War and used it for his lectures at the Red Army College
in northern Shensi. Only five chapters were completed. The chapters on the
strategic offensive, political work and other problems were left undone because
he was too busy in consequence of the Sian Incident. This work, a result
of a major inner-Party controversy on military questions during the Second
Revolutionary Civil War, gives expression to one line in military affairs
as against another. The enlarged meeting of the Political Bureau of the Central
Committee held at Tsunyi in January 1935 settled the controversy about the
military line, reaffirmed Comrade Mao Tse-tung's views and repudiated the
erroneous line. In October 1935 the Central Committee moved to northern Shensi,
and in December Comrade Mao Tse-tung made a report "On Tactics Against Japanese
Imperialism" in which problems concerning the political line of the Party
in the Second Revolutionary Civil War were systematically solved. He wrote
this work a year later, in 1936, to explain the problems of strategy in China's
revolutionary war in a systematic way.]


CHAPTER I.
HOW TO STUDY WAR
1. THE LAWS OF WAR ARE DEVELOPMENTAL


The laws of war are a problem which anyone directing a war must study
and solve.

The laws of revolutionary war are a problem which anyone directing
a revolutionary war must study and solve.

The laws of China's revolutionary war are a problem which anyone directing
China's revolutionary war must study and solve.

We are now engaged in a war; our war is a revolutionary war; and our
revolutionary war is being waged in this semi-colonial and semi-feudal country
of China. Therefore, we must study not only the laws of war in general, but
the specific laws of revolutionary war, and the even more specific laws of
revolutionary war in China.

It is well known that when you do anything, unless you understand its actual
circumstances, its nature and its relations to other things, you will not
know the laws governing it, or know how to do it, or be able to do it well.

War is the highest form of struggle for resolving contradictions,
when they have developed to a certain stage, between classes, nations, states,
or political groups, and it has existed ever since the emergence of private
property and of classes. Unless you understand the actual circumstances of
war, its nature and its relations to other things, you will not know the
laws of war, or know how to direct war, or be able to win victory.

Revolutionary war, whether a revolutionary class war or a revolutionary
national war, has its own specific circumstances and nature, in addition
to the circumstances and nature of war in general. Therefore, besides the
general laws of war, it has specific laws of its own. Unless you understand
its specific circumstances and nature, unless you understand its specific
laws, you will not be able to direct a revolutionary war and wage it
successfully.

China's revolutionary war, whether civil war or national war, is waged
in the specific environment of China and so has its own specific circumstances
and nature distinguishing it both from war in general and from revolutionary
war in general. Therefore, besides the laws of war in general and of
revolutionary war in general, it has specific laws of its own. Unless you
understand them, you will not be able to win in China's revolutionary war.

Therefore, we must study the laws of war in general, we must also study the
laws of revolutionary war, and, finally, we must study the laws of China's
revolutionary war.

Some people hold a wrong view, which we refuted long ago. They say that it
is enough merely to study the laws of war in general, or, to put it more
concretely, that it is enough merely to follow the military manuals published
by the reactionary Chinese government or the reactionary military academies
in China. They do not see that these manuals give merely the laws of war
in general and moreover are wholly copied from abroad, and that if we copy
and apply them exactly without the slightest change in form or content, we
shall be "cutting the feet to fit the shoes" and be defeated. Their argument
is: why should knowledge which has been acquired at the cost of blood be
of no use? They fail to see that although we must cherish the earlier experience
thus acquired, we must also cherish experience acquired at the cost of our
own blood.

Others hold a second wrong view, which we also refuted long ago. They say
that it is enough merely to study the experience of revolutionary war in
Russia, or, to put it more concretely, that it is enough merely to follow
the laws by which the civil war in the Soviet Union was directed and the
military manuals published by Soviet military organizations. They do not
see that these laws and manuals embody the specific characteristics of the
civil war and the Red Army in the Soviet Union, and that if we copy and apply
them without allowing any change, we shall also be "cutting the feet to fit
the shoes" and be defeated. Their argument is: since our war, like the war
in the Soviet Union, is a revolutionary war, and since the Soviet Union won
victory, how then can there be any alternative but to follow the Soviet example?
They fail to see that while we should set special store by the war experience
of the Soviet Union, because it is the most recent experience of revolutionary
war and was acquired under the guidance of Lenin and Stalin, we should likewise
cherish the experience of China's revolutionary war, because there are many
factors that are specific to the Chinese revolution and the Chinese Red Army.

Still others hold a third wrong view, which we likewise refuted long ago.
They say that the most valuable experience is that of the Northern Expedition
of 1926-27 and that we must learn from it, or, to put it more concretely,
that we must imitate the Northern Expedition in driving straight ahead to
seize the big cities. They fail to see that while the experience of the Northern
Expedition should be studied, it should not be copied and applied mechanically,
because the circumstances of our present war are different. We should take
from the Northern Expedition only what still applies today, and work out
something of our own in the light of present conditions.

Thus the different laws for directing different wars are determined by the
different circumstances of those wars--differences in their time, place and
nature. As regards the time factor, both war and its laws develop; each
historical stage has its special characteristics, and hence the laws of war
in each historical stage have their special characteristics and cannot be
mechanically applied in another stage. As for the nature of war, since
revolutionary war and counterrevolutionary war both have their special
characteristics, the laws governing them also have their own characteristics,
and those applying to one cannot be mechanically transferred to the other.
As for the factor of place, since each country or nation, especially a large
country or nation, has its own characteristics, the laws of war for each
country or nation also have their own characteristics, and here, too, those
applying to one cannot be mechanically transferred to the other. In studying
the laws for directing wars that occur at different historical stages, that
differ in nature and that are waged in different places and by different
nations, we must fix our attention on the characteristics and development
of each, and must oppose a mechanical approach to the problem of war.

Nor is this all. It signifies progress and development in a commander who
is initially capable of commanding only a small formation, if he becomes
capable of commanding a big one. There is also a difference between operating
in one locality and in many. It likewise signifies progress and development
in a commander who is initially capable of operating only in a locality he
knows well, if he becomes capable of operating in many other localities.
Owing to technical, tactical and strategic developments on the enemy side
and on our own, the circumstances also differ from stage to stage within
a given war. It signifies still more progress and development in a commander
who is capable of exercising command in a war at its lower stages, if he
becomes capable of exercising command in its higher stages. A commander who
remains capable of commanding only a formation of a certain size, only in
a certain locality and at a certain stage in the development of a war shows
that he has made no progress and has not developed. There are some people
who, contented with a single skill or a peep-hole view, never make any progress,
they may play some role in the revolution at a given place and time, but
not a significant one. We need directors of war who can play a significant
role. All the laws for directing war develop as history develops and as war
develops; nothing is changeless.

2. THE AIM OF WAR IS TO ELIMINATE WAR

War, this monster of mutual slaughter among men, will be finally eliminated
by the progress of human society, and in the not too distant future too.
But there is only one way to eliminate it and that is to oppose war with
war, to oppose counter-revolutionary war with revolutionary war, to oppose
national counter-revolutionary war with national revolutionary war, and to
oppose counter-revolutionary class war with revolutionary class war. History
knows only two kinds of war, just and unjust. We support just wars and oppose
unjust wars. All counter-revolutionary wars are unjust, all revolutionary
wars are just. Mankind's era of wars will be brought to an end by our own
efforts, and beyond doubt the war we wage is part of the final battle. But
also beyond doubt the war we face will be part of the biggest and most ruthless
of all wars. The biggest and most ruthless of unjust counter-revolutionary
wars is hanging over us, and the vast majority of mankind will be ravaged
unless we raise the banner of a just war. The banner of mankind's just war
is the banner of mankind's salvation. The banner of China's just war is the
banner of China's salvation. A war waged by the great majority of mankind
and of the Chinese people is beyond doubt a just war, a most lofty and glorious
undertaking for the salvation of mankind and China, and a bridge to a new
era in world history. When human society advances to the point where classes
and states are eliminated, there will be no more wars, counter-revolutionary
or revolutionary, unjust or just; that will be the era of perpetual peace
for mankind. Our study of the laws of revolutionary war springs from the
desire to eliminate all wars; herein lies the distinction between us Communists
and all the exploiting classes.
3. STRATEGY IS THE STUDY OF THE LAWS OF A WAR SITUATION AS A WHOLE

Wherever there is war, there is a war situation as a whole. The war situation
as a whole may cover the entire world, may cover an entire country, or may
cover an independent guerrilla zone or an independent major operational front.
Any war situation which acquires a comprehensive consideration of its various
aspects and stages forms a war situation as a whole.

The task of the science of strategy is to study those laws for directing
a war that govern a war situation as a whole. The task of the science of
campaigns and the science of tactics [1] is to study those
laws for directing a war that govern a partial situation.

Why is it necessary for the commander of a campaign or a tactical operation
to understand the laws of strategy to some degree? Because an understanding
of the whole facilitates the handling of the part, and because the part is
subordinate to the whole. The view that strategic victory is determined by
tactical successes alone is wrong because it overlooks the fact that victory
or defeat in a war is first and foremost a question of whether the situation
as a whole and its various stages are properly taken into account. If there
are serious defects or mistakes in taking the situation as a whole and its
various stages into account, the war is sure to be lost. "One careless move
loses the whole game" refers to a move affecting the situation as a whole,
a move decisive for the whole situation, and not to a move of a partial nature,
a move which is not decisive for the whole situation. As in chess, so in
war.

But the situation as a whole cannot be detached from its parts and become
independent of them, for it is made up of all its parts. Sometimes certain
parts may suffer destruction or defeat without seriously affecting the situation
as a whole, because they are not decisive for it. Some defeats or failures
in tactical operations or campaigns do not lead to deterioration in the war
situation as a whole, because they are not of decisive significance. But
the loss of most of the campaigns making up the war situation as a whole,
or of one or two decisive campaigns, immediately changes the whole situation.
Here, "most of the campaigns" or "one or two campaigns" are decisive. In
the history of war, there are instances where defeat in a single battle nullified
all the advantages of a series of victories, and there are also instances
where victory in a single battle after many defeats opened up a new situation.
In those instances the "series of victories" and the "many defeats" were
partial in nature and not decisive for the situation as a whole, while "defeat
in a single battle" or "victory in a single battle" played the decisive role.
All this explains the importance of taking into account the situation as
a whole. What is most important for the person in over-all command is to
concentrate on attending to the war situation as a whole. The main point
is that, according to the circumstances, he should concern himself with the
problems of the grouping of his military units and formations, the relations
between campaigns, the relations between various operational stages, and
the relations between our activities as a whole and the enemy's activities
as a whole--all these problems demand his greatest care and effort, and if
he ignores them and immerses himself in secondary problems, he can hardly
avoid setbacks.

The relationship between the whole and the part holds not only for the
relationship between strategy and campaign but also for that between
campaign and tactics. Examples are to be found in the relation between
the operations of a division and those of its regiments and battalions, and
in the relation between the operations of a company and those of its platoons
and squads. The commanding officer at any level should centre his attention
on the most important and decisive problem or action in the whole situation
he is handling, and not on other problems or actions.

What is important or decisive should be determined not by general or abstract
considerations, but according to the concrete circumstances. In a military
operation the direction and point of assault should be selected according
to the actual situation of the enemy, the terrain, and the strength of our
own forces at the moment. One must see to it that the soldiers do not overeat
when supplies are abundant, and take care that they do not go hungry when
supplies are short. In the White areas the mere leakage of a piece of information
may cause defeat in a subsequent engagement, but in the Red areas such leakage
is often not a very serious matter. It is necessary for the high commanders
to participate personally in certain battles but not in others. For a military
school, the most important question is the selection of a director and
instructors and the adoption of a training programme. For a mass meeting,
the main thing is mobilizing the masses to attend and putting forward suitable
slogans. And so on and so forth. In a word, the principle is to centre our
attention on the important links that have a bearing on the situation as
a whole.

The only way to study the laws governing a war situation as a whole is to
do some hard thinking. For what pertains to the situation as a whole is not
visible to the eye, and we can understand it only by hard thinking; there
is no other way. But because the situation as a whole is made up of parts,
people with experience of the parts, experience of campaigns and tactics,
can understand matters of a higher order provided they are willing to think
hard. The problems of strategy include the following:

Giving proper consideration to the relation between the enemy and ourselves.

Giving proper consideration to the relation between various campaigns or
between various operational stages.

Giving proper consideration to those parts which have a bearing on (are decisive
for) the situation as a whole.

Giving proper consideration to the special features contained in the general
situation.

Giving proper consideration to the relation between the front and the rear.

Giving proper consideration to the distinction as well as the connection
between losses and replacements, between fighting and resting, between
concentration and dispersion, between attack and defence, between advance
and retreat, between concealment and exposure, between the main attack and
supplementary attacks, between assault and containing action, between centralized
command and decentralized command, between protracted war and war of quick
decision, between positional war and mobile war, between our own forces and
friendly forces, between one military arm and another, between higher and
lower levels, between cadres and the rank and file, between old and new soldiers,
between senior and junior cadres, between old and new cadres, between Red
areas and White areas, between old Red areas and new ones, between the central
district and the borders of a given base area, between the warm season and
the cold season, between victory and defeat, between large and small troop
formations, between the regular army and the guerrilla forces, between destroying
the enemy and winning over the masses, between expanding the Red Army and
consolidating it, between military work and political work, between past
and present tasks, between present and future tasks, between tasks arising
from one set of circumstances and tasks arising from another, between fixed
fronts and fluid fronts, between civil war and national war, between one
historical stage and another, etc., etc.


None of these problems of strategy is visible to the eye, and yet, if we
think hard, we can comprehend, grasp and master them all, that is, we can
raise the important problems concerning a war or concerning military operations
to the higher plane of principle and solve them. Our task in studying the
problems of strategy is to attain this goal.

 4. THE IMPORTANT THING IS TO BE GOOD AT LEARNING

Why have we organized the Red Army? For the purpose of defeating the enemy.
Why do we study the laws of war? For the purpose of applying them in war.

To learn is no easy matter and to apply what one has learned is even harder.
Many people appear impressive when discoursing on military science in classrooms
or in books, but when it comes to actual fighting, some win battles and others
lose them. Both the history of war and our own experience in war have proved
this point.

Where then does the crux lie?

In real life, we cannot ask for "ever-victorious generals", who are few and
far between in history. What we can ask for is generals who are brave and
sagacious and who normally win their battles in the course of a war, generals
who combine wisdom with courage. To become both wise and courageous one must
acquire a method, a method to be employed in learning as well as in applying
what has been learned.

What method? The method is to familiarize ourselves with all aspects of the
enemy situation and our own, to discover the laws governing the actions of
both sides and to make use of these laws in our own operations.

The military manuals issued in many countries point both to the necessity
of a "flexible application of principles according to circumstances" and
to the measures to be taken in case of defeat. They point to the former in
order to warn a commander against subjectively committing mistakes through
too rigid an application of principles, and to the latter in order to enable
him to cope with the situation after he has committed subjective mistakes
or after unexpected and irresistible changes have occurred in the objective
circumstances.

Why are subjective mistakes made? Because the way the forces in a war or
a battle are disposed or directed does not fit the conditions of the given
time and place, because subjective direction does not correspond to, or is
at variance with, the objective conditions, in other words, because the
contradiction between the subjective and the objective has not been resolved.
People can hardly avoid such situations whatever they are doing, but some
people prove themselves more competent than others. As in any job we demand
a comparatively high degree of competence, so in war we demand more victories
or, conversely, fewer defeats. Here the crux is to bring the subjective and
the objective into proper correspondence with each other.

Take an example in tactics. If the point chosen for attack is on one of the
enemy's flanks and it is located precisely where his weak
spot happens to be, and in consequence the assault succeeds, then the subjective
corresponds with the objective, that is, the commander's reconnaissance,
judgement and decision have corresponded with the enemy's actual situation
and dispositions. If the point chosen for attack is on another flank or in
the centre and the attack hits a snag and makes no headway, then such
correspondence is lacking. If the attack is properly timed, if the
reserves are used neither too late nor too early, and if all the other
dispositions and operations in the battle are such as to favour us and not
the enemy, then the subjective direction throughout the battle completely
corresponds with the objective situation. Such complete correspondence is
extremely rare in a war or a battle, in which the belligerents are groups
of live human beings bearing arms and keeping their secrets from each other;
this is quite unlike handling inanimate objects or routine matters. But if
the direction given by the commander corresponds in the main with the actual
situation, that is, if the decisive elements in the direction correspond
with the actual situation, then there is a basis for victory.

A commander's correct dispositions stem from his correct decisions, his correct
decisions stem from his correct judgements, and his correct judgements stem
from a thorough and necessary reconnaissance and from pondering on and piecing
together the data of various kinds gathered through reconnaissance. He applies
all possible and necessary methods of reconnaissance, and ponders on the
information gathered about the enemy's situation, discarding the dross and
selecting the essential, eliminating the false and retaining the true, proceeding
from the one to the other and from the outside to the inside; then, he takes
the conditions on his own side into account, and makes a study of both sides
and their interrelations, thereby forming his judgements, making up his mind
and working out his plans. Such is the complete process of knowing a situation
which a military man goes through before he formulates a strategic plan,
a campaign plan or a battle plan. But instead of doing this, a careless military
man bases his military plans on his own wishful thinking, and hence his plans
are fanciful and do not correspond with reality. A rash military man relying
solely upon enthusiasm is bound to be tricked by the enemy, or lured on by
some superficial or partial aspect of the enemy's situation, or swayed by
irresponsible suggestions from subordinates that are not based on real knowledge
or deep insight, and so he runs his head against a brick wall, because he
does not know or does not want to know that every military plan must be based
on the necessary reconnaissance and on careful consideration of the enemy's
situation, his own situation, and their interrelations.

The process of knowing a situation goes on not only before the formulation
of a military plan but also after. In carrying out the plan from the moment
it is put into effect to the end of the operation, there is another process
of knowing the situation, namely, the process of practice. In the course
of this process, it is necessary to examine anew whether the plan worked
out in the preceding process corresponds with reality. If it does not correspond
with reality, or if it does not fully do so, then in the light of our new
knowledge, it becomes necessary to form new judgements, make new decisions
and change the original plan so as to meet the new situation. The plan is
partially changed in almost every operation, and sometimes it is even changed
completely. A rash man who does not understand the need for such alterations
or is unwilling to make them, but who acts blindly, will inevitably run his
head against a brick wall.

The above applies to a strategic action, a campaign or a battle. Provided
he is modest and willing to learn, an experienced military man will be able
to familiarize himself with the character of his own forces (commanders,
men, arms, supplies, etc., and their sum total), with the character of the
enemy forces (likewise, commanders, men, arms, supplies, etc., and their
sum total) and with all other conditions related to the war, such as politics,
economics, geography and weather; such a military man will have a better
grasp in directing a war or an operation and will be more likely to win
victories. He will achieve this because, over a long period of time, he has
come to know the situation on the enemy side and his own, discovered the
laws of action, and resolved the contradictions between the subjective and
the objective. This process of knowing is extremely important; without such
a long period of experience, it would be difficult to understand and grasp
the laws of an entire war. Neither a beginner nor a person who fights only
on paper can become a really able high-ranking commander; only one who has
learned through actual fighting in war can do so.

All military laws and military theories which are in the nature of principles
are the experience of past wars summed up by people in former days or in
our own times. We should seriously study these lessons, paid for in blood,
which are a heritage of past wars. That is one point. But there is another.
We should put these conclusions to the test of our own experience, assimilating
what is useful, rejecting what is useless, and adding what is specifically
our own. The latter is very important, for otherwise we cannot direct a war.

Reading is learning, but applying is also learning and the more important
kind of learning at that. Our chief method is to learn warfare through warfare.
A person who has had no opportunity to go to school can also learn warfare--he
can learn through fighting in war. A revolutionary war is a mass undertaking,
it is often n a matter of first learning and then doing, but of doing and
the learning, for doing is itself learning. There is a gap between the ordinary
civilian and the soldier, but it is no Great Wall, and it can be quickly
closed, and the way to close it is to take part in revolution in war. By
saying that it is not easy to learn and to apply, we mean that It Is hard
to learn thoroughly and to apply skillfully. By saying that civilians can
very quickly become soldiers, we mean that it is not difficult to cross the
threshold. To put the two statements together we may cite the Chinese adage,
"Nothing in the world is difficult for one who sets his mind to it." To cross
the threshold is not difficult and mastery, too, is possible provided one
sets one's mind to the task and is good at learning.

The laws of war, like the laws governing all other things, are reflections
in our minds of objective realities; everything outside of the mind is objective
reality. Consequently what has to be learned and known includes the state
of affairs on the enemy side and that on our side, both of which should be
regarded as the object of study, while the mind (the capacity to think) alone
is the subject performing the study. Some people are good at knowing themselves
and poor at knowing their enemy, and some are the other way round, neither
can solve the problem of learning and applying the laws of war. There is
a saying in the book of Sun Wu Tzu, the great military scientist of ancient
China, "Know the enemy and know yourself, and you can fight a hundred battles
with no danger of defeat", [2] which refers both to the
stage of learning and to the stage of application, both to knowing the laws
of the development of objective reality and to deciding on our own action
in accordance with these laws in order to overcome the enemy facing us. We
should not take this saying lightly.

War is the highest form of struggle between nations, states, classes, or
political groups, and all the laws of war are applied by warring nations,
states, classes, or political groups for the purpose of achieving victory
for themselves. Unquestionably, victory or defeat in war is determined mainly
by the military, political, economic and natural conditions on both sides.
But not by these alone. It is also determined by each side's subjective ability
in directing the war. In his endeavour to win a war, a military man cannot
overstep the limitations imposed by the material conditions; within these
limitations, however, he can and must strive for victory. The stage of action
for a military man is built upon objective material conditions, but on that
stage he i can direct the performance of many a drama, full of sound and
colour, power and grandeur. Therefore, given the objective material foundations,
i.e., the military, political, economic and natural conditions, our Red Army
commanders must display their prowess and marshal all their forces to crush
the national and class enemies and to transform this evil world. Here is
where our subjective ability in directing war can and must be exercised.
We do not permit any of our Red Army commanders to become a blundering hothead;
we decidedly want every Red Army commander to become a hero who is both brave
and sagacious, who possesses both all-conquering courage and the ability
to remain master of the situation throughout the changes and vicissitudes
of the entire war. Swimming in the ocean of war, he not only must not flounder
but must make sure of reaching the opposite shore with measured strokes.
The laws for directing war constitute the art of swimming in the ocean of
war.

So much for our methods.
CHAPTER II.
THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY AND CHINA'S REVOLUTIONARY WAR

China's revolutionary war, which began in 1924, has passed through two stages,
the first from 1924 to 1927, and the second from 1927 to 1936; the stage
of national revolutionary war against Japan will now commence. In all three
of its stages this revolutionary war has been, is and will be fought under
the leadership of the Chinese proletariat and its party, the Chinese Communist
Party. The chief enemies in China's revolutionary war are imperialism and
the feudal forces. Although the Chinese bourgeoisie may take part in the
revolutionary war at certain historical junctures, yet its selfishness and
lack of political and economic independence render it both unwilling and
unable to lead China's revolutionary war on to the road of complete victory.
The masses of China's peasantry and urban petty bourgeoisie wish to take
an active part in the revolutionary war and to carry it to complete victory.
They are the main forces in the revolutionary war, but, being small-scale
producers, they are limited in their political outlook (and some of the
unemployed masses have anarchist views), so that they are unable to give
correct leadership in the war. Therefore, in an era when the proletariat
has already appeared on the political stage, the responsibility for leading
China's revolutionary war inevitably falls on the shoulders of the Chinese
Communist Party. In this era, any revolutionary war will definitely end in
defeat if it lacks, or runs counter to, the leadership of the proletariat
and the Communist Party. Of all the social strata and political groupings
in semi-colonial China, the proletariat and the Communist Party are the ones
most free from narrow-mindedness and selfishness, are politically the most
far-sighted, the best organized and the readiest to learn with an open mind
from the experience of the vanguard class, the proletariat, and its political
party throughout the world and to make use of this experience in their own
cause Hence only the proletariat and the Communist Party can lead the peasantry,
the urban petty bourgeoisie and bourgeoisie, can overcome the narrow-mindedness
of the peasants and the petty bourgeoisie, the destructiveness of the unemployed
masses, and also (provided the Communist Party does not err in its policy)
the vacillation and lack of thoroughness of the bourgeoisie can lead the
revolution and the war on to the road of victory.

The revolutionary war of 1924-27 was waged, basically speaking, in conditions
in which the international proletariat and the Chinese proletariat and its
party exerted political influence on the Chinese national bourgeoisie and
its parties and entered into political cooperation with them. However, this
revolutionary war failed at the critical juncture, first of all because the
big bourgeoisie turned traitor, and at the same time because the opportunists
within the revolutionary ranks voluntarily surrendered the leadership of
the revolution.

The Agrarian Revolutionary War, lasting from 1927 to the present, has been
waged under new conditions. The enemy in this war is not imperialism alone
but also the alliance of the big bourgeoisie and the big landlords. And the
national bourgeoisie has become a tail to the big bourgeoisie. This revolutionary
war is led by the Communist Party alone, which has established absolute
leadership over it. This absolute leadership is the most important condition
enabling the revolutionary war to be carried through firmly to the end. Without
it, it is inconceivable that the revolutionary war could have been carried
on with such perseverance.

The Chinese Communist Party has led China's revolutionary war courageously
and resolutely, and for fifteen long years [3] has
demonstrated to the whole nation that it is the people's friend, fighting
at all times in the forefront of the revolutionary war in defence of the
people's interests and for their freedom and liberation.

By its arduous struggles and by the martyrdom of hundreds of thousands of
its heroic members and tens of thousands of its heroic cadres, the Communist
Party of China has played a great educative role among hundreds of millions
of people throughout the country. The Party's great historic achievements
in its revolutionary struggles have provided the prerequisite for the survival
and salvation of China at this critical juncture when she is being invaded
by a national enemy; and this prerequisite is the existence of a political
leadership enjoying the confidence of the vast majority of the people and
chosen by them after long years of testing. Today, the people accept what
the Communist Party says more readily than what any other political party
says. Were it not for the arduous struggles of the Chinese Communist Party
in the last fifteen years, it would be impossible to save China in the face
of the new menace of subjugation.

Besides the errors of the Right opportunism of Chen Tu-hsiu
[4] and the "Left" opportunism of Li Li-san,
[5] the Chinese Communist Party has committed two other
errors in the course of the revolutionary war. The first error was the "Left"
opportunism of 1931-34 [6] which resulted in serious losses
in the Agrarian Revolutionary War so that, instead of our defeating the enemy's
fifth campaign of "encirclement and suppression", we lost our base areas
and the Red Army was weakened. This error was corrected at the enlarged meeting
of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee at Tsunyi in January 1935.
The second was the Right opportunism of Chang Kuo-tao in 1935-36
[7] which grew to such an extent that it undermined the
discipline of the Party and of the Red Army and caused serious losses to
part of the Red Army's main forces. But this error was also finally rectified,
thanks to the correct leadership of the Central Committee and the political
consciousness of Party members, commanders and fighters in the Red Army.
Of course all these errors were harmful to our Party, to our revolution and
the war, but in the end we overcame them, and in doing so our Party and our
Red Army have steeled themselves and become still stronger.

The Chinese Communist Party has led and continues to lead the stirring,
magnificent and victorious revolutionary war. This war is not only the banner
of China's liberation, but has international revolutionary significance as
well. The eyes of the revolutionary people the world over are upon us. In
the new stage, the stage of the anti-Japanese national revolutionary war,
we shall lead the Chinese revolution to It's completion and exert a profound
influence on the revolution in the East and in the whole world. Our revolutionary
war has proved that we need a correct Marxist military line as well as a
correct Marxist political line. Fifteen years of revolution and war have
hammered out such political and military lines. We believe that from now
on, in the new stage of the war, these lines will be further developed, filled
out and enriched in new circumstances, so that we can attain our aim of defeating
the national enemy. History tells us that correct political and military
lines do not emerge and develop spontaneously and tranquilly, but only in
the course of struggle. These lines must combat left opportunism on the one
hand and Right opportunism on the other. Without combating and thoroughly
overcoming these harmful tendencies which damage the revolution and the
revolutionary war, it would be impossible to establish a correct line and
win victory in this war. It is for this reason that I often refer to erroneous
views in this pamphlet.
CHAPTER III.
CHARACTERISTICS OF CHINA'S REVOLUTIONARY WAR
1. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE SUBJECT

People who do not admit, do not know, or do not want to know t at China's
revolutionary war has its own characteristics have equated the war waged
by the Red Army against the Kuomintang forces with war in general or with
the civil war in the Soviet Union. The experience of the civil war in the
Soviet Union directed by Lenin and Stalin has a world-wide significance.
All Communist Parties, including the Chinese Communist Party, regard this
experience and its theoretical summing-up by Lenin and Stalin as their guide.
But this does not mean that we should apply it mechanically to our own
conditions. In many of its aspects China's revolutionary war has characteristics
distinguishing it from the civil war in the Soviet Union. Of course it is
wrong to take no account of these characteristics or deny their existence.
This point has been fully borne out in our ten years of war.

Our enemy has made similar mistakes. He did not recognize that fighting against
the Red Army required a different strategy and different tactics from those
used in fighting other forces. Relying on his superiority in various respects,
he took us lightly and stuck to his old methods of warfare. This was the
case both before and during his fourth "encirclement and suppression" campaign
in 1933, with the result that he suffered a series of defeats. In the Kuomintang
army a new approach to the problem was suggested first by the reactionary
Kuomintang general Liu Wei-yuan and then by Tai Yueh. Their idea was eventually
accepted by Chiang Kai-shek. That was how Chiang Kai-shek's Officers' Training
Corps at Lushan [8] came into being and how the new
reactionary military principles [9] applied in the fifth
campaign of "encirclement and suppression" were evolved.

But when the enemy changed his military principles to suit operations against
the Red Army, there appeared in our ranks a group of people who reverted
to the "old ways". They urged a return to ways suited to the general run
of things, refused to go into the specific circumstances of each case, rejected
the experience gained in the Red Army's history of sanguinary battles, belittled
the strength of imperialism and the Kuomintang as well as that of the Kuomintang
army, and turned a blind eye to the new reactionary principles adopted by
the enemy. As a result, all the revolutionary bases except the Shensi-Kansu
border area were lost, the Red Army was reduced from 300,000 to a few tens
of thousands, the membership of the Chinese Communist Party fell from 300,000
to a few tens of thousands, and the Party organizations in the Kuomintang
areas were almost all destroyed. In short, we paid a severe penalty, which
was historic in its significance. This group of people called themselves
Marxist-Leninists, but actually they had not learned an iota of Marxism-Leninism.
Lenin said that the most essential thing in Marxism, the living soul of Marxism,
is the concrete analysis of concrete conditions. [10]
That was precisely the point these comrades of ours forgot.

Hence one can see that, without an understanding of the characteristics of
China's revolutionary war, it is impossible to direct it and lead it to victory.
2. WHAT ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS OF CHINA'S REVOLUTIONARY WAR?

What then are the characteristics of China's revolutionary war?

I think there are four principal ones.

The first is that China is a vast, semi-colonial country which is unevenly
developed politically and economically and which has gone through the revolution
of 1924-27.

This characteristic indicates that it is possible for China's revolutionary
war to develop and attain victory. We already pointed this out (at the First
Party Congress of the Hunan-Kiangsi Border Area)[11]
when in late 1927 and early 1928 soon after guerrilla warfare was started
in China, some comrades in the Chingkang Mountains in the Hunan-Kiangsi border
area raised the question, "How long can we keep the Red Flag flying?" For
this was a most fundamental question. Without answering this question of
whether China's revolutionary base areas and the Chinese Red Army could survive
and develop, we could not have advanced a single step. The Sixth National
Congress of the Chinese Communist Party in 1928 again gave the answer to
the question. Since then the Chinese revolutionary movement has had a correct
theoretical basis.

Let us now analyse this characteristic.

China's political and economic development is uneven--a weak capitalist economy
coexists with a preponderant semi-feudal economy; a few modern industrial
and commercial cities coexist with a vast stagnant countryside; several million
industrial workers coexist with several hundred millions of peasants and
handicraftsmen labouring under the old system; big warlords controlling the
central government coexist with small warlords controlling the provinces;
two kinds of reactionary armies, the so-called Central Army under Chiang
Kai-shek and - miscellaneous troops" under the warlords in the provinces,
exist side by side; a few railways, steamship lines and motor roads
exist side by side with a vast number of wheelbarrow paths and foot-paths
many of which are difficult to negotiate even on foot.

China is a semi-colonial country--disunity among the imperialist powers makes
for disunity among the ruling groups in China. There is a difference between
a semi-colonial country controlled by several countries and a colony controlled
by a single country.

China is a vast country--"When it is dark in the east, it is light in the
west; when things are dark in the south, there is still light in the north."
Hence one need not worry about lack of room for manoeuvre.

China has gone through a great revolution--this has provided the seeds from
which the Red Army has grown, provided the leader of the Red Army, namely,
the Chinese Communist Party, and provided the masses with experience of
participation in a revolution.

We say, therefore, that the first characteristic of China's revolutionary
war is that it is waged in a vast semi-colonial country which is unevenly
developed politically and economically and which has gone through a revolution.
This characteristic basically determines our military strategy and tactics
as well as our political strategy and tactics.

The second characteristic is that our enemy is big and powerful.

How do matters stand with the Kuomintang, the enemy of the Red Army? It is
a party that has seized political power and has more or less stabilized its
power. It has gained the support of the world's principal counter-revolutionary
states. It has remodeled its army which has thus become different from any
other army in Chinese history and on the whole similar to the armies of modern
states; this army is much better supplied with weapons and matériel
than the Red Army, and is larger than any army in Chinese history, or
for that matter than the standing army of any other country. There is a world
of difference between the Kuomintang army and the Red Army. The Kuomintang
controls the key positions or lifelines in the politics, economy, communications
and culture of China; its political power is nation-wide.

The Chinese Red Army is thus confronted with a big and powerful enemy. This
is the second characteristic of China's revolutionary war. It necessarily
makes the military operations of the Red Army different in many ways from
those of wars in general and from those of the civil war in the Soviet Union
or of the Northern Expedition.

The third characteristic is that the Red Army is small and weak. The Chinese
Red Army, starting as guerrilla units, came into being after the defeat of
the first great revolution. This occurred in a period of relative political
and economic stability in the reactionary capitalist countries of the world
as well as in a period of reaction in China.

Our political power exists in scattered and isolated mountainous or remote
regions and receives no outside help whatsoever. Economic and cultural conditions
in the revolutionary base areas are backward compared with those in the
Kuomintang areas. The revolutionary base areas embrace only rural districts
and small towns. These areas were extremely small in the beginning and have
not grown much larger since. Moreover, they are fluid and not stationary,
and the Red Army has no really consolidated bases.

The Red Army is numerically small, its arms are poor, and it has great difficulty
in obtaining supplies such as food, bedding and clothing.

This characteristic presents a sharp contrast to the preceding one. Prom
this sharp contrast have arisen the strategy and tactics of the Red Army.

The fourth characteristic is Communist Party leadership and the agrarian
revolution.

This characteristic is the inevitable consequence of the first one. It has
given rise to two features. On the one hand, despite the fact that China's
revolutionary war is taking place in a period of reaction in China and throughout
the capitalist world, victory is possible because it is under the leadership
of the Communist Party and has the support of the peasantry. Thanks to this
support, our base areas, small as they are, are politically very powerful
and stand firmly opposed to the enormous Kuomintang regime, while militarily
they place great difficulties in the way of the Kuomintang attacks. Small
as it is, the Red Army has great fighting capacity, because its members,
led by the Communist Party, are born of the agrarian revolution and are fighting
for their own interests, and because its commanders and fighters are politically
united.

The Kuomintang, on the other hand, presents a sharp contrast. It opposes
the agrarian revolution and therefore has no support from the peasantry.
Though it has a large army, the Kuomintang cannot make its soldiers and the
many lower-ranking officers, who were originally small producers, risk their
lives willingly for it. Its officers and men are politically divided, which
reduces its fighting capacity.
3. OUR STRATEGY AND TACTICS ENSUING  THESE CHARACTERISTICS

Thus the four principal characteristics of China's revolutionary war are:
a vast semi-colonial country which is unevenly developed politically and
economically and which has gone through a great revolution; a big and powerful
enemy; a small and weak Red Army; and the agrarian revolution. These
characteristics determine the line for guiding China's revolutionary war
as well as many of its strategic and tactical principles. It follows from
the first and fourth characteristics that it is possible for the Chinese
Red Army to grow and defeat its enemy. It follows from the second and third
characteristics that it is impossible for the Chinese Red Army to grow very
rapidly or defeat its enemy quickly; in other words, the war will be protracted
and may even be lost if it is mishandled.

These are the two aspects of China's revolutionary war. They exist
simultaneously, that is, there are favourable factors and there are difficulties.
This is the fundamental law of China's revolutionary war, from which many
other laws ensue. The history of our ten years of war has proved the validity
of this law. He who has eyes but fails to see this fundamental law cannot
direct China's revolutionary war, cannot lead the Red Army to victories.

It is clear that we must correctly settle all the following matters of principle:

Determine our strategic orientation correctly, oppose adventurism when on
the offensive, oppose conservatism when on the defensive, and oppose flightism
when shifting from one place to another.

Oppose guerrilla-ism in the Red Army, while recognizing the guerrilla character
of its operations.

Oppose protracted campaigns and a strategy of quick decision, and uphold
the strategy of protracted war and campaigns of quick decision.

Oppose fixed battle lines and positional warfare, and favour fluid
battle lines and mobile warfare.

Oppose fighting merely to rout the enemy, and uphold fighting to annihilate
the enemy.

Oppose the strategy of striking with two "fists" in two directions at the
same time, and uphold the strategy of striking with one "fist" in one direction
at one time. [12]

Oppose the principle of maintaining one large rear area, and uphold the principle
of small rear areas.

Oppose an absolutely centralized command, and favour a relatively centralized
command.

Oppose the purely military viewpoint and the ways of roving rebels,
[13] and recognize that the Red Army is a propagandist
and organizer of the Chinese revolution.

Oppose bandit ways, [14] and uphold strict political
discipline.

Oppose warlord ways, and favour both democracy within proper limits and an
authoritative discipline in the army.

Oppose an incorrect, sectarian policy on cadres, and uphold the correct policy
on cadres.

Oppose the policy of isolation, and affirm the policy of winning over all
possible allies.

Oppose keeping the Red Army at its old stage, and strive to develop it to
a new stage.

Our present discussion of the problems of strategy is intended to elucidate
these matters carefully in the light of the historical experience gained
in China's ten years of bloody revolutionary war.
CHAPTER IV.

  "ENCIRCLEMENT AND SUPPRESSION" AND COUNTER-CAMPAIGNS AGAINST IT --THE MAIN
  PATTERN OF CHINA'S CIVIL WAR


In the ten years since our guerrilla war began, every independent Red guerrilla
unit, every Red Army unit or every revolutionary base area has been regularly
subjected by the enemy to "encirclement and suppression". The enemy looks
upon the Red Army as a monster and seeks to capture it the moment it shows
itself. He is for ever pursuing the Red Army and for ever trying to encircle
it. For ten years this pattern of warfare has not changed, and unless the
civil war gives place to a national war, the pattern will remain the same
till the day the enemy becomes the weaker contestant and the Red Army the
stronger.

The Red Army's operations take the form of counter-campaigns against
"encirclement and suppression". For us victory means chiefly victory in combating
"encirclement and suppression", that is, strategic victory and victories
in campaigns. The fight against each "encirclement and suppression" campaign
constitutes a counter-campaign, which usually comprises several or even scores
of battles, big and small. Until an "encirclement and suppression" campaign
has been basically smashed, one cannot speak of strategic victory or of victory
in the counter-campaign as a whole, even though many battles may have been
won. The history of the Red Army's decade of war is a history of
counter-campaigns against "encirclement and suppression".

In the enemy's "encirclement and suppression" campaigns and the Red Army's
counter-campaigns against them, the two forms of fighting, offensive and
defensive, are both employed, and here there is no difference from any other
war, ancient or modern, in China or elsewhere. The special characteristic
of China's civil war, however, is the repeated alternation of the two forms
over a long period of time. In each "encirclement and suppression" campaign,
the enemy employs the offensive against the Red Army's defensive, and the
Red Army employs the defensive against his offensive; this is the first stage
of a counter-campaign against "encirclement and suppression". Then the enemy
employs the defensive against the Red Army's offensive, and the Red Army
employs the offensive against his defensive; this is the second stage of
the counter-campaign. Every "encirclement and suppression" campaign has these
two stages, and they alternate over a long period.

By repeated alternation over a long period we mean the repetition of this
pattern of warfare and these forms of fighting. This is a fact obvious to
everybody. An "encirclement and suppression" campaign and a counter-campaign
against it--such is the repeated pattern of the war. In each campaign the
alternation in the forms of fighting consists of the first stage in which
the enemy employs the offensive against our defensive and we meet his offensive
with our defensive, and of the second stage in which the enemy employs the
defensive against our offensive and we meet his defensive with our offensive.

As for the content of a campaign or of a battle, it does not consist of mere
repetition but is different each time. This, too, is a fact and obvious to
everybody. In this connection it has become a rule that with each campaign
and each counter-campaign, the scale becomes larger, the situation more
complicated and the fighting more intense.

But this does not mean that there are no ups and downs. After the enemy's
fifth "encirclement and suppression" campaign, the Red Army was greatly weakened,
and all the base areas in the south were lost. Having shifted to the northwest,
the Red Army now no longer holds a vital position threatening the internal
enemy as it did in the south and as a result the scale of the "encirclement
and suppression" campaigns has become smaller, the situation simpler and
the fighting less intense.

What constitutes a defeat for the Red Army? Strategically speaking, there
is a defeat only when a counter-campaign against "encirclement and suppression"
fails completely, but even then the defeat is only partial and temporary.
For only the total destruction of the Red Army would constitute complete
defeat in the civil war; but this has never happened. The loss of extensive
base areas and the shift of the Red Army constituted a temporary and partial
defeat, not a final and complete one, even though this partial defeat entailed
losing go per cent of the Party membership, of the armed forces and of the
base areas. We call this shift the continuation of our defensive and the
enemy's pursuit the continuation of his offensive. That is to say, in the
course of the struggle between the enemy's "encirclement and suppression"
and our counter-campaign we allowed our defensive to be broken by the enemy's
offensive instead of turning from the defensive to the offensive; and so
our defensive turned into a retreat and the enemy's offensive into a pursuit.
But when the Red Army reached a new area, as for example when we shifted
from Kiangsi Province and various other regions to Shensi Province, the
repetition of "encirclement and suppression" campaigns began afresh. That
is why we say that the Red Army's strategic retreat (the Long March) was
a continuation of its strategic defensive and the enemy's strategic pursuit
was a continuation of his strategic offensive.

In the Chinese civil war, as in all other wars, ancient or modern, in China
or abroad, there are only two basic forms of fighting, attack and defence.
The special characteristic of China's civil war consists in the long-term
repetition of "encirclement and suppression" campaigns and of our
counter-campaigns together with the long-term alternation in the two forms
of fighting, attack and defence, with the inclusion of the phenomenon of
the great strategic shift of more than ten thousand kilometres (the Long
March). [15]

A defeat for the enemy is much the same. It is a strategic defeat for the
enemy when his "encirclement and suppression" campaign is broken and our
defensive becomes an offensive, when the enemy turns to the defensive and
has to reorganize before launching another "encirclement and suppression"
campaign. The enemy has not had to make a strategic shift of more than ten
thousand kilometres such as we have, because he rules the whole country and
is much stronger than we are. But there have been partial shifts of his forces.
Sometimes, enemy forces in White strongholds encircled by the Red Army in
some base areas have broken through our encirclement and withdrawn to the
White areas to organize new offensives. If the civil war is prolonged and
the Red Army's victories become more extensive, there will be more of this
sort of thing. But the enemy cannot achieve the same results as the Red Army,
because he does not have the help of the people and because his officers
and men are not united. If he were to imitate the Red Army's long-distance
shift, he would certainly be wiped out.

In the period of the Li Li-san line in 1930, Comrade Li Li-san failed to
understand the protracted nature of China's civil war and for that reason
did not perceive the law that in the course of this war there is repetition
over a long period of "encirclement and suppression" campaigns and of their
defeat (by that time there had already been three in the Hunan-Kiangsi border
area and two in Fukien). Hence, in an attempt to achieve rapid victory for
the revolution, he ordered the Red Army, which was then still in its infancy,
to attack Wuhan, and also ordered a nation-wide armed uprising. Thus he committed
the error of "Left" opportunism.

Likewise the "Left" opportunists of 1931-1934 did not believe in the law
of the repetition of "encirclement and suppression" campaigns. Some responsible
comrades in our base area along the Hupeh-Honan-Anhwei border held an "auxiliary
force" theory, maintaining that the Kuomintang army had become merely an
auxiliary force after the defeat of its third "encirclement and suppression"
campaign and that the imperialists themselves would have to take the field
as the main force in further attacks on the Red Army. The strategy based
on this estimate was that the Red Army should attack Wuhan. In principle,
this fitted in with the views of those comrades in Kiangsi who called for
a Red Army attack on Nanchang, were against the work of linking up the base
areas and the tactics of luring the enemy in deep, regarded the seizure of
the capital and other key cities of a province as the starting point for
victory in that province, and held that "the fight against the fifth
'encirclement and suppression' campaign represents the decisive battle between
the road of revolution and the road of colonialism". This "Left" opportunism
was the source of the wrong line adopted in the struggles against the fourth
"encirclement and suppression" campaign in the Hupeh-Honan-Anhwei border
area and in those against the fifth in the Central Area in Kiangsi; and it
rendered the Red Army helpless before these fierce enemy campaigns and brought
enormous losses to the Chinese revolution.

The view that the Red Army should under no circumstances adopt defensive
methods was directly related to this "Left" opportunism which denied the
repetition of "encirclement and suppression" campaigns, and it, too, was
entirely erroneous.

The proposition that a revolution or a revolutionary war is an offensive
is of course correct. A revolution or a revolutionary war in its emergence
and growth from a small force to a big force, from the absence of political
power to the seizure of political power, from the absence of a Red Army to
the creation of a Red Army, and from the absence of revolutionary base areas
to their establishment must be on the offensive and cannot be conservative;
and tendencies towards conservatism must be opposed.

The only entirely correct proposition is that a revolution or a revolutionary
war is an offensive but also involves defence and retreat To defend in order
to attack, to retreat in order to advance, to move against the flanks in
order to move against the front, and to take a roundabout route in order
to get on to the direct route--this is inevitable in the process of development
of many phenomena, especially military movements.

Of the two propositions stated above, the first may be correct in the political
sphere, but it is incorrect when transposed to the military sphere. Moreover,
it is correct politically only in one situation (when the revolution is
advancing), but incorrect when transposed to another situation (when the
revolution is in retreat, in general retreat as in Russia in 1906,
[16] and in China in 1927 or in partial retreat as in
Russia at the time of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in 1918).
[17] Only the second proposition is entirely correct
and true. The "Left" opportunism of 1931-34, which mechanically opposed the
employment of defensive military measures, was nothing but infantile thinking.

When will the pattern of repeated "encirclement and suppression" campaigns
come to an end? In my opinion, if the civil war is prolonged, this repetition
will cease when a fundamental change takes place in the balance of forces.
It will cease when the Red Army has become stronger than the enemy. Then
we shall be encircling and suppressing the enemy and he will be resorting
to counter-campaigns, but political and military conditions will not allow
him to attain the same position as that of the Red Army in its counter-campaigns.
It can be definitely asserted that by then the pattern of repeated "encirclement
and suppression" campaigns will have largely, if not completely, come to
an end.
 CHAPTER V
THE STRATEGIC DEFENSIVE

Under this heading I would like to discuss the following problems: (I) active
and passive defence; (2) preparations for combating "encirclement and
suppression" campaigns; (3) strategic retreat; (4) strategic counter-offensive;
(5) starting the counter-offensive; (6) concentration of troops; (7) mobile
warfare; (8) war of quick decision; and (9) war of annihilation.
1. ACTIVE AND PASSIVE DEFENCE

Why do we begin by discussing defence? After the failure of China's first
national united front of 1994-27, the revolution became a most intense and
ruthless class war. While the enemy ruled the whole country, we had only
small armed forces; consequently, from the very beginning we have had to
wage a bitter struggle against his "encirclement and suppression" campaigns.
Our offensives have been closely linked with our efforts to break them, and
our fate depends entirely on whether or not we are able to do so. The process
of breaking an "encirclement and suppression" campaign is usually circuitous
and not as direct as one would wish. The primary problem, and a serious one
too, is how to conserve our strength and await an opportunity to defeat the
enemy. Therefore, the strategic defensive is the most complicated and most
important problem facing the Red Army in its operations.

In our ten years of war two deviations often arose with regard to the strategic
defensive; one was to belittle the enemy, the other was to be terrified of
him.

As a result of belittling the enemy, many guerrilla units suffered defeat,
and on several occasions the Red Army was unable to break the enemy's
"encirclement and suppression".

When the revolutionary guerrilla units first came into existence, their leaders
often failed to assess the enemy's situation and our own correctly. Because
they had been successful in organizing sudden armed uprisings in certain
places or mutinies among the White troops, they saw only the momentarily
favourable circumstances, or failed to see the grave situation actually
confronting them, and so usually underestimated the enemy. Moreover, they
had no understanding of their own weaknesses (i.e., lack of experience and
smallness of forces). It was an objective fact that the enemy was strong
and we were weak, and yet some people refused to give it thought, talked
only of attack but never of defence or retreat, thus mentally disarming
themselves In the matter of defence, and hence misdirected their actions.
Many guerrilla units were defeated on this account.

Examples in which the Red Army, for this reason, failed to break the enemy's
"encirclement and suppression" campaigns were its defeat In 1928 in the
Haifeng-Lufeng area of Kwangtung Province, [18] and its
loss of freedom of action in 1932, in the fourth counter-campaign against
the enemy's "encirclement and suppression" in the Hupeh-Honan-Anhwei border
area, where the Red Army acted on the theory that the Kuomintang army was
merely an auxiliary force.

There are many instances of setbacks which were due to being terrified of
the enemy.

As against those who underestimated him, some people greatly overestimated
him and also greatly underestimated our own strength, as a result of which
they adopted an unwarranted policy of retreat and likewise disarmed themselves
mentally in the matter of defence. This resulted in the defeat of some guerrilla
units, or the failure of certain Red Army campaigns, or the loss of base
areas.

The most striking example of the loss of a base area was that of the Central
Base Area in Kiangsi during the fifth counter-campaign against "encirclement
and suppression". The mistake here arose from a Rightist viewpoint. The leaders
feared the enemy as if he were a tiger, set up defences everywhere, fought
defensive actions at every step and did not dare to advance to the enemy's
rear and attack him there, which would have been to our advantage, or boldly
to lure the enemy troops in deep so as to herd them together and annihilate
them. As a result, the whole base area was lost and the Red Army had to undertake
the Long March of over 12,000 kilometres. However, this kind of mistake was
usually preceded by a "Left" error of underestimating the enemy. The military
adventurism of attacking the key cities in 1932 was the root cause of the
line of passive defence subsequently adopted in coping with the enemy's fifth
"encirclement and suppression" campaign.


The most extreme example of being terrified of the enemy was the retreatism
of the "Chang Kuo-tao line". The defeat of the Western Column of the Fourth
Front Red Army west of the Yellow River [19] marked the
final bankruptcy of this line.


Active defence is also known as offensive defence, or defence through decisive
engagements. Passive defence is also known as purely defensive defence or
pure defence. Passive defence is actually a spurious kind of defence, and
the only real defence is active defence, defence for the purpose of
counter-attacking and taking the offensive. As far as I know, there is no
military manual of value nor any sensible military expert, ancient or modern,
Chinese or foreign, that does not oppose passive defence, whether in strategy
or tactics. Only a complete fool or a madman would cherish passive defence
as a talisman. However, there are people in this world who do such things.
That is an error in war, a manifestation of conservatism in military matters,
which we must resolutely oppose.

The military experts of the newer and rapidly developing imperialist countries,
namely, Germany and Japan, trumpet the advantages of the strategic offensive
and come out against the strategic defensive. This kind of military thinking
is absolutely unsuited to China's revolutionary war. These military experts
assert that a serious weakness of the defensive is that it shakes popular
morale, instead of inspiring it. This applies to countries where class
contradictions are acute and the war benefits only the reactionary ruling
strata or the reactionary political groups in power. But our situation is
different. With the slogan of defending the revolutionary base areas and
defending China, we can rally the overwhelming majority of the people to
fight with one heart and one mind, because we are the oppressed and the victims
of aggression. It was also by using the form of the defensive that the Red
Army of the Soviet Union defeated its enemies during the civil war. When
the imperialist countries organized the Whites for attack, the war was waged
under the slogan of defending the Soviets, even when the October Uprising
was being prepared, the military mobilization was carried out under the slogan
of defending the capital. In every just war the defensive not only has a
lulling effect on politically alien elements, it also makes possible the
rallying of the backward sections of the masses to join in the war.

When Marx said that once an armed uprising is started there must not be a
moment's pause in the attack, [20] he meant that the
masses having taken the enemy unawares in an insurrection, must give the
reactionary rulers no chance to retain or recover their political power must
seize this moment to beat the nation's reactionary ruling forces when they
are unprepared, and must not rest content with the victories already won,
underestimate the enemy, slacken their attacks or hesitate to press forward,
and so let slip the opportunity of destroying the enemy, bringing failure
to the revolution. This is correct. It does not mean, however, that when
we are already locked in battle with an enemy who enjoys superiority, we
revolutionaries should not adopt defensive measures even when we are hard
pressed. Only a prize idiot would think in this way.


Taken as a whole, our war has been an offensive against the Kuomintang, but
militarily it has assumed the form of breaking the enemy's "encirclement
and suppression".


Militarily speaking, our warfare consists of the alternate use of the defensive
and the offensive. In our case it makes no difference whether the offensive
is said to follow or to precede the defensive, because the crux of the matter
is to break the "encirclement and suppression". The defensive continues until
an "encirclement and suppression" campaign is broken, whereupon the offensive
begins, these being but two stages of the same thing; and one such enemy
campaign is closely followed by another. Of the two stages, the defensive
is the more complicated and the more important. It involves numerous problems
of how to break the "encirclement and suppression". The basic principle here
is to stand for active defence and oppose passive defence.

In our civil war, when the strength of the Red Army surpasses that of the
enemy, we shall, in general, no longer need the strategic defensive Our policy
then will be the strategic offensive alone. This change will depend on an
over-all change in the balance of forces. By that time the only remaining
defensive measures will be of a partial character.
2. PREPARATIONS FOR COMBATING "ENCIRCLEMENT AND SUPPRESSION" CAMPAIGNS

Unless we have made necessary and sufficient preparations against a planned
enemy "encirclement and suppression" campaign, we shall certainly be forced
into a passive position. To accept battle in haste is to fight without being
sure of victory. Therefore, when the enemy is preparing an "encirclement
and suppression" campaign, it is absolutely necessary for us to prepare our
counter-campaign. To be opposed to such preparations, as some people in our
ranks were at one time, is childish and ridiculous.

There is a difficult problem here on which controversy may easily arise.
When should we conclude our offensive and switch to the phase of preparing
our counter-campaign against "encirclement and suppression"? When we are
victoriously on the offensive and the enemy is on the defensive, his preparations
for the next "encirclement and suppression" campaign are conducted in secret,
and therefore it is difficult for us to know when his offensive will begin.
If our work of preparing the counter-campaign begins too early, it is bound
to reduce the gains from our offensive and will sometimes even have certain
harmful effects on the Red Army and the people. For the chief measures in
the preparatory phase are the military preparations for withdrawal and the
political mobilization for them. Sometimes, if we start preparing too early,
this will turn into waiting for the enemy; after waiting a long time without
the enemy's appearing, we will have to renew our offensive. And sometimes,
the enemy will start his offensive just as our new offensive is beginning,
thus putting us in a difficult position. Hence the choice of the right moment
to begin our preparations is an important problem. The right moment should
be determined with due regard both to the enemy's situation and our own and
to the relation between the two. In order to know the enemy's situation,
we should collect information on his political, military and financial position
and the state of public opinion in his territory. In analysing such information
we must take the total strength of the enemy into full account and must not
exaggerate the extent of his past defeats, but on the other hand we must
not fail to take into account his internal contradictions, his financial
difficulties, the effect of his past defeats, etc. As for our side, we must
not exaggerate the extent of our past victories, but neither should we fail
to take full account of their effect. \

Generally speaking, however, the question of timing the preparations, it
is preferable to start them too early rather than too late. For the former
involves smaller losses and has the advantage that preparedness averts peril
and puts us in a fundamentally invincible position.

The essential problems during the preparatory phase are the preparations
for the withdrawal of the Red Army, political mobilization, recruitment,
arrangements for finance and provisions, and the handling of politically
alien elements.

By preparations for the Red Army's withdrawal we mean taking care that it
does not move in a direction jeopardizing the withdrawal or advance too far
in its attacks or become too fatigued. These are the things the main forces
of the Red Army must attend to on the eve of a large-scale enemy offensive.
At such a time, the Red Army must devote its attention mainly to planning
the selection and preparation of the battle areas, the acquisition of supplies,
and the enlargement and training of its own forces.

Political mobilization is a problem of prime importance in the struggle against
"encirclement and suppression". That is to say, we should tell the Red Army
and the people in the base area clearly, resolutely and fully that the enemy's
offensive is inevitable and imminent and will do serious harm to the people,
but at the same time, we should tell them about his weaknesses, the factors
favourable to the Red Army, our indomitable will to victory and our general
plan of work. We should call upon the Red Army and the entire population
to fight against the enemy's "encirclement and suppression" campaign and
defend the base area. Except where military secrets are concerned, political
mobilization must be carried out openly, and, what is more, every effort
should be made to extend it to all who might possibly support the revolutionary
cause. The key link here is to convince the cadres.

Recruitment of new soldiers should be based on two considerations, first,
on the level of political consciousness of the people and the size of the
population and, second, on the current state of the Red Army and the possible
extent of its losses in the whole course of the counter-campaign.

Needless to say, the problems of finance and food are of great importance
to the counter-campaign. We must take the possibility of a prolonged enemy
campaign into account. It is necessary to make an estimate of the minimum
material requirements--chiefly of the Red Army but also of the people in
the revolutionary base area-- for the entire struggle against the enemy's
"encirclement and suppression" campaign.

With regard to politically alien elements we should not be off our guard,
but neither should we be unduly apprehensive of treachery on their part and
adopt excessive precautionary measures. Distinction should be made between
the landlords, the merchants and the rich peasants, and the main point is
to explain things to them politically and win their neutrality, while at
the same time organizing the masses of the people to keep an eye on them.
Only against the very few elements who are most dangerous should stern measures
like arrest be taken.

The extent of success in a struggle against "encirclement and suppression"
is closely related to the degree to which the tasks of the preparatory phase
have been fulfilled. Relaxation of preparatory work which is due to
underestimation of the enemy and panic which is due to being terrified of
the enemy's attacks are harmful tendencies, and both should be resolutely
opposed. What we need is an enthusiastic but calm state of mind and intense
but orderly work.
3. STRATEGIC RETREAT

A strategic retreat is a planned strategic step taken by an inferior force
for the purpose of conserving its strength and biding its time to defeat
the enemy, when it finds itself confronted with a superior force whose offensive
it is unable to smash quickly. But military adventurists stubbornly oppose
such a step and advocate "engaging the enemy outside the gates".

We all know that when two boxers fight, the clever boxer usually gives a
little ground at first, while the foolish one rushes in furiously and uses
up all his resources at the very start, and in the end he is often beaten
by the man who has given ground.

In the novel Shui Hu Chuan, [21] the drill master
Hung, challenging Lin Chung to a fight on Chai Chin's estate, shouts, "Come
on! Come on ! Come on !" In the end it is the retreating Lin Chung who spots
Hung's weak point and floors him with one blow.

During the Spring and Autumn Era, when the states of Lu and Chi
[22] were at war, Duke Chuang of Lu wanted to attack
before the Chi troops had tired themselves out, but Tsao Kuei prevented him.
When instead he adopted the tactic of "the enemy tires, we attack", he defeated
the Chi army. This is a classic example from China's military history of
a weak force defeating a strong force. Here is the account given by the historian
Tsochiu Ming: [23]

  In the spring the Chi troops invaded us. The Duke was about to fight. Tsao
  Kuei requested an audience. His neighbours said,


  "This is the business of meat-eating officials, why meddle with it?" Tsao
  replied, "Meat-eaters are fools, they cannot plan ahead." So he saw the Duke.
  And he asked, "What will you rely on when you fight?" The Duke answered,
  "I never dare to keep all my food and clothing for my own enjoyment, but
  always share them with others." Tsao said, "Such paltry charity cannot reach
  all The people will not follow you." The Duke said, "I never offer to the
  gods less sacrificial beasts, jade or silk than are due to them. I keep good
  faith." Tsao said, "Such paltry faith wins no trust. The gods will not bless
  you." The Duke said, "Though unable personally to attend to the details of
  all trials, big and small, I always demand the facts." Tsao said, "That shows
  your devotion to your people. You can give battle. When you do so, I beg
  to follow you." The Duke and he rode in the same chariot. The battle was
  joined at Changshao. When the Duke was about to sound the drum for the attack,
  Tsao said, "Not yet." When the men of Chi had drummed thrice, Tsao said,
  "Now we can drum" The army of Chi was routed. The Duke wanted to pursue.
  Again Tsao said, "Not yet." He got down from the chariot to examine the enemy's
  wheel-tracks, then mounted the arm-rest of the chariot to look afar. He said,
  "Now we can pursue!" So began the pursuit of the Chi troops. After the victory
  the Duke asked Tsao why he had given such advice. Tsao replied, "A battle
  depends upon courage. At the first drum courage is aroused, at the second
  it flags, and with the third it runs out. When the enemy's courage ran out,
  ours was still high and so we won. It is difficult to fathom the moves of
  a great state, and I feared an ambush. But when I examined the enemy's
  wheel-tracks and found them cries-crossing and looked afar and saw his banners
  drooping, I advised pursuit."


That was a case of a weak state resisting a strong state The story speaks
of the political preparations before a battle--winning the confidence of
the people; it speaks of a battlefield favourable for switching over
to the counter- offensive--Changshao, it indicates the favourable time for
starting the counter-offensive--when the enemy's courage is running out and
one's own is high; and it points to the moment for starting the pursuit--when
the enemy's tracks are crisscrossed and his banners are drooping. Though
the battle was not a big one, it illustrates the principles of the strategic
defensive. China's military history contains numerous instances of victories
won on these principles. In such famous battles as the Battle of Chengkao
between the states of Chu and Han, [24] the Battle of
Kunyang between the states of Hsin and Han, [25] the
Battle of Kuantu between Yuan Shao and Tsao Tsao, [26]
the Battle of Chipi between the states of Wu and Wei,
[27] the Battle of Yiling between the states of Wu and
Shu, [28] and the Battle of Feishui between the states
of Chin and Tsin, [29] in each case the contending sides
were unequal, and the weaker side, yielding some ground at first, gained
mastery by striking only after the enemy had struck and so defeated the stronger
side.

Our war began in the autumn of 1927, and we then had no experience at all.
The Nanchang Uprising [30] and the Canton Uprising
[31] failed, and in the Autumn Harvest Uprising
[32] the Red Army in the Hunan-Hupeh-Kiangsi border area
also suffered several defeats and shifted to the Chingkang Mountains on the
Hunan-Kiangsi border. In the following April the units which had survived
the defeat of the Nanchang Uprising also moved to the Chingkang Mountains
by way of southern Hunan. By May 1928 however, basic principles of guerrilla
warfare, simple in nature and suited to the conditions of the time, had already
been evolved, that is, the sixteen-character formula: "The enemy advances,
we retreat; the enemy camps, we harass; the enemy tires, we attack; the enemy
retreats, we pursue." This sixteen-character formulation of military principles
was accepted by the Central Committee before the Li Li-san line. Later our
operational principles were developed a step further. At the time of our
first counter-campaign against "encirclement and suppression" in the Kiangsi
base area, the principle of "luring the enemy in deep" was put forward and,
moreover, successfully applied. By the time the enemy's third "encirclement
and suppression" campaign was defeated, a complete set of operational principles
for the Red Army had taken shape. This marked a new stage in the development
of our military principles, which were greatly enriched in content and underwent
many changes in form, mainly in the sense that although they basically remained
the same as in the sixteen-character formula, they transcended their originally
simple nature. The sixteen-character formula covered the basic principles
for combating "encirclement and suppression"; it covered the two stages of
the strategic defensive and the strategic offensive, and within the defensive,
it covered the two stages of the strategic retreat and the strategic
counter-offensive. What came later was only a development of this formula.

But beginning from January 1932, after the publication of the Party's resolution
entitled "Struggle for Victory First in One or More Provinces After Smashing
the Third 'Encirclement and Suppression' Campaign", which contained serious
errors of principle, the "Left" opportunists attacked these correct principles,
finally abrogated the whole set and instituted a complete set of contrary
"new principles" or "regular principles". From then on, the old principles
were no longer to be considered as regular but were to be rejected as
"guerrilla-ism". The opposition to "guerrilla-ism" reigned for three whole
years. Its first stage was military adventurism, in the second it turned
into military conservatism and, finally, in the third stage it became flightism.
It was not until the Central Committee held the enlarged meeting of the Political
Bureau at Tsunyi, Kweichow Province, in January 1935 that this wrong line
was declared bankrupt and the correctness of the old line reaffirmed. But
at what a cost!

Those comrades who vigorously opposed "guerrilla-ism" argued along the following
lines. It was wrong to lure the enemy in deep because we had to abandon so
much territory. Although battles had been won in this way, was not the situation
different now? Moreover, was it not better to defeat the enemy without abandoning
territory? And was it not better still to defeat the enemy in his own areas,
or on the borders between his areas and ours? The old practices had nothing
"regular" about them and were methods used only by guerrillas. Now our own
state had been established and our Red Army had become a regular army. Our
fight against Chiang Kai-shek had become a war between two states, between
two great armies. History should not repeat itself, and everything pertaining
to "guerrilla-ism" should be totally discarded. The new principles were
"completely Marxist", while the old had been created by guerrilla units in
the mountains, and there was no Marxism in the mountains. The new principles
were the antithesis of the old. They were: "Pit one against ten, pit ten
against a hundred, fight bravely and determinedly, and exploit victories
by hot pursuit"; "Attack on all fronts"; "Seize key cities"; and "Strike
with two 'fists' in two directions at the same time". When the enemy attacked,
the methods of dealing with him were: "Engage the enemy outside the gates",
"Gain mastery by striking first", "Don't let our pots and pans be smashed",
"Don't give up an inch of territory" and "Divide the forces into six routes".
The war was "the decisive battle between the road of revolution and the road
of colonialism", a war of short swift thrusts, blockhouse warfare, war of
attrition, "protracted war". There were, further, the policy of maintaining
a great rear area and an absolutely centralized command. Finally there was
a large-scale "house-moving". And anyone who did not accept these things
was to be punished, labelled an opportunist, and so on and so forth.

Without a doubt these theories and practices were all wrong. They were nothing
but subjectivism. Under favourable circumstances this subjectivism manifested
itself in petty-bourgeois revolutionary fanaticism and impetuosity, but in
times of adversity, as the situation worsened, it changed successively into
desperate recklessness, conservatism and flightism. They were the theories
and practices of hotheads and ignoramuses; they did not have the slightest
flavour of Marxism about them; indeed they were anti-Marxist.

Here we shall discuss only strategic retreat, which in Kiangsi was called
"luring the enemy in deep" and in Szechuan "contracting the front". No previous
theorist or practitioner of war has ever denied that this is the policy a
weak army fighting a strong army must adopt in the initial stage of a war.
It has been said by a foreign military expert that in strategically defensive
operations, decisive battles are usually avoided in the beginning, and are
sought only when conditions have become favourable. That is entirely correct
and we have nothing to add to it.

The object of strategic retreat is to conserve military strength and prepare
for the counter-offensive. Retreat is necessary because not to retreat a
step before the onset of a strong enemy inevitably means to jeopardize the
preservation of one's own forces. In the past, however, many people were
stubbornly opposed to retreat, considering it to be an "opportunist line
of pure defence". Our history has proved that their opposition was entirely
wrong.

To prepare for a counter-offensive, we must select or create conditions
favourable to ourselves but unfavourable to the enemy, so as to bring about
a change in the balance of forces, before we go on to the stage of the
counter-offensive.

In the light of our past experience, during the stage of retreat we should
in general secure at least two of the following conditions before we can
consider the situation as being favourable to us and unfavourable to the
enemy and before we can go over to the counter-offensive. These conditions
are:

(1) The population actively supports the Red Army.

(2) The terrain is favourable for operations.

(3) All the main forces of the Red Army are concentrated.

(4) The enemy's weak spots have been discovered.

(5) The enemy has been reduced to a tired and demoralized state).

(6) The enemy has been induced to make mistakes.

The first condition, active support of the population, is the most important
one for the Red Army. It means having a base area. Moreover, given this
condition, it is easy to achieve conditions 4, 5 and 6. Therefore, when the
enemy launches a full-scale offensive, the Red Army generally withdraws from
the White area into the base area, because that is where the population is
most active in supporting the Red Army against the White army. Also, there
is a difference between the borders and the central district of a base area;
in the latter the people are better at blocking the passage of information
to the enemy, better at reconnaissance, transportation, joining in the fighting,
and so on. Thus when we were combating the first, second and third "encirclement
and suppression" campaigns in Kiangsi, all the places selected as "terminal
points for the retreat" were situated where the first condition, popular
support, was excellent or quite good. This characteristic of our base areas
made the Red Army's operations very different from ordinary operations and
was the main reason why the enemy subsequently had to resort to the policy
of blockhouse warfare.

One advantage of operating on interior lines is that it makes it possible
for the retreating army to choose terrain favourable to itself and force
the attacking army to fight on its terms. In order to defeat a strong army,
a weak army must carefully choose favourable terrain as a battleground. But
this condition alone is not enough and must be accompanied by others. The
first of these is popular support. The next is a vulnerable enemy, for instance,
an enemy who is tired or has made mistakes, or an advancing enemy column
that is comparatively poor in fighting capacity. In the absence of these
conditions, even if we have found excellent terrain, we have to disregard
it and continue to retreat in order to secure them. In the White areas there
is no lack of good terrain, but we do not have the favourable condition of
active popular support. If other conditions are not yet fulfilled, the Red
Army has no alternative but to retreat towards its base area. Distinctions
such as those between the White areas and the Red areas also usually exist
between the borders and the central district of a base area.

Except for local units and containing forces, all our assault troops should,
on principle, be concentrated. When attacking an enemy who is on the defensive
strategically, the Red Army usually disperses its own forces. Once the enemy
launches a full-scale offensive, the Red Army effects a "retreat towards
the centre". The terminal point chosen for the retreat is usually in the
central section of the base area, but sometimes it is in the frontal or rear
sections, as circumstances require. By such a retreat towards the centre
all the main forces of the Red Army can be concentrated.

Another essential condition for a weak army fighting a strong one is to pick
out the enemy's weaker units for attack. But at the beginning of the enemy's
offensive we usually do not know which of his advancing columns is the strongest
and which the second strongest, which is the weakest and which the second
weakest, and so a process of reconnaissance is required. This often takes
a considerable time. That is another reason why strategic retreat is necessary.

If the attacking enemy is far more numerous and much stronger than we are,
we can accomplish a change in the balance of forces only when the enemy has
penetrated deeply into our base area and tasted all the bitterness it holds
for him. As the chief of staff of one of Chiang Kai-shek's brigades remarked
during the third "encirclement and suppression'! campaign, "Our stout men
have worn themselves thin and our thin men have worn themselves to death."
Or, in the words of Chen Ming-shu, Commander-in-Chief of the Western Route
of the Kuomintang's "Encirclement and Suppression" Army, "Everywhere the
National Army gropes in the dark, while the Red Army walks in broad daylight."
By then the enemy army, although still strong, is much weakened, its soldiers
are tired, its morale is sagging and many of its weak spots are revealed.
But the Red Army, though weak, has conserved its strength and stored up its
energy, and is waiting at its ease for the fatigued enemy. At such a time
it is generally possible to attain a certain parity between the two sides,
or to change the enemy's absolute superiority to relative superiority and
our absolute inferiority to relative inferiority, and occasionally even to
become superior to the enemy. When fighting against the third "encirclement
and suppression" campaign in Kiangsi, the Red Army executed a retreat to
the extreme limit (to concentrate in the rear section of the base area);
if it had not done so, it could not have defeated the enemy because the enemy's
"encirclement and suppression" forces were then over ten times the size of
the Red Army. When Sun Wu Tzu said, "Avoid the enemy when he is full of vigour,
strike when he is fatigued and withdraws", he was referring to tiring and
demoralizing the enemy so as to reduce his superiority.

Finally, the object of retreat is to induce the enemy to make mistakes or
to detect his mistakes. One must realize that an enemy commander, however
wise, cannot avoid making some mistakes over a relatively long period of
time, and hence it is always possible for us to exploit the openings he leaves
us. The enemy is liable to make mistakes, just as we ourselves sometimes
miscalculate and give him openings to exploit. In addition, we can induce
the enemy to make mistakes by our own actions, for instance, by "counterfeiting
an appearance", as Sun Wu Tzu called it, that is, by making a feint to the
east but attacking in the west. If we are to do this, the terminal point
for the retreat cannot be rigidly limited to a definite area. Sometimes when
we have retreated to the predetermined area and not yet found openings to
exploit, we have to retreat farther and wait for the enemy to give us an
opening.

The favourable conditions which we seek by retreating are in general those
stated above. But this does not mean that a counter-offensive cannot be launched
until all these conditions are present. The presence of all of them at the
same time is neither possible nor necessary. But a weak force operating on
interior lines against a strong enemy should strive to secure such conditions
as are necessary in the light of the enemy's actual situation. All views
to the contrary are incorrect.

The decision on the terminal point for retreat should depend on the situation
as a whole. It is wrong to decide on a place which, considered in relation
to only part of the situation, appears to be favourable for our passing to
the counter-offensive, if it is not also advantageous from the point of view
of the situation as a whole. For at the start of our counter- offensive we
must take subsequent developments into consideration, and our counter-offensives
always begin on a partial scale. Sometimes the terminal point for retreat
should be fixed in the frontal section of the base area, as it was during
our second and fourth counter-campaigns against "encirclement and suppression"
in Kiangsi and our third counter-campaign in the Shensi-Kansu area. At times
it should be in the middle section of the base area, as in our first
counter-campaign in Kiangsi. At other times, it should be fixed in the rear
section of the base area, as in our third counter-campaign in Kiangsi. In
all these cases the decision was taken by correlating the partial situation
with the situation as a whole. But during the fifth counter-campaign in Kiangsi,
our army gave no consideration whatsoever to retreat, because it did not
take account of either the partial or the total situation, and this was really
rash and foolhardy conduct. A situation is made up of a number of factors;
in considering the relation between a part of the situation and the whole,
we should base our judgements on whether the factors on the enemy's side
and on ours, as manifested in both the partial and the whole situation, are
to a certain extent favourable for our starting a counter-offensive.

The terminal points for retreat in a base area can be generally divided into
three types, those in the frontal, those in the middle, and those in the
rear section of the base area. Does this, however, mean refusing to fight
in the White areas altogether? No. It is only when we have to deal with a
large-scale campaign of enemy "encirclement and suppression" that we refuse
to fight in the White areas. It is only when there is a wide disparity between
the enemy's strength and ours that, acting on the principle of conserving
our strength and biding our time to defeat the enemy, we advocate retreating
to the base area and luring him in deep, for only by so doing can we create
or find conditions favourable for our counter-offensive. If the situation
is not so serious, or if it is so serious that the Red Army cannot begin
its counter-offensive even in the base area, or if the counter-offensive
is not going well and a further retreat is necessary to bring about a change
in the situation, then we should recognize, theoretically at least, that
the terminal point for the retreat may be fixed in a White area, though we
have had very little experience of this kind.

In general, the terminal points for retreat in a White area can also be divided
into three types: (1) those in front of our base area, (2) those on its flanks,
and (3) those behind it. Here is an example of the first type.

During our first counter-campaign against "encirclement and suppression"
in Kiangsi, had it not been for the disunity inside the Red Army and the
split in the local Party organization (the two difficult problems created
by the Li Li-san line and the A-B Group), [33] it is
conceivable that we might have concentrated our forces within the triangle
formed by Kian, Nanfeng and Changshu and launched a counter-offensive. For
the enemy force advancing from the area between the Kan and Fu Rivers was
not very greatly superior to the Red Army in strength (100,000 against 40,000).
Though the popular support there was not as active as in the base area, the
terrain was favourable; moreover, it would have been possible to smash, one
by one, the enemy forces advancing along separate routes.

Now for an example of the second type.

During our third counter-campaign in Kiangsi, if the enemy's offensive had
not been on so large a scale, if one of the enemy's columns had advanced
from Chienning, Lichuan and Taining on the Fukien-Kiangsi border, and if
that column had not been too strong for us to attack, it is likewise conceivable
that the Red Army might have massed its forces in the White area in western
Fukien and crushed that column first, without having to make a thousand-li
detour through Juichin to Hsingkuo.

Finally, an example of the third type.

During that same third counter-campaign in Kiangsi, if the enemy's main force
had headed south instead of west, we might have been compelled to withdraw
to the Huichang-Hsunwu-Anyuan area (a White area), in order to induce the
enemy to move further south; the Red Army could have then driven northward
into the interior of the base area, by which time the enemy force in the
north of the base area would not have been very large.

The above, however, are all hypothetical examples not based on actual experience;
they should be regarded as exceptional and not treated as general principles.
When the enemy launches a large-scale "encirclement and suppression" campaign,
our general principle is to lure him in deep, withdraw into the base area
and fight him there, because this is our surest method of smashing his offensive.

Those who advocate "engaging the enemy outside the gates" oppose strategic
retreat, arguing that to retreat means to lose territory, to bring harm on
the people ("to let our pots and pans be smashed", as they call it), and
to give rise to unfavourable repercussions outside. During our fifth
counter-campaign, they argued that every time we retreated a step the enemy
would push his blockhouses forward a step, so that our base areas would
continuously shrink and we would have no way of recovering lost ground. Even
though luring the enemy deep into our territory might have been useful in
the past, it would be useless against the enemy's fifth "encirclement and
suppression" campaign in which he adopted the policy of blockhouse warfare.
The only way to deal with this campaign, they said, was to divide up our
forces for resistance and make short swift thrusts at the enemy.

It is easy to give an answer to such views, and our history has already done
so. As for loss of territory, it often happens that only by loss can loss
be avoided; this is the principle of "Give in order to take". If what we
lose is territory and what we gain is victory over the enemy, plus recovery
and also expansion of our territory, then it is a paying proposition. In
a business transaction, if a buyer does not "lose" some money, he cannot
obtain goods; if a seller does not "lose" some goods, he cannot obtain money.
The losses incurred in a revolutionary movement involve destruction, and
what is gained is construction of a progressive character. Sleep and rest
involve loss of time, but energy is gained for tomorrow's work. If any fool
does not understand this and refuses to sleep, he will have no energy the
next day, and that is a losing proposition. We lost out in the fifth
counter-campaign for precisely such reasons. Reluctance to give up part of
our territory resulted in the loss of it all. Abyssinia, too, lost all her
territory when she fought the enemy head-on, though that was not the sole
cause of her defeat.

The same holds true on the question of bringing damage on the people. If
you refuse to let the pots and pans of some households be smashed over a
short period of time, you will cause the smashing of the pots and pans of
all the people to go on over a long period of time. If you are afraid of
unfavourable short-term political repercussions, you will have to pay the
price in unfavourable long-term political repercussions. After the October
Revolution, if the Russian Bolsheviks had acted on the opinions of the "Left
Communists" and refused to sign the peace treaty with Germany, the new-born
Soviets would have been in danger of early death. [34]

Such seemingly revolutionary "Left" opinions originate from the revolutionary
impetuosity of the petty-bourgeois intellectuals as well as from the narrow
conservatism of the peasant small producers. People holding such opinions
look at problems only one-sidedly and are unable to take a comprehensive
view of the situation as a whole; they are unwilling to link the interests
of today with those of tomorrow or the interests of the part with those of
the whole, but cling like grim death to the partial and the temporary. Certainly,
we should cling tenaciously to the partial and the temporary when, in the
concrete circumstances of the time, they are favourable--and especially when
they are decisive--for the whole current situation and the whole period,
or otherwise we shall become advocates of letting things slide and doing
nothing about them. That is why a retreat must have a terminal point. We
must not go by the short-sightedness of the small producer. We should
learn the wisdom of the Bolsheviks. The naked eye is not enough, we must
have the aid of the telescope and the microscope The Marxist method is our
telescope and microscope in political and military matters.

Of course, strategic retreat has its difficulties. To pick the time for beginning
the retreat, to select the terminal point, to convince the cadres and the
people politically--these are difficult problems demanding solution.

The problem of timing the beginning of the retreat is very important. If
in the course of our first counter-campaign against "encirclement and
suppression" in Kiangsi Province our retreat had not been carried out just
when it was, that is, if it had been delayed, then at the very least the
extent of our victory would have been affected. Both a premature and a belated
retreat, of course, bring losses. But generally speaking, a belated retreat
brings more losses than a premature one. A well-timed retreat, which enables
us to keep all the initiative, is of great assistance to us in switching
to the counter-offensive when, having reached the terminal point for our
retreat, we have regrouped our forces and are waiting at our ease for the
fatigued enemy. When smashing the enemy's first, second and fourth campaigns
of "encirclement and suppression" in Kiangsi, we were able to handle him
confidently and without haste. It was only during the third campaign that
the Red Army was very fatigued by the detour it had hastily had to make m
order to reassemble, because we had not expected the enemy to launch a new
offensive so quickly after suffering such a crushing defeat in the second
campaign (we ended our second counter-campaign on May 29, 1931, and Chiang
Kai-shek began his third "encirclement and suppression" campaign on July
1). The timing of the retreat is decided in the same way as the timing of
the preparatory phase of a counter-campaign which we discussed earlier, that
is, entirely on the basis of the requisite information we have collected
and of the appraisal of the general situation on the enemy side and on our
own.

It is extremely difficult to convince the cadres and the people of the necessity
of strategic retreat when they have had no experience of it, and when the
prestige of the army leadership is not yet such that it can concentrate the
authority for deciding on strategic retreat in the hands of a few persons
or of a single person and at the same time enjoy the confidence of the cadres.
Because the cadres lacked experience and had no faith in strategic retreat,
great difficulties were encountered at the beginning of our first and fourth
counter-campaigns and during the whole of the fifth. During the first
counter-campaign the cadres, under the influence of the Li Li-san line, were
in favour not of retreat but of attack until they were convinced otherwise.
In the fourth counter-campaign the cadres, under the influence of military
adventurism, objected to making preparations for retreat. In the fifth, they
at first persisted in the military adventurist view, which opposed luring
the enemy in deep, but later turned to military conservatism. Another case
is that of the adherents of the Chang Kuo-tao line, who did not admit the
impossibility of establishing our bases in the regions of the Tibetan and
the Hui peoples [35] until they ran up against a brick
wall. Experience is essential for the cadres, and failure is indeed the mother
of success. But it is also necessary to learn with an open mind from other
people's experience, and it is sheer "narrow empiricism" to insist on one's
own personal experience in all matters and, in its absence, to adhere stubbornly
to one's own opinions and reject other people's experience. Our war has suffered
in no small measure on this account.

The people's lack of faith in the need for a strategic retreat, which was
due to their inexperience, was never greater than in our first counter-campaign
in Kiangsi. At that time the local Party organizations and the masses of
the people in the counties of Kian, Hsingkuo and Yungfeng were all opposed
to the Red Army's withdrawal. But after the experience of the first
counter-campaign, no such problem occurred in the subsequent ones. Everyone
was convinced that the loss of territory in the base area and the sufferings
of the people were temporary and was confident that the Red Army could smash
the enemy's "encirclement and suppression". However, whether or not the people
have faith is closely tied up with whether or not the cadres have faith,
and hence the first and foremost task is to convince the cadres.

Strategic retreat is aimed solely at switching over to the counteroffensive
and is merely the first stage of the strategic defensive. The decisive link
in the entire strategy is whether victory can be won in the stage of the
counter-offensive which follows.
4. STRATEGIC COUNTER-OFFENSIVE

To defeat the offensive of an enemy who enjoys absolute superiority we rely
on the situation created during the stage of our strategic retreat, a situation
which is favourable to ourselves, unfavourable to the enemy and different
from that at the beginning of his offensive. It takes many elements to make
up such a situation. All this has been dealt with above.

However, the presence of these conditions and of a situation favourable to
ourselves and unfavourable to the enemy does not mean that we have already
defeated him. Such conditions and such a situation provide the possibility
for our victory and his defeat, but do not constitute the reality of victory
or defeat; they have not yet brought actual victory or defeat to either army.
To bring about victory or defeat a decisive battle between the two armies
is necessary. Only a decisive battle can settle the question as to which
army is the victor and which the vanquished. This is the sole task in the
stage of strategic counter-offensive. The counter-offensive is a long process,
the most fascinating, the most dynamic, and also the final stage of a defensive
campaign. What is called active defence refers chiefly to this strategic
counter-offensive, which is in the nature of a decisive engagement.

Conditions and situation are created not only in the stage of the strategic
retreat, but continue to be created in that of the counter-offensive. Whether
in form or in nature, they are not exactly the same in the latter stage as
in the former.

What might remain the same in form and in nature, for example, is the fact
that the enemy troops will be even more fatigued and depleted, which is simply
a continuation of their fatigue and depletion in the previous stage.

But wholly new conditions and a wholly new situation are bound to emerge.
Thus, when the enemy has suffered one or more defeats, the conditions
advantageous to us and disadvantageous to him will not be confined to his
fatigue, etc., but a new factor will have been added, namely, that he has
suffered defeats. New changes will take place in the situation, too. When
the enemy begins to manoeuvre his troops in a disorderly way and to make
false moves, the relative strengths of the two opposing armies will naturally
no longer be the same as before.

But if it is not the enemy's forces but ours that have suffered one or more
defeats, then both the conditions and the situation will change in the opposite
direction. That is to say, the enemy's disadvantages will be reduced, while
on our side disadvantages will emerge and even grow. That again will be something
entirely new and different.

A defeat for either side will lead directly and speedily to a new effort
by the defeated side to avert disaster, to extricate itself from the new
conditions and the new situation unfavourable to it and favourable to the
enemy and to re-create such conditions and such a situation as are favourable
to it and unfavourable to its opponent, in order to bring pressure to bear
on the latter.

The effort of the winning side will be exactly the opposite. It will
strive to exploit its victory and inflict still greater damage on the
enemy, add to the conditions that are in its favour and further improve its
situation, and prevent the enemy from succeeding in extricating himself from
his unfavourable conditions and unfavourable situation and averting disaster.

Thus, for either side, the struggle at the stage of the decisive battle is
the most intense, the most complicated and the most changeful as well as
the most difficult and trying in the whole war or the whole campaign; it
is the most exacting time of all from the point of view of command.

In the stage of counter-offensive, there are many problems, the chief of
which are the starting of the counter-offensive, the concentration of troops,
mobile warfare, war of quick decision and war of annihilation.

Whether in a counter-offensive or in an offensive, the principles with regard
to these problems do not differ in their basic character. In this sense we
may say that a counter-offensive is an offensive.

Still, it is not exactly an offensive. The principles of the counter-offensive
are applied when the enemy is on the offensive. The principles of the offensive
are applied when the enemy is on the defensive. In this sense, there are
certain differences between a counter-offensive and an offensive.

For this reason, although the various operational problems are all included
in the discussion of the counter-offensive in the present chapter on the
strategic defensive, and although the chapter on the strategic offensive
will deal only with other problems in order to avoid repetition, we should
not overlook either the similarities or the differences between the
counter-offensive and the offensive when it comes to actual application.
 5. STARTING THE COUNTER-OFFENSIVE

The problem of starting a counter-offensive is the problem of the "initial
battle" or "prelude".

Many bourgeois military experts advise caution in the initial battle, whether
one is on the strategic defensive or on the strategic offensive, but
more especially when on the defensive. In the past we, too, have stressed
this as a serious point. Our operations against the five enemy campaigns
of "encirclement and suppression" in Kiangsi Province have given us rich
experience, a study of which will not be without benefit.

In his first campaign, the enemy employed about 100,000 men, divided Into
eight columns, to advance southward from the Kian-Chienning line against
the Red Army's base area. The Red Army had about 40,000 men and was concentrated
in the area of Huangpi and Hsiaopu in Ningtu County, Kiangsi Province.

The situation was as follows:

(1) The "suppression" forces did not exceed 100,000 men, none of whom were
Chiang Kai-shek's own troops, and the general situation was not very grave.

(2) The enemy division under Lo Lin, defending Kian, was located across the
Kan River to the west.

(3) The three enemy divisions under Kung Ping-fan, Chang Hui-tsan and Tan
Tao-yuan had advanced and occupied the Futien-Tungku-Lungkang-Yuantou sector
southeast of Kian and northwest of Ningtu. The main body of Chang Hui-tsan's
division was at Lungkang and that of Tan Tao-yuan's division at Yuantou.
It was not advisable to select Futien and Tungku as the battleground, as
the inhabitants, misled by the A-B Group, were for a time mistrustful of
and opposed to the Red Army.

(4) The enemy division under Liu Ho-ting was far away in Chienning in the
White area of Fukien, and was unlikely to cross into Kiangsi.

(5) The two enemy divisions under Mao Ping-wen and Hsu Keh-hsiang had entered
the Toupi-Lokou-Tungshao sector lying between Kuangchang and Ningtu. Toupi
was a White area, Lokou a guerrilla zone, and Tungshao, where there were
A-B Group elements, was a place from which information was liable to leak
out. Furthermore, if we were to attack Mao Ping-wen and Hsu Keh-hsiang and
then drive westward, the three enemy divisions m the west under Chang Hui-tsan,
Tan Tao-yuan and Kung Ping-fan might join forces, thus making it difficult
for us to win victory and impossible to bring the issue to a final solution.

(6) The two divisions under Chang Hui-tsan and Tan Tao-yuan, which made up
the enemy's main force, were troops belonging to Lu Ti-ping, who was
commander-in-chief of this "encirclement and suppression" campaign and governor
of Kiangsi Province, and Chang Hui-tsan was the field commander. To wipe
out these two divisions would be practically to smash the campaign. Each
division had about fourteen thousand men and Chang's was divided between
two places, so that if we attacked one division at a time we would enjoy
absolute superiority.

(7) The Lungkang-Yuantou sector, where the main forces of the Chang and Tan
divisions were located, was close to our concentrations, and there was good
popular support to cover our approach.

(8) The terrain in Lungkang was good. Yuantou was not easy to attack. But
were the enemy to advance to Hsiaopu to attack us, we would have good terrain
there too.

(9) We could mass the largest number of troops in the Lungkang sector. In
Hsingkuo, less than a hundred li to the southwest of Lungkang, we
had an independent division of over one thousand men, which could manoeuvre
in the enemy's rear.

(10) If our troops made a breakthrough at the centre and breached the enemy's
front, his columns to the east and west would be cut into two widely separated
groups.

For the above reasons, we decided that our first battle should be against
Chang Hui-tsan's main force, and we successfully hit two of his brigades
and his divisional headquarters, capturing the entire force of nine thousand
men and the divisional commander himself, without letting a single man or
horse escape. This one victory scared Tan's division into fleeing towards
Tungshao and Hsu's division into fleeing towards Toupi. Our troops then pursued
Tan's division and wiped out half of it. We fought two battles in five days
(December 27, 1930 to January 1, 1931), and, fearing defeat, the enemy forces
in Futien, Tungku and Toupi retreated in disorder. So ended the first campaign
of "encirclement and suppression".

The situation in the second campaign was as follows:

(1) The "suppression" forces numbering 200,000 were under the command of
Ho Ying-chin with headquarters at Nanchang.

(2) As in the first enemy campaign, none of the forces were Chiang Kai-shek's
own troops. Among them the 18th Route Army under Tsai Ting-kai, the 26th
under Sun Lien-chung and the 8th under Chu Shao-liang were strong, or fairly
strong, while all the rest were rather weak.

(3) The A-B Group had been cleaned up, and the entire population of the base
area supported the Red Army.

(4) The 5th Route Army under Wang Chin-yu, newly arrived from the north,
was afraid of us, and, generally speaking, so were the two divisions on its
left flank under Kuo Hua-tsung and Hao Meng-ling.

(5) If our troops attacked Futien first and then swept across to the east,
we could expand the base area to the Chienning-Lichuan-Taining sector on
the Pukien-Kiangsi border and acquire supplies to help smash the next
"encirclement and suppression" campaign. But if we were to thrust westward,
we would come up against the Kan River and have no room for expansion after
the battle. To turn east again after the battle would tire our troops and
waste time.

(6) Though our army (numbering over 30,000 men) was somewhat smaller than
in the first campaign, it had had four months in which to recuperate and
build up energy.

For these reasons, we decided, for our first battle, to engage the forces
of Wang Chin-yu and of Kung Ping-fan (totalling 11 regiments) in the Futien
sector. After winning this battle we attacked Kuo Huatsung, Sun Lien-chung,
Chu Shao-liang and Liu Ho-ting in succession. In fifteen days (from May 16
to May 30, 1931) we marched seven hundred li, fought five battles, captured
more than twenty thousand rifles and roundly smashed the enemy's "encirclement
and suppression" campaign. When fighting Wang Chin-yu, we were between the
two enemy forces under Tsai Ting-kai and Kuo Hua-tsung, some ten li from
the latter and forty li from the former, and some people said we were "getting
into a blind alley", but we got through all the same. This was mainly due
to the popular support we enjoyed in the base area and to the lack of
co-ordination among the enemy units. After Kuo Hua-tsung's division was defeated,
Hao Meng-ling's division fled by night back to Yungfeng, and so avoided disaster.

The situation in the third "encirclement and suppression" campaign was as
follows:

(1) Chiang Kai-shek personally took the held as commander-in-chief. Under
him there were three subordinate commanders, each in charge of a column--the
left, the right and the centre. The central column was commanded by Ho Ying-chin,
who, like Chiang Kai-shek, had his headquarters in Nanchang, the right was
commanded by Chen Ming-shu with headquarters at Kian, and the left by Chu
Shao-liang with headquarters at Nanfeng.

(2) The "suppression" forces numbered 300,000. The main forces, totalling
about 100,000 men, were Chiang Kai-shek's own troops and consisted of 5 divisions
(of 9 regiments each), commanded by Chen Cheng, Lo Cho-ying, Chao Kuan-tao,
Wei Lihuang and Chiang Ting-wen respectively. Besides these, there were 3
divisions (totalling 40,000 men) under Chiang Kuang-nai, Tsai Ting-kai and
Han Teh-chin. Then there was Sun Lien-chung's army of 20,000. In addition,
there were other, weaker forces that were likewise not Chiang's own troops.

(3) The enemy's strategy in this "suppression" campaign was to "drive straight
in", which was vastly different from the strategy of "consolidating at every
step" he used in the second campaign. The aim was to press the Red Army back
against the Kan River and annihilate it there.

(4) There was an interval of only one month between the end of the second
enemy campaign and the beginning of the third. The Red Army (then about 30,000
strong) had had neither rest nor replenishments after much hard fighting
and had just made a detour of a thousand li to concentrate at Hsingkuo in
the western part of the southern Kiangsi base area, when the enemy pressed
it hard from several directions.

In this situation the plan we first decided on was to move from Hsingkuo
by way of Wanan, make a breakthrough at Futien, and then sweep from west
to east across the enemy's rear communication lines, thus letting the enemy's
main forces make a deep but useless penetration into our base area in southern
Kiangsi; this was to be the first phase of our operation. Then when the enemy
turned back northward, inevitably very fatigued, we were to seize the opportunity
to strike at his vulnerable units; that was to be the second phase of our
operation. The heart of this plan was to avoid the enemy's main forces and
strike at his weak spots. But when our forces were advancing on Futien, we
were detected by the enemy, who rushed the two divisions under Chen Cheng
and Lo Cho-ying to the scene. We had to change our plan and fall back to
Kaohsinghsu in the western part of Hsingkuo County, which, together with
its environs of less than a hundred square li, was then the only place for
our troops to concentrate in. The day after our concentration we decided
to make a thrust eastward towards Lientang in eastern Hsingkuo County, Liangtsun
in southern Yungfeng County and Huangpi in northern Ningtu County. That same
night, under covet of darkness, we passed through the forty-li gap between
Chiang Ting-wen's division and the forces of Chiang Kuang-nai, Tsai Ting-kai
and Han Teh-chin, and swung to Lientang. On the second day we skirmished
with the forward units under Shangkuan Yun-hsiang (who was in command of
Hao Meng-ling's division as well as his own). The first battle was fought
on the third day with Shangkuan Yun-hsiang's division and the second battle
on the fourth day with Hao Meng-ling's division; after a three day march
we reached Huangpi and fought our third battle against Mao Ping-wen's division.
We won all three battles and captured over ten thousand rifles. At this point
all the main enemy forces, which had been advancing westward and southward,
turned eastward. Focusing on Huangpi, they converged at furious speed to
seek battle and closed in on us in a major compact encirclement. We slipped
through in the high mountains that lay in the twenty-li gap between the forces
of Chiang Kuang-nai, Tsai Ting-kai and Han Teh-chin on the one side and Chen
Cheng and Lo Cho-ying on the other, and thus, returning from the east to
the west, reassembled within the borders of Hsingkuo County. By the time
the enemy discovered this fact and began advancing west again, our forces
had already had a fortnight's rest, whereas the enemy forces, hungry, exhausted
and demoralized, were no good for fighting and so decided to retreat. Taking
advantage of their retreat, we attacked the forces of Chiang Kuang-nai, Tsai
Ting-kai, Chiang Ting-wen and Han Teh-chin, wiping out one of Chiang Ting-wen's
brigades and Han Tehchin's entire division. As for the divisions under Chiang
Kuang-nai and Tsai Ting-kai, the fight resulted in a stalemate and they got
away.

The situation in the fourth "encirclement and suppression" campaign was as
follows. The enemy was advancing on Kuangchang in three columns; the eastern
one was his main force, while the two divisions forming his western column
were exposed to us and were also very close to the area where our forces
were concentrated. Thus we had the opportunity to attack his western column
in southern Yihuang County first, and at one stroke we annihilated the two
divisions under Li Ming and Chen Shih-chi. As the enemy then sent two divisions
from the eastern column to give support to his central column and advanced
further, we were again able to wipe out a division in southern Yihuang County.
In these two battles we captured more than ten thousand rifles and, in the
main, smashed this campaign of "encirclement and suppression".

In his fifth campaign the enemy advanced by means of his new strategy of
building blockhouses and first occupied Lichuan. But, in attempting to recover
Lichuan and engage the enemy outside the base area, we made an attack north
of Lichuan at Hsiaoshih, which was an enemy strong point and was situated,
moreover, in the White area. Failing to win the battle, we shifted our attack
to Tzehsichiao, which was also an enemy strongpoint situated in the White
area southeast of Hsiaoshih, and again we failed. Then in seeking battle
we milled around between the enemy's main forces and his blockhouses and
were reduced to complete passivity. All through our fifth counter-campaign
against "encirclement and suppression", which lasted a whole year, we showed
not the slightest initiative or drive. In the end we had to withdraw from
our Kiangsi base area.

Our army's experience in these five counter-campaigns against "encirclement
and suppression" proves that the first battle in the counter-offensive is
of the greatest importance for the Red Army, which is on the defensive, if
it is to smash a large and powerful enemy "suppression" force. Victory or
defeat in the first battle has a tremendous effect upon the entire situation,
all the way to the final engagement. Hence we arrive at the following
conclusions.

First, the first battle must be won. We should strike only when positively
certain that the enemy's situation, the terrain and popular support are all
in our favour and not in his. Otherwise we should rather fall back and carefully
bide our time. There will always be opportunities; we should not rashly accept
battle. In our first counter-campaign we originally planned to strike at
Tan Tao-yuan's troops; we advanced twice but each time had to restrain ourselves
and pull back, because they would not budge from their commanding position
on the Yuantou heights. A few days later we sought out Chang Huitsan's troops,
which were more vulnerable to our attack. In our second counter-campaign
our army advanced to Tungku where, for the sole purpose of waiting for Wang
Chin-yu's men to leave their strongpoint at Futien, we encamped close to
the enemy for twenty-five days even at the risk of leakage of information;
we rejected all impatient suggestions for a quick attack and finally attained
our aim. In our third counter-campaign, although the storm was breaking all
around us and we had made a detour of a thousand li, and although the enemy
had discovered our plan to outflank him, we nevertheless exercised patience,
turned back, changed our tactics to a breakthrough in the centre, and finally
fought the first battle successfully at Lientang. In our fourth counter-campaign,
after our attack on Nanfeng had failed, we unhesitatingly withdrew, wheeled
round to the enemy's right flank, and reassembled our forces in the area
of Tungshao, whereupon we launched our great and victorious battle in southern
Yihuang County. It was only in the fifth counter-campaign that the importance
of the first battle was not recognized at all. Taking alarm at the loss of
the single county town of Lichuan, our forces marched north to meet the enemy
in an attempt to recover it. Then, the unexpected encounter at Hsunkou, which
had resulted in a victory (with the annihilation of an enemy division), was
not treated as the first battle, nor were the changes that were bound to
ensue foreseen, but instead Hsiaoshih was rashly attacked with no assurance
of success. Thus the initiative was lost at the very first move, and that
is really the worst and most stupid way to fight.

Second, the plan for the first battle must be the prelude to, and an organic
part of, the plan for the whole campaign. Without a good plan for the whole
campaign it is absolutely impossible to fight a really good first battle.
That is to say, even though victory is won in the first battle, if
the battle harms rather than helps the campaign as a whole, such a victory
can only be reckoned a defeat (as in the case of the battle of Hsunkou in
the fifth campaign). Hence, before fighting the first battle one must have
a general idea of how the second, third, fourth, and even the final battle
will be fought, and consider what changes will ensue in the enemy's situation
as a whole if we win, or lose, each of the succeeding battles. Although the
result may not--and, in fact, definitely will not--turn out exactly as we
expect, we must think everything out carefully and realistically in the light
of the general situation on both sides. Without a grasp of the situation
as a whole, it is impossible to make any really good move on the chessboard.

Third, one must also consider what will happen in the next strategic stage
of the war. Whoever directs strategy will not be doing his duty if he occupies
himself only with the counter-offensive and neglects the measures to be taken
after it succeeds, or in case it fails. In a particular strategic stage,
he should take into consideration the succeeding stages, or, at the very
least, the following one. Even though future changes are difficult to foresee
and the farther ahead one looks the more blurred things seem, a general
calculation is possible and an appraisal of distant prospects is necessary.
In war as well as in politics, planning only one step at a time as one goes
along is a harmful way of directing matters. After each step, it is necessary
to examine the ensuing concrete changes and to modify or develop one's strategic
and operational plans accordingly, or otherwise one is liable to make the
mistake of rushing straight ahead regardless of danger. However, it is absolutely
essential to have a long-term plan which has been thought out in its general
outline and which covers an entire strategic stage or even several strategic
stages. Failure to make such a plan will lead to the mistake of hesitating
and allowing oneself to be tied down, which in fact serves the enemy's strategic
objects and reduces one to a passive position. It must be borne in mind that
the enemy's supreme command is not lacking in strategic insight. Only when
we have trained ourselves to be a head taller than the enemy will strategic
victories be possible. During the enemy's fifth "encirclement and suppression"
campaign, failure to do so was the main reason for the errors in strategic
direction under the "Left" opportunist and the Chang Kuo-tao lines. In short,
in the stage of retreat we must see ahead to the stage of the counter-offensive,
in the stage of the counter-offensive we must see ahead to that of the offensive,
and in the stage of the offensive we must again see ahead to a stage of retreat.
Not to do so but to confine ourselves to considerations of the moment is
to court defeat.

The first battle must be won. The plan for the whole campaign must be taken
into account. And the strategic stage that comes next must be taken into
account. These are the three principles we must never forget when we begin
a counter-offensive, that is, when we fight the first battle.
6. CONCENTRATION OF TROOPS

The concentration of troops seems easy but is quite hard in practice. Everybody
knows that the best way is to use a large force to defeat a small one, and
yet many people fail to do so and on the contrary often divide their forces
up. The reason is that such military leaders have no head for strategy and
are confused by complicated circumstances; hence, they are at the mercy of
these circumstances, lose their initiative and have recourse to passive response.

No matter how complicated, grave and harsh the circumstances, what a military
leader needs most of all is the ability to function independently in organizing
and employing the forces under his command. He may often be forced into a
passive position by the enemy, but the important thing is to regain the
initiative quickly. Failure to do so spells defeat.

The initiative is not something imaginary but is concrete and material. Here
the most important thing is to conserve and mass an armed force that is as
large as possible and full of fighting spirit.

It is easy to fall into a passive position in defensive warfare, which gives
far less scope for the full exercise of initiative than does offensive warfare.
However, defensive warfare, which is passive in form, can be active in content,
and can be switched from the stage in which it is passive in form to the
stage in which it is active both in form and in content. In appearance a
fully planned strategic retreat is made under compulsion, but in reality
it is effected in order to conserve our strength and bide our time to defeat
the enemy, to lure him in deep and prepare for our counter-offensive. On
the other hand, refusal to retreat and hasty acceptance of battle (as in
the battle of Hsiaoshih) may appear a serious effort to gain the initiative,
while in reality it is passive. Not only is a strategic counter-offensive
active in content, but in form, too, it discards the passive posture of the
period of retreat. In relation to the enemy, our counter-offensive represents
our effort to make him relinquish the initiative and put him in a passive
position.

Concentration of troops, mobile warfare, war of quick decision and war of
annihilation are all necessary conditions for the full achievement of this
aim. And of these, concentration of troops is the first and most essential.

This concentration is necessary for the purpose of reversing the situation
as between the enemy and ourselves. First, its purpose is to reverse the
situation as regards advance and retreat. Previously it was the enemy who
was advancing and we who were retreating; now we seek a situation in which
we advance and he retreats. When we concentrate our troops and win a battle,
then in that battle we gain the above purpose, and this influences the whole
campaign.

Second, its purpose is to reverse the situation with regard to attack and
defence. In defensive warfare the retreat to the prescribed terminal point
belongs basically to the passive, or "defence", stage. The counter-offensive
belongs to the active, or "attack", stage. Although the strategic defensive
retains its defensive character throughout its duration, still as compared
with the retreat the counter-offensive already represents a change not only
in form but in content. The counter-offensive is transitional between the
strategic defensive and the strategic offensive, and in the nature of a prelude
to the strategic offensive; it is precisely for the purpose of the
counter-offensive that troops are concentrated.

Third, its purpose is to reverse the situation with regard to interior and
exterior lines. An army operating on strategically interior lines suffers
from many disadvantages, and this is especially so in the case of the Red
Army, confronted as it is with "encirclement and suppression". But in campaigns
and battles we can and absolutely must change this situation. We can turn
a big "encirclement and suppression" campaign waged by the enemy against
us into a number of small, separate campaigns of encirclement and suppression
waged by us against the enemy. We can change the converging attack directed
by the enemy against us on the plane of strategy into converging attacks
directed by us against the enemy on the plane of campaigns and battles. We
can change the enemy's strategic superiority over us into our superiority
over him in campaigns and battles. We can put the enemy who is in a strong
position strategically into a weak position in campaigns and battles. At
the same time we can change our own strategically weak position into a strong
position in campaigns and battles. This is what we call exterior-line operations
within interior-line operations, encirclement and suppression within
"encirclement and suppression", blockade within blockade, the offensive within
the defensive, superiority within inferiority, strength within weakness,
advantage within disadvantage, and initiative within passivity. The winning
of victory in the strategic defensive depends basically on this
measure--concentration of troops.

In the war annals of the Chinese Red Army, this has often been an important
controversial issue. In the battle of Kian on October 4, 1930, our advance
and attack were begun before our forces were fully concentrated, but fortunately
the enemy force (Teng Ying's division) fled of its own accord; by itself
our attack was ineffective.

Beginning from 1932, there was the slogan "Attack on all fronts", which called
for attacks from the base area in all directions--north, south, east and
west. This is wrong not only for the strategic defensive but even for the
strategic offensive. As long as there is no fundamental change in the over-all
balance of forces, both strategy and tactics involve the defensive and the
offensive, containing actions and assaults, and "attacks on all fronts" are
in fact extremely rare. This slogan expresses the military equalitarianism
which accompanies military adventurism.

In 1933 the exponents of military equalitarianism put forward the theory
of "striking with two 'fists'" and splitting the main force of the Red Army
in two, to seek victories simultaneously in two strategic directions. As
a result, one fist remained idle while the other was tired out with fighting,
and we failed to win the greatest victory possible at the time. In my opinion,
when we face a powerful enemy, we should employ our army, whatever its size,
in only one main direction at a time, not two. I am not objecting to operations
in two or more directions, but at any given time there ought to be only one
main direction. The Chinese Red Army, which entered the arena of the civil
war as a small and weak force, has since repeatedly defeated its powerful
antagonist and won victories that have astonished the world, and it has done
so by relying largely on the employment of concentrated strength. Any one
of its great victories can prove this point. When we say, "Pit one against
ten, pit ten against a hundred", we are speaking of strategy, of the whole
war and the over-all balance of forces, and in the strategic sense that is
just what we have been doing. However, we are not speaking of campaigns and
tactics, in which we must never do so. Whether in counter-offensives or
offensives, we should always concentrate a big force to strike at one part
of the enemy forces. We suffered every time we did not concentrate our troops,
as in the battles against Tan Tao-yuan in the Tungshao area of Ningtu County
in Kiangsi Province in January 1931, against the 19th Route Army in the
Kaohsinghsu area of Hsingkuo County in Kiangsi in August 1931, against Chen
Chi-tang in the Shuikouhsu area of Nanhsiung County in Kwangtung Province
in July 1932, and against Chen Cheng in the Tuantsun area of Lichuan County
in Kiangsi in March 1934. In the past, battles such as those of Shuikouhsu
and Tuantsun were generally deemed victories or even big victories (in the
former we routed twenty regiments under Chen Chi-tang, in the latter twelve
regiments under Chen Cheng), but we never welcomed such victories and in
a certain sense even regarded them as defeats. For, in our opinion, a battle
has little significance when there are no prisoners or war booty, or when
they do not outweigh the losses.

Our strategy is "pit one against ten" and our tactics are "pit ten against
one"--this is one of our fundamental principles for gaining mastery over
the enemy.

Military equalitarianism reached its extreme point in our fifth counter-campaign
against "encirclement and suppression" in 1934. It was thought that we could
beat the enemy by "dividing the forces into six routes" and "resisting on
all fronts", but instead we were beaten by the enemy, and the reason was
fear of losing territory. Naturally one can scarcely avoid loss of territory
when concentrating the main forces in one direction while leaving only containing
forces in others. But this loss is temporary and partial and is compensated
for by victory in the place where the assault is made. After such a victory
is won, territory lost in the area of the containing forces can be recovered.
The enemy's first, second, third and fourth campaigns of "encirclement and
suppression" all entailed the loss of territory-- particularly the third
campaign, in which the Kiangsi base area of the Red Army was almost completely
lost--but in the end we not only recovered but extended our territory.

Failure to appreciate the strength of the people in the base area has often
given rise to unwarranted fear of moving the Red Army too far away from the
base area. This happened when the Red Army in Kiangsi made a long drive to
attack Changchow in Fukien Province in 1932, and also when it wheeled around
to attack Fukien after the victory in our fourth counter-campaign in 1933.
There was fear in the first case that the enemy would seize the entire base
area, and in the second that he would seize part of it; consequently there
was opposition to concentrating our forces and advocacy of dividing them
up for defence, but in the end all this proved to be wrong. As far as the
enemy is concerned, he is afraid to advance into our base area, but the main
danger in his eyes is a Red Army that has driven into the White area. His
attention is always fixed on the whereabouts of the main force of the Red
Army, and he rarely takes his eyes off it to concentrate on the base area.
Even when the Red Army is on the defensive, it is still the centre of the
enemy's attention. Part of his over-all plan is to reduce the size of our
base area, but if the Red Army concentrates its main force to annihilate
one of his columns, the enemy's supreme command will be compelled to focus
greater attention on the Red Army and concentrate larger forces against it.
Hence it is possible to wreck an enemy plan for reducing the size of a base
area.

Also, it was wrong to say, "In the fifth 'encirclement and suppression' campaign
which is being carried on by means of blockhouse warfare, it is impossible
for us to operate with concentrated forces, and all we can do is to divide
them up for defence and for short swift thrusts." The enemy's tactics of
pushing forward 3, 5, 8, or 10 li at a time and building blockhouses at each
halt were entirely the result of the Red Army's practice of fighting defensive
actions at every successive point. The situation would certainly have been
different if our army had abandoned the tactics of point-by-point defence
on interior lines and, when possible and necessary, had turned and driven
into the enemy's interior lines. The principle of concentration of forces
is precisely the means for defeating the enemy's blockhouse warfare.

The kind of concentration of forces we advocate does not mean the abandonment
of people's guerrilla warfare. To abandon small-scale guerrilla warfare and
"concentrate every single rifle in the Red Army", as advocated by the Li
Li-san line, has long since been proved wrong. Considering the revolutionary
war as a whole, the operations of the people's guerrillas and those of the
main forces of the Red Army complement each other like a man's right arm
and left arm, and if we had only the main forces of the Red Army without
the people's guerrillas, we would be like a warrior with only one arm. In
concrete terms, and especially with regard to military operations, when we
talk of the people in the base area as a factor, we mean that we have an
armed people. That is the main reason why the enemy is afraid to approach
our base area.

It is also necessary to employ Red Army detachments for operations in secondary
directions; not all the forces of the Red Army should be concentrated. The
kind of concentration we advocate is based on the principle of guaranteeing
absolute or relative superiority on the battlefield. To cope with a strong
enemy or to fight on a battlefield of vital importance, we must have an
absolutely superior force; for instance, a force of 40,000 was concentrated
to fight the 9,000 men under Chang Hui-tsan on December 30, 1930, in the
first battle of our first counter-campaign. To cope with a weaker enemy or
to fight on a battlefield of no great importance, a relatively superior force
is sufficient; for instance, only some 10,000 Red Army men were employed
to fight Liu Ho-ting's division of 7,000 men in Chienning on May 29, 1931,
in the last battle of our second counter-campaign.

That is not to say we must have numerical superiority on every occasion.
In certain circumstances, we may go into battle with a relatively or absolutely
inferior force. Take the case of going into battle with a relatively inferior
force when we have only a rather small Red Army force in a certain area (it
is not that we have more troops and have not concentrated them). Then, in
order to smash the attack of the stronger enemy in conditions where popular
support, terrain and weather are greatly in our favour, it is of course necessary
to concentrate the main part of our Red Army force for a surprise attack
on a segment of one flank of the enemy while containing his centre and his
other flank with guerrillas or small detachments, and in this way victory
can be won. In our surprise attack on this segment of the enemy flank, the
principle of using a superior force against an inferior force, of using the
many to defeat the few, still applies. The same principle also applies when
we go into battle with an absolutely inferior force, for example, when a
guerrilla force makes a surprise attack on a large White army force, but
is attacking only a small part of it.

As for the argument that the concentration of a large force for action in
a single battle area is subject to the limitations of terrain, roads, supplies
and billeting facilities, it should be evaluated according to the circumstances.
There is a difference in the degree to which these limitations affect the
Red Army and the White army, as the Red Army can stand greater hardships
than the White army.

We use the few to defeat the many--this we say to the rulers of China as
a whole. We use the many to defeat the few--this we say to each separate
enemy force on the battlefield. That is no longer a secret, and in general
the enemy is by now well acquainted with our way. However, he can neither
prevent our victories nor avoid his own losses, because he does not know
when and where we shall act. This we keep secret. The Red Army generally
operates by surprise attacks.
7. MOBILE WARFARE

Mobile warfare or positional warfare? Our answer is mobile warfare. So long
as we lack a large army or reserves of ammunition, and so long as there is
only a single Red Army force to do the fighting in each base area, positional
warfare is generally useless to us. For us, positional warfare is generally
inapplicable in attack as well as in defence.

One of the outstanding characteristics of the Red Army's operations, which
follows from the fact that the enemy is powerful while the Red Army is deficient
in technical equipment, is the absence of fixed battle lines.

The Red Army's battle lines are determined by the direction in which it is
operating. As its operational direction often shifts, its battle lines are
fluid. Though the main direction does not change in a given period of time,
within its ambit the secondary directions may shift at any moment; when we
find ourselves checked in one direction, we must turn to another. If, after
a time, we also find ourselves checked in the main direction, then we must
change it too.

In a revolutionary civil war, there cannot be fixed battle lines, which was
also the case in the Soviet Union. The difference between the Soviet Army
and ours is that its battle lines were not so fluid as ours. There cannot
be absolutely fixed battle lines in any war, because the vicissitudes of
victory and defeat, advance and retreat, preclude it. But relatively fixed
battle lines are often to be found in the general run of wars. Exceptions
occur only where an army faces a much stronger enemy, as is the case with
the Chinese Red Army in its present stage.

Fluidity of battle lines leads to fluidity in the size of our base areas.
Our base areas are constantly expanding and contracting, and often as one
base area falls another rises. This fluidity of territory is entirely a result
of the fluidity of the war.

Fluidity in the war and in our territory produces fluidity in all fields
of construction in our base areas. Construction plans covering several years
are out of the question. Frequent changes of plan are all in the day's work.

It is to our advantage to recognize this characteristic. We must base our
planning on it and must not have illusions about a war of advance without
any retreats, take alarm at any temporary fluidity of our territory or of
the rear areas of our army, or endeavour to draw up detailed long-term plans.
We must adapt our thinking and our work to the circumstances, be ready to
sit down as well as to march on, and always have our marching rations handy.
It is only by exerting ourselves in today's fluid way of life that tomorrow
we can secure relative stability, and eventually full stability.

The exponents of the strategy of "regular warfare" which dominated our fifth
counter-campaign denied this fluidity and opposed| what they called
"guerrilla-ism". Those comrades who opposed fluidity managed affairs as though
they were the rulers of a big state, and the result was an extraordinary
and immense fluidity-- the 25,000-li Long March.

Our workers' and peasants' democratic republic is a state, but today it is
not yet a full-fledged one. Today we are still in the period of strategic
defensive in the civil war, the form of our political power is still far
from that of a full-fledged state, our army is still much inferior to the
enemy both in numbers and technical equipment, our territory is still very
small, and our enemy is constantly out to destroy us and will never rest
content till he has done so. In defining our policy on the basis of these
facts, we should not repudiate guerrilla-ism in general terms but should
honestly admit the guerrilla character of the Red Army. It is no use being
ashamed of this. On the contrary, this guerrilla character is precisely our
distinguishing feature, our strong point, and our means of defeating the
enemy. We should be prepared to discard it, but we cannot do so today. In
the future this guerrilla character will definitely become something to be
ashamed of and to be discarded, but today it is invaluable and we must stick
to it.

"Fight when you can win, move away when you can't win"--this is the popular
way of describing our mobile warfare today. There is no military expert anywhere
in the world who approves only of fighting and never of moving, though few
people do as much moving as we do. We generally spend more time in moving
than in fighting and would be doing well if we fought an average of one sizable
battle a month. All our "moving" is for the purpose of "fighting", and all
our strategy and tactics are built on "fighting". Nevertheless, there are
times when it is inadvisable for us to fight. In the first place, it is
inadvisable to fight when the force confronting us is too large; second,
it is sometimes inadvisable to fight when the force confronting us, though
not so large, is very dose to other enemy forces; third, it is generally
inadvisable to fight an enemy force that is not isolated and is strongly
entrenched; fourth, it is inadvisable to continue an engagement in which
there is no prospect of victory. In any one of these situations we are prepared
to move away. Such moving away is both permissible and necessary. For our
recognition of the necessity of moving away is based on our recognition of
the necessity of fighting. Herein lies the fundamental characteristic of
the Red Army's mobile warfare.

Mobile warfare is primary, but we do not reject positional warfare where
it is possible and necessary. It should be admitted that positional warfare
should be employed for the tenacious defence of particular key points in
a containing action during the strategic defensive, and when, during the
strategic offensive, we encounter an enemy force that is isolated and cut
off from help. We have had considerable experience in defeating the enemy
by such positional warfare; we have cracked open many enemy cities, blockhouses
and forts and broken through fairly well-fortified enemy field positions.
In future we shall increase our efforts and remedy our inadequacies in this
respect. We should by all means advocate positional attack or defence when
circumstances require and permit it. At the present time, what we are opposed
to is the general use of positional warfare or putting it on an equal footing
with mobile` warfare; that is impermissible.

During the ten years' civil war, have there been no changes whatsoever in
the guerrilla character of the Red Army, its lack of fixed battle lines,
the fluidity of its base areas, or the fluidity of construction work in its
base areas? Yes, there have been changes. The period from the days in the
Chingkang Mountains to our first counter-campaign against "encirclement and
suppression" in Kiangsi was the first stage, the stage in which the guerrilla
character and fluidity were very pronounced, the Red Army being in its infancy
and the base areas still being guerrilla zones. In the second stage, comprising
the period from the first to the third counter-campaign, both the guerrilla
character and the fluidity were considerably reduced, front armies having
been formed and base areas with a population of several millions established.
In the third stage, which comprised the period from the end of the third
to the fifth counter-campaign, the guerrilla character and the fluidity were
further reduced, and a central government and a revolutionary military commission
had already been set up. The fourth stage was the Long March. The mistaken
rejection of guerrilla warfare and fluidity on a small scale had led to guerrilla
warfare and fluidity on a great scale. Now we are in the fifth stage. Because
of our failure to smash the fifth "encirclement and suppression" campaign
and because of this great fluidity, the Red Army and the base areas have
been greatly reduced, but we have planted our feet in the Northwest and
consolidated and developed the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, our base
area here. The three front armies which form the main forces of the Red Army
have been brought under a unified command, which is unprecedented.

Going by the nature of our strategy, we may also say the period from the
days in the Chingkang Mountains to our fourth counter-campaign was one stage,
the period of the fifth counter-campaign was another, and the period from
the Long March to the present is the third. During the fifth counter-campaign
the correct policy of the past was wrongly discarded; today we have correctly
discarded the wrong policy adopted during the fifth counter-campaign and
revived the earlier and correct policy. However, we have not thrown out
everything in the fifth counter-campaign, nor revived everything that preceded
it. We have revived only what was good in the past, and discarded only the
mistakes of the period of the fifth counter-campaign.

Guerrilla-ism has two aspects. One is irregularity, that is, decentralization,
lack of uniformity, absence of strict discipline, and simple methods of work.
These features stemmed from the Red Army's infancy, and some of them were
just what was needed at the time. As the Red Army reaches a higher stage,
we must gradually and consciously eliminate them so as to make the Red Army
more centralized, more unified, more disciplined and more thorough in its
work--in short, more regular in character. In the directing of operations
we should also gradually and consciously reduce such guerrilla characteristics
as are no longer required at a higher stage. Refusal to make progress in
this respect and obstinate adherence to the old stage are impermissible and
harmful, and are detrimental to large-scale operations.

The other aspect of guerrilla-ism consists of the principle of mobile warfare,
the guerrilla character of both strategic and tactical operations which is
still necessary at present, the inevitable fluidity of our base areas,
flexibility in planning the development of the base areas, and the rejection
of premature regularization in building the Red Army. In this connection,
it is equally impermissible, disadvantageous and harmful to our present
operations to deny the facts of history, oppose the retention of what is
useful, and rashly leave the present stage in order to rush blindly towards
a "new stage", which as yet is beyond reach and has no real significance.

We are now on the eve of a new stage with respect to the Red Army's
technical equipment and organization. We must be prepared to go over to this
new stage. Not to prepare ourselves would be wrong and harmful to our future
warfare. In the future, when the technical and organizational conditions
in the Red Army have changed and the building of the Red Army has entered
a new stage, its operational directions and battle lines will become more
stable; there will be more positional warfare; the fluidity of the war, of
our territory and of our construction work will be greatly reduced and finally
disappear; and we will no longer be handicapped by present limitations, such
as the enemy's superiority and his strongly entrenched positions.

At present we oppose both the wrong measures of the period of the domination
of "Left" opportunism and the revival of many of the irregular features which
the Red Army had in its infancy but which are now unnecessary. But we should
be resolute in restoring the many valuable principles of army building and
of strategy and tactics by which the Red Army has consistently won its victories.
We must sum up all that is good from the past in a systematic, more highly
developed and richer military line, in order to win victories over the enemy
today and prepare to go over to the new stage in the future.

The waging of mobile warfare involves many problems, such as reconnaissance,
judgement, decision, combat disposition, command, concealment, concentration,
advance, deployment, attack, pursuit, surprise attack, positional attack,
positional defence, encounter action, retreat, night fighting, special
operations, evading the strong and attacking the weak, besieging the enemy
in order to strike at his reinforcements, feint attack, defence against aircraft,
operating amongst several enemy forces, by-passing operations, consecutive
operations, operating without a rear, the need for rest and building up energy.
These problems exhibited many specific features in the history of the Red
Army, features which should be methodically dealt with and summed up in the
science of campaigns, and I shall not go into them here.
 8. WAR OF QUICK DECISION

A strategically protracted war and campaigns or battles of quick decision
are two aspects of the same thing, two principles which should receive equal
and simultaneous emphasis in civil wars and which are also applicable in
anti-imperialist wars.

Because the reactionary forces are very strong, revolutionary forces grow
only gradually, and this fact determines the protracted nature of our war.
Here impatience is harmful and advocacy of "quick decision" incorrect. To
wage a revolutionary war for ten years, as we have done, might be surprising
in other countries, but for us it is like the opening sections in an
"eight-legged essay"-- the "presentation, amplification and preliminary
exposition of the theme" [36] -- and many exciting parts
are yet to follow. No doubt developments in the future will be greatly
accelerated under the influence of domestic and international conditions.
As changes have already taken place in the international and domestic situation
and greater changes are coming, it can be said that we have outgrown the
past state of slow development and fighting in isolation. But we should not
expect successes overnight. The aspiration to "wipe out the enemy before
breakfast" is admirable, but it is bad to make concrete plans to do so. As
China's reactionary forces are backed by many imperialist powers, our
revolutionary war will continue to be a protracted one until China's
revolutionary forces have built up enough strength to breach the main positions
of our internal and external enemies, and until the international revolutionary
forces have crushed or contained most of the international reactionary forces.
To proceed from this point in formulating our strategy of long-term warfare
is one of the important principles guiding our strategy.

The reverse is true of campaigns and battles--here the principle is not
protractedness but quick decision. Quick decision is sought in campaigns
and battles, and this is true at all times and in all countries. In a war
as a whole, too, quick decision is sought at all times and in all countries,
and a long drawn-out war is considered harmful. China's war, however, must
be handled with the greatest patience and treated as a protracted war. During
the period of the Li Li-san line, some people ridiculed our way of doing
things as "shadowboxing tactics" (meaning our tactics of fighting many battles
back and forth before going on to seize the big cities), and said that we
would not see the victory of the revolution until our hair turned white.
Such impatience was proved wrong long ago. But if their criticism had been
applied not to strategy but to campaigns and battles, they would have been
perfectly right, and for the following reasons. First, the Red Army has no
sources from which to replenish its arms and especially its ammunition; second,
the White forces consist of many armies while there is only one Red Army,
which must be prepared to fight one operation after another in quick succession
in order to smash each campaign of "encirclement and suppression"; and third,
though the White armies advance separately, most of them keep fairly close
to one another, and if we fail to gain a quick decision in attacking one
of them, all the others will converge upon us. For these reasons we have
to fight battles of quick decision. It is usual for us to conclude a battle
in a few hours, or in a day or two. It is only when our plan is to "besiege
the enemy in order to strike at his reinforcements" and our purpose is to
strike not at the besieged enemy but at his reinforcements that we are prepared
for a certain degree of protractedness in our besieging operations; but even
then we seek a quick decision against the reinforcements. A plan of protracted
operations is often applied in campaigns or battles when we are strategically
on the defensive and are tenaciously defending positions on a holding front,
or when, in a strategic offensive, we are attacking isolated enemy forces
cut off from help, or are eliminating White strongholds within our base areas.
But protracted operations of this kind help rather than hinder the main Red
Army force in its battles of quick decision.

A quick decision cannot be achieved simply by wanting it, but requires many
specific conditions. The main requirements are: adequate preparations, seizing
the opportune moment, concentration of superior forces, encircling and
outflanking tactics, favourable terrain, and striking at the enemy when he
is on the move, or when he is stationary but has not yet consolidated his
positions. Unless these requirements are satisfied, it is impossible to achieve
quick decision in a campaign or battle.

The smashing of an enemy "encirclement and suppression" is a major campaign,
but the principle of quick decision and not that of protractedness still
applies. For the manpower, financial resources and military strength of a
base area do not allow protractedness.

While quick-decision is the general principle, we must oppose undue impatience.
It is altogether necessary that the highest military and political leading
body of a revolutionary base area, having taken into account the circumstances
in its base area and the situation of the enemy, should not be overawed by
his truculence, dispirited by hardships that can be endured, or dejected
by setbacks, but should have the requisite patience and stamina. The smashing
of the first enemy "encirclement and suppression" campaign in Kiangsi Province
| took only one week from the first battle to the last; the second was smashed
in barely a fortnight; the third dragged on for three months; before it was
smashed; the fourth took three weeks; and the fifth taxed our endurance for
a whole year. When we were compelled to break through the enemy's encirclement
after the failure to smash his fifth campaign, we showed an unjustifiable
haste. In the circumstances then obtaining, we could well have held out for
another two or three months, giving the troops some time for rest and
reorganization. If that had been done, and if the leadership had been a little
wiser after our breakthrough, the outcome would have been very different.

For all that, the principle of shortening the duration of a campaign by every
possible means remains valid. Campaign and battle plans should call for our
maximum effort in concentration of troops, mobile warfare, and so on, so
as to ensure the destruction of the enemy's effective strength on the interior
lines (that is, in the base area) and the quick defeat of his "encirclement
and suppression" campaign, but where it is evident that the campaign cannot
be terminated on our interior lines, we should employ the main Red Army force
to break through the enemy's encirclement and switch to our exterior lines
(that is, the enemy's interior lines) in order to defeat him there. Now that
the enemy has developed his blockhouse warfare to a high degree, this will
become our usual method of operation. At the time of the Fukien Incident,
[37] two months after the commencement of our fifth
counter-campaign, the main forces of the Red Army should undoubtedly have
thrust into the Kiangsu-Chekiang-Anhwei-Kiangsi region, with Chekiang as
the centre, and swept over the length and breadth of the area between Hangchow,
Soochow, Nanking, Wuhu, Nanchang and Foochow, turning our strategic defensive
into a strategic offensive, menacing the enemy's vital centres and seeking
battles in the vast areas where there were no blockhouses. By such means
we could have compelled the enemy, who was attacking southern Kiangsi and
western Fukien, to turn back to defend his vital centres, broken his attack
on the base area in Kiangsi and rendered aid to Fukien People's Government--we
certainly could have aided it by this means. As this plan was rejected, the
enemy's fifth "encirclement and suppression" campaign could not be broken,
and the People's Government in Fukien inevitably collapsed. Even after a
year's fighting, though it had become inopportune for us to advance on Chekiang,
we could still have turned to the strategic offensive in another direction
by moving our main forces towards Hunan, that is, by driving into central
Hunan instead of going through Hunan to Kweichow, and in this way we could
have manoeuvred the enemy from Kiangsi into Hunan and destroyed him there.
As this plan, too, was rejected, all hope of breaking the enemy's fifth campaign
was finally dashed, and we had no alternative but to set out on the Long
March.


9. WAR OF ANNIHILATION

It is inappropriate to advocate a "contest of attrition" for the Chinese
Red Army today. A "contest of treasures" not between Dragon Kings but between
a Dragon King and a beggar would be rather ludicrous. For the Red Army which
gets almost all its supplies from the enemy, war of annihilation is the basic
policy. Only by annihilating the enemy's effective strength can we smash
his "encirclement and suppression" campaigns and expand our revolutionary
base areas. Inflicting casualties is a means of annihilating the enemy, or
otherwise there would be no sense to it. We incur losses ourselves in inflicting
casualties on the enemy, but we replenish ourselves by annihilating his units,
thereby not only making good our losses but adding to the strength of our
army. A battle in which the enemy is routed is not basically decisive in
a contest with a foe of great strength. A battle of annihilation, on the
other hand, produces a great and immediate impact on any enemy. Injuring
all of a man's ten fingers is not as effective as chopping off one, and routing
ten enemy divisions is not as effective as annihilating one of them.

Our policy for dealing with the enemy's first, second, third and fourth
"encirclement and suppression" campaigns was war of annihilation. The forces
annihilated in each campaign constituted only part of his total strength',
and yet all these "encirclement and suppression" campaigns were smashed.
In our fifth counter-campaign, however, the opposite policy was pursued,
which in fact helped the enemy to attain his aims.

War of annihilation entails the concentration of superior forces and the
adoption of encircling or outflanking tactics. We cannot have the former
without the latter. Conditions such as popular support, favourable terrain,
a vulnerable enemy force and the advantage of surprise are all indispensable
for the purpose of annihilation.

Merely routing one enemy force or permitting it to escape has meaning only
if, in the battle or campaign as a whole, our main force is concentrating
its operations of annihilation against another enemy force, or otherwise
it is meaningless. Here the losses are justified by the gains.

In establishing our own war industry we must not allow ourselves to become
dependent on it. Our basic policy is to rely on the war industries of the
imperialist countries and of our domestic enemy. We have a claim on the output
of the arsenals of London as well as of Hanyang, and, what is more, it is
delivered to us by the enemy's transport corps. This is the sober truth,
it is not a jest.
NOTES
1. The science of strategy, the science of campaigns and
the science of tactics are all components of Chinese military science. The
science of strategy deals with the laws that govern the war situation as
a whole. The science of campaigns deals with the laws that govern campaigns
and is applied in directing campaigns. The science of tactics deals with
the laws that govern battles and is applied in directing battles.
2. Sun Wu Tzu, or Sun Wu, was a famous Chinese military
scientist in the 5th century B.C., who wrote Sun Tzu, a treatise on
war containing thirteen chapters. This quotation is from Chapter 3, "The
Strategy of Attack".
3. When Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrote this article in 1936,
it was exactly fifteen years since the founding of the Chinese Communist
Party in July 1921.
4. Chen Tu-hsiu was originally a professor at Peking University
and became famous as an editor of New Youth. He was one of the founders
of the Communist Party of China. Owing to his reputation at the time of the
May 4th Movement and owing to the Party's immaturity in its initial period,
he became General Secretary of the Party. In the last period of the revolution
of 1924-27, the Rightist thinking in the Party represented by Chen Tu-hsiu
developed into a line of capitulationism. Comrade Mao Tse-tung has observed
that the capitulationists at that time "voluntarily gave up the Party's
leadership of the peasant masses, urban petty bourgeoisie and middle bourgeoisie,
and in particular gave up the Party's leadership of the armed forces, thus
causing the defeat of the revolution" ("The Present Situation and Our Tasks",
Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Eng. ed., FLP, Peking, 1961, Vol.
IV, p. 171). After the defeat of 1927 Chen Tu-hsiu and a handful of
other capitulationists lost faith in the future of the revolution and became
liquidationists. They took the reactionary Trotskyist stand and together
with the Trotskyites formed a small anti-Party group. Consequently Chen Tu-hsiu
was expelled from the Party in November 1929. He died in 1942.
5. The "Left" opportunism of Li Li-san, generally known
as the "Li Li-san line", refers to the "Left" opportunist line which existed
in the Party for about four months beginning from June 1930 and which was
represented by Comrade Li Li-san, then the most influential leader of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. The Li Li-san line had
the following characteristics: It violated the policy of the Party's Sixth
National Congress; it denied that mass strength had to be built up for the
revolution and denied that the development of the revolution was uneven;
it regarded as "extremely erroneous... localism and conservatism characteristic
of peasant mentality" the ideas of Comrade Mao Tse-tung that for a long time
we should devote our attention mainly to creating rural base areas, use the
rural areas to encircle the cities and use these bases to advance a high
tide of country-wide revolution; and it held that preparations should be
made for immediate insurrections in all parts of the country. On the basis
of this erroneous line, Comrade Li Li-san drew up an adventurist plan for
organizing immediate armed insurrections in the key cities throughout the
country. At the same time, he refused to recognize the uneven development
of the world revolution, holding that the general outbreak of the Chinese
revolution would inevitably lead to a general outbreak of world revolution,
without which the Chinese revolution could not be successful; he also refused
to recognize the protracted nature of China's bourgeois-democratic revolution,
holding that the beginnings of victory in one or more provinces would mark
the beginning of the transition to socialist revolution, and thus formulated
a number of inappropriate "Left" adventurist policies. Comrade Mao Tse-tung
opposed this erroneous line, and the broad masses of cadres and members in
the Party also demanded its rectification. At the Third Plenary Session of
the Party's Sixth Central Committee in September 1930 Comrade Li Li-san admitted
the mistakes that had been pointed out and then relinquished his leading
position in the Central Committee. Over a long period of time Comrade Li
Li-san corrected his wrong views, and so he was re-elected to the Central
Committee at the Seventh National Congress of the Party.
6. The Third Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee
of the Party held in September 1930, and the subsequent central leading body
adopted many positive measures to put an end to the Li Li-san line. But later
a number of Party comrades who were inexperienced in practical revolutionary
struggle, with Chen Shao-yu (Wang Ming) and Chin Pang-hsien (Po Ku) in the
lead, came out against the Central Committee's measures. In the pamphlet,
The Two Lines or The Struggle for the Further Bolshevization
of the Communist Party of China, they most emphatically declared that
the main danger then existing in the Party was not "Left" opportunism but
"Right opportunism" and, to justify their own activities, they "criticized"
the Li Li-san line as "Rightist". They put forward a new political programme
which continued, revived or developed the Li Li-san line and other "Left"
ideas and policies in a new guise, and set themselves against the correct
line of Comrade Mao Tse-tung. It was mainly to criticize the military mistakes
of this new "Left" opportunist line that Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrote the present
article "Problems of Strategy in China's Revolutionary War". This line was
dominant in the Party from the Fourth Plenary Session of the Sixth Central
Committee in January 1931 to the meeting of the Political Bureau convened
by the Central Committee at Tsunyi, Kweichow Province, in January 1935, which
ended the dominance of this erroneous line and established the new central
leadership headed by Comrade Mao Tse-tung. The erroneous "Left" line dominated
the Party for a particularly long time (four years) and brought extremely
heavy losses, with disastrous consequences, to the Party and the revolution.
A loss of go per cent was inflicted on the Chinese Communist Party, the Chinese
Red Army and its base areas tens of millions of people in the revolutionary
base areas were made to suffer the cruel oppression of the Kuomintang, and
the progress of the Chinese revolution was retarded. The overwhelming majority
of the errant comrades have realized and corrected their mistakes through
a long process of learning from experience and have done much good work for
the Party and the people. Under Comrade Mao Tse-tung's leadership they are
now united with the masses of other comrades in the Party on the basis of
a common political understanding.
7. For the Right opportunism of Chang Kuo-tao, see "On
Tactics Against Japanese Imperialism", Notes 21 and 22, pp. 175-76 of this
volume.
8. The Officers' Training Corps at Lushan was an organization
set up by Chiang Kai-shek in July 1933 on Lushan Mountain in Kiukiang, Kiangsi
Province, for training anti-Communist military cadres. Officers of Chiang
Kai-shek's armed forces were sent there in rotation to receive fascist military
and political training from German, Italian and American instructors.
9. These new military principles largely constituted the
Chiang Kai-shek gang's policy of "blockhouse warfare" in accordance with
which it advanced gradually and entrenched itself at every step.
10. See V. I. Lenin, " 'Communism' ", in which Lenin,
criticizing the Hungarian Communist Bela Kun, said that he "gives up the
most essential thing in Marxism, the living soul of Marxism, the concrete
analysis of concrete conditions" (Collected Works. Russ. ed., Moscow,
1950, Vol. XXXI, p. 143).
11. The First Party Congress of the Hunan-Kiangsi Border
Area was held on May 20, 1928 at Maoping, Ningkang County.
12. For an explanation, see pp. 236-37 of this volume.
13. For roving rebels, see "On Correcting Mistaken Ideas
in the Party", Notes 4 and 5, pp. 115-16 of this volume.
14. "Bandit ways" refers to plundering and looting resulting
from lack of discipline, organization and clear political direction.
15. The Long March of 25,000 li (12,500 kilometres) was
made by the Red Army from Kiangsi Province to northern Shensi Province. For
further reference, see "On Tactics Against Japanese Imperialism", Note 20,
p. 175 of this volume.
16. The period after the December uprising of 1905 was
defeated, in which the revolutionary tide in Russia gradually receded. See
History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks), Short
Course, Chapter 3, Sections 5 and 6.
17. The peace treaty of Brest-Litovsk was concluded between
Soviet Russia and Germany in March 1918. Confronted with obviously superior
enemy forces, the revolutionary forces had to make a temporary retreat in
order to prevent the German imperialists from launching an attack on the
new-born Soviet Republic, which as yet had no army of its own. The conclusion
of this treaty gained time for the Soviet Republic to consolidate the political
power of the proletariat, reorganize its economy and build up the Red Army.
It enabled the proletariat to maintain its leadership over the peasantry
and build up sufficient strength to defeat the White Guards and the armed
intervention of Britain, the United States, France, Japan, Poland and other
countries in 1918-20.
18. On October 30, 1927 the peasants of the Haifeng-Lufeng
area of Kwangtung Province launched their third insurrection under the leadership
of the Communist Party of China. They occupied Haifeng and Lufeng and the
surrounding area, organized a Red Army and established the democratic political
power of the workers and peasants. They were later defeated because they
made the mistake of underestimating the enemy.
19. The Fourth Front Army and the Second Front Army of
the Red Army joined forces in the autumn of 1936 and shifted northward from
the northeastern part of Sikang. Chang Kuo-tao was then still persisting
in his anti-Party stand and in his policy of retreat and liquidation. In
October of the same year, when the Second and Fourth Front Armies arrived
in Kansu, he ordered the advance units of the Fourth Front Army, numbering
more than 20,000, to organize the Western Column for crossing the Yellow
River and advancing westward to Chinghai. This Column was practically defeated
after suffering blows in battles in December 1936 and was completely defeated
in March 1937.
20. See letter from Karl Marx to L. Kugelmann on the Paris
Commune.
21. Shui Hu Chuan (Heroes of the Marshes) is a
celebrated Chinese novel describing a peasant war. The novel is attributed
to Shih Nai-an who lived around the end of the Yuan Dynasty and the beginning
of the Ming Dynasty (14th century). Lin Chung and Chai Chin are both heroes
in this novel. Hung is the drill master on Chai Chin's estate.
22. Lu and Chi were two feudal states in the Spring and
Autumn Era (722-481 B.C.). Chi was a big state in the central part of the
present Shantung Province, nod Lu was a smaller one in the southern part.
Duke Chuang reigned over Lu from 693 to 662 B.C.
23. Tsochiu Ming was the author of Tso Chuan, a
classical chronicle of the Chou Dynasty. For the passage quoted, see the
section in Tso Chuan enticed "The loth Year of Duke Chuang" (684 B.C.).
24. The ancient town of Chengkao, in the northwest of
the present Chengkao County, Honan Province, was of great military importance.
It was the scene of battles fought in 203 B.C. between Liu Pang, King of
Han, and Hsiang Yu, King of Chu. At first Hsiang Yu captured Hsingyang and
Chengkao and Liu Pang's troops were almost routed. Liu Pang waited until
the opportune moment when Hsiang Yu's troops were in midstream crossing the
Szeshui River, and then crushed them and recaptured Chengkao.
25. The ancient town of Kunyang, in the north of the present
Yehhsien County, Honan Province, was the place where Liu Hsiu, founder of
the Eastern Han Dynasty, defeated the troops of Wang Mang, Emperor of the
Hsin Dynasty, in A.D. 23. There was a huge numerical disparity between the
two sides, Liu Hsiu's forces totalling 8,000 to 9,000 men as against Wang
Mang's 400,000. But taking advantage of the negligence of Wang Mang's generals,
Wang Hsun and Wang Yi, who underestimated the enemy, Liu Hsiu with only 3,000
picked troops put Wang Mang's main forces to rout. He followed up this victory
by crushing the rest of the enemy troops.
26. Kuantu was in the northeast of the present Chungmou
County, Honan Province, and the scene of the battle between the armies of
Tsao Tsao and Yuan Shao in A.D. 200. Yuan Shao had an army of 100,000 while
Tsao Tsao had only a meagre force and was short of supplies. Taking advantage
of lack of vigilance on the part of Yuan Shao's troops, who belittled the
enemy, Tsao Tsao dispatched his light-footed soldiers to spring a surprise
attack on them and set their supplies on fire. Yuan Shao's army was thrown
into confusion and its main force wiped out.
27. The state of Wu was ruled by Sun Chuan, and the state
of Wei by Tsao Tsao. Chihpi is situated on the south bank of the Yangtse
River, to the northeast of Chinyni Hupeh Province. In A.D. 208 Tsao Tsao
led an army of over 500,000 men, which he proclaimed to be 800,000 strong,
to launch an attack on Sun Chuan. The latter, in alliance with Tsao
Tsao's antagonist Liu Pei, mustered a force of 30,000. Knowing that Tsao
Tsao's army was plagued by epidemics and was unaccustomed to action
afloat, the allied forces of Sun Chuan and Liu Pei set fire to Tsao Tsao's
fleet and crushed his army.
28. Yiling, to the east of the present Ichang, Hupeh Province,
was the place where Lu Hsun, a general of the state of Wu, defeated
the army of Liu Pei, ruler of Shu, in A.D. 222. Liu Pei's troops scored
successive victories at the beginning of the war and penetrated five
or six hundred li into the territory of Wu as far as Yiling. Lu Hsun, who
was defending Yiling, avoided battle for over seven months until Liu Pei
"was at his wits' end and his troops were exhausted and demoralized".
Then he crushed Liu Pei's troops by taking advantage of a favourable
wind to set fire to their tents.
29. Hsieh Hsuan, a general of Eastern Tsin Dynasty, defeated
Pu Chien, ruler of the state of Chin, in A.D. 383 at the Peishui River
in Anhwei Province. Pu Chien had an infantry force of more than 600,000,
a cavalry force of 270,000 and a guards corps of more than 30,000, while
the land and river forces of Eastern Tsin numbered only 80,000. When the
armies lined up on opposite banks of the Peishui River, Hsieh Hsuan, taking
advantage of the overconfidence and conceit of the enemy troops, requested
Pu Chien to move his troops back so as to leave room for the Eastern Tsin
troops to cross the river and fight it out. Pu Chien complied, but when he
ordered withdrawal, his troops got into a panic and could not be stopped.
Seizing the opportunity, the Eastern Tsin troops crossed the river, launched
an offensive and crushed the enemy.
30. Nanchang, capital of Kiangsi Province, was the scene
of the famous uprising on August l, 1927 led by the Communist Party of China
in order to combat the counterrevolution of Chiang Kai-shek and Wang Ching-wei
and to continue the revolution of 1924-27. More than thirty thousand troops
took part in the uprising which was led by Comrades Chou En-lai, Chu The,
Ho Lung and Yeh Ting. The insurrectionary army withdrew from Nanchang on
August 5 as planned, but suffered a defeat when approaching Chaochow and
Swatow in Kwangtung Province. Led by Comrades Chu Teh, Chen Yi and Lin Piao,
part of the troops later fought their way to the Chingkang Mountains and
joined forces with the 1st Division of the First Workers' and Peasants'
Revolutionary Army under Comrade Mao Tse-tung.
31. See "Why Is It That Red Political Power Can Exist
in China?", Note 8, p. 72 of this volume.
32. The famous Autumn Harvest Uprising under the leadership
of Comrade Mao Tse-tung was launched in September 1927 by the people's armed
forces of Hsiushui, Pinghsiang, Pingkiang and Liuyang Counties on the
Hunan-Kiangd border, who formed the 1st Division of the First Workers' and
Peasants' Revolutionary Army. Comrade Mao Tse-tung led this force to the
Chingkang Mountains where a revolutionary base was established.
33. The A-B (initials for "Anti-Bolshevik") Group was
a counter-revolutionary organization of undercover Kuomintang agents in the
Red areas.
34. See V. I. Lenin, "Theses on the Question of the Immediate
Conclusion of a Separate and Annexationist Peace", "Strange and Monstrous",
"A Serious Lesson and a Serious Responsibility", "Report on War and Peace",
Selected Works, in two volumes, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1952,
Vol. II, Part I, and also History of thc Communist Party of thc Soviet
Union (Bolsheviks), Short Course, Chapter 7, Section 7.
35. The regions referred to here are those inhabited by
the Tibetans in Sikang and the Hui people in Kansu, Chinghai and Sinkiang
Provinces.
36. The "eight-legged essay" was the prescribed form in
the imperial competitive examinations in feudal China from the 15th to the
19th century. The main body of the essay was made up of the inceptive paragraph,
the middle paragraph, the rear paragraph and the concluding paragraph, with
each paragraph comprising two parts. Here Comrade Mao Tse-tung is using the
development of the theme in this kind of essay as a metaphor to illustrate
the development of the revolution through its various stages. However, Comrade
Mao Tse-tung generally uses the term "eight-legged essay" to ridicule dogmatism.
37. In November 1933, under the influence of the people's
anti-Japanese upsurge throughout China, the leaders of the Kuomintang's 19th
Route Army, in alliance with the Kuomintang forces under Li Chi-shen, publicly
renounced Chiang Kai-shek and established the "People's Revolutionary Government
of the Republic of China" in Fukien, concluding an agreement with the Red
Army to attack Chiang Kai-shek and resist Japan. This episode was referred
to as the Fukien Incident. The 19th Route Army and Fukien People's Government,
however, collapsed under the attacks of Chiang Kai-shek's troops.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Problems of Strategy in Guerilla War Against Japan







PROBLEMS OF STRATEGY IN GUERRILLA WAR AGAINST JAPAN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  PROBLEMS OF STRATEGY IN GUERRILLA WAR AGAINST JAPAN


May 1938

[In the early days of the War of Resistance Against Japan, many people
inside and outside the Party belittled the important strategic role of guerrilla
warfare and pinned their hopes on regular warfare alone, and particularly
on the operations of the Kuomintang forces. Comrade Mao Tse-tung refuted
this view and wrote this article to show the correct road of development
for anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare. As a result, the Eighth Route Army and
the New Fourth Army, which had just over 40,000 men when the War of Resistance
began in 1937, grew to a great army of one million by the time Japan surrendered
in 1945, established many revolutionary base areas, played a great part in
the war and thus, throughout this period, made Chiang Kai-shek afraid to
capitulate to Japan or launch a nation-wide civil war. In 1946, when Chiang
Kai-shek did launch a nation-wide civil war, the People's Liberation Army,
formed out of the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies, was strong enough to
deal with his attacks.] 



CHAPTER I


WHY RAISE THE QUESTION OF STRATEGY IN GUERRILLA WAR?


In the War of Resistance Against Japan, regular warfare is primary and
guerrilla warfare supplementary. This point has already been correctly settled.
Thus, it seems there are only tactical problems in guerrilla warfare. Why
then raise the question of strategy?

If China were a small country in which the role of guerrilla warfare was
only to render direct support over short distances to the campaigns of the
regular army, there would, of course, be only tactical problems but no strategic
ones. On the other hand, if China were a country as strong as the Soviet
Union and the invading enemy could either be quickly expelled, or, even though
his expulsion were to take some time, he could not occupy extensive areas,
then again guerrilla warfare would simply play a supporting role in campaigns,
and would naturally involve only tactical but not strategic problems.

The question of strategy in guerrilla war does arise, however, in the case
of China, which is neither small nor like the Soviet Union, but which is
both a large and a weak country. This large and weak country is being attacked
by a small and strong country, but the large and weak country is in an era
of progress; this is the source of the whole problem. It is in these
circumstances that vast areas have come under enemy occupation and that the
war has become a protracted one. The enemy is occupying vast areas of this
large country of ours, but Japan is a small country, she does not have sufficient
soldiers and has to leave many gaps in the occupied areas, so that our
anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare consists primarily not in interior-line
operations in support of the campaigns of the regular troops but in independent
operations on exterior lines; furthermore, China is progressive, that is
to say, she has a staunch army and broad masses of people, both led by the
Communist Party, so that, far from being small-scale, our anti-Japanese guerrilla
warfare is in fact large-scale warfare. Hence the emergence of a whole series
of problems, such as the strategic defensive, the strategic offensive, etc.
The protracted nature of the war and its attendant ruthlessness have made
it imperative for guerrilla warfare to undertake many unusual tasks; hence
such problems as those of the base areas, the development of guerrilla warfare
into mobile warfare, and so on. For all these reasons, China's guerrilla
warfare against Japan has broken out of the bounds of tactics to knock at
the gates of strategy, and it demands examination from the viewpoint of strategy.
The point that merits our particular attention is that such extensive as
well as protracted guerrilla warfare is quite new in the entire history of
war. This is bound up with the fact that we are now in the Nineteen Thirties
and Nineteen Forties and that we now have the Communist Party and the Red
Army. Herein lies the heart of the matter. Our enemy is probably still cherishing
fond dreams of emulating the Mongol conquest of the Sung Dynasty, the Manchu
conquest of the Ming Dynasty, the British occupation of North America and
India, the Latin occupation of Central and South America, etc. But such dreams
have no practical value in present-day China because there are certain factors
present in the China of today which were absent in those historical instances,
and one of them is guerrilla warfare, which is quite a new phenomenon. If
our enemy overlooks this fact, he will certainly come to grief.

These are the reasons why our anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare, though occupying
only a supplementary place in the War of Resistance as a whole, must nevertheless
be examined from the viewpoint of strategy.

Why not, then, apply to guerrilla warfare the general strategic principles
of the War of Resistance?

The question of strategy in our anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare is indeed
closely linked with the question of strategy in the War of Resistance as
a whole, because they have much in common. On the other hand, guerrilla warfare
is different from regular warfare and has its own peculiarities, and consequently
many peculiar elements are involved in the question of strategy in guerrilla
warfare. Without modification it is impossible to apply the strategic principles
of the War of Resistance in general to guerrilla warfare with its own
peculiarities.

CHAPTER II


THE BASIC PRINCIPLE OF WAR IS TO PRESERVE ONESELF AND DESTROY
  THE ENEMY 


Before discussing the question of strategy in guerrilla warfare in concrete
terms, a few words are needed on the fundamental problem of war.

All the guiding principles of military operations grow out of the one basic
principle: to strive to the utmost to preserve one's own strength and destroy
that of the enemy. In a revolutionary war, this principle is directly linked
with basic political principles. For instance, the basic political principle
of China's War of Resistance Against Japan, i.e., its political
aim, is to drive out Japanese imperialism and build an independent, free
and happy new China. In terms of military action this principle means the
use of armed force to defend our motherland and to drive out the Japanese
invaders. To attain this end, the operations of the armed units take the
form of doing their utmost to preserve their own strength on the one hand
and destroy the enemies on the other. How then do we justify the encouragement
of heroic sacrifice in war? Every war exacts a price, sometimes an extremely
high one. Is this not in contradiction with "preserving oneself"? In fact,
these is no contradiction at all; to put it more exactly; sacrifice and
self-preservation are both opposite and complementary to each other. For
such sacrifice is essential not only for destroying the enemy but also for
preserving oneself--partial and temporary "non-preservation" (sacrifice,
or paying the price) is necessary for the sake of general and permanent
preservation. From this basic principle stems the series of principles guiding
military operations, all of which--from the principles of shooting (taking
cover to preserve oneself, and making full use of fire-power to destroy the
enemy) to the principles of strategy--are permeated with the spirit of this
basic principle. All technical, tactical and strategic principles represent
applications of this basic principle. The principle of preserving oneself
and destroying the enemy is the basis of all military principles.

CHAPTER III


SIX SPECIFIC PROBLEMS OF STRATEGY IN GUERRILLA WAR AGAINST
  JAPAN


Now let us see what policies or principles have to be adopted in guerrilla
operations against Japan before we can attain the object of preserving ourselves
and destroying the enemy. Since the guerrilla units in the War of Resistance
(and in all other revolutionary wars) generally grow out of nothing and expand
from a small to a large force, they must preserve themselves and, moreover,
they must expand. Hence the question is, what policies or principles have
to be adopted before we can attain the object of preserving and expanding
ourselves and destroying the enemy?

Generally speaking, the main principles are as follows: (1) the use of
initiative, flexibility and planning in conducting offensives within the
defensive, battles of quick decision within protracted war, and exterior-line
operations within interior-line operations; (2) co-ordination with regular
warfare; (3) establishment of base areas; (4) the strategic defensive and
the strategic offensive; (5) the development of guerrilla warfare into mobile
warfare; and (6) correct relationship of command. These six items constitute
the whole of the strategic programme for guerrilla war against Japan and
are the means necessary for the preservation and expansion of our forces,
for the destruction and expulsion of the enemy, for co-ordination with regular
warfare and the winning of final victory.

CHAPTER IV


INITIATIVE, FLEXIBILITY AND PLANNING IN CONDUCTING OFFENSIVES
  WITHIN THE DEFENSIVE, BATTLES OF QUICK DECISION WITHIN PROTRACTED WAR, AND
  EXTERIOR-LINE OPERATIONS WITHIN INTERIOR-LINE OPERATIONS


Here the subject may be dealt with under four headings: (1) the relationship
between the defensive and the offensive, between protractedness and quick
decision, and between the interior and exterior lines; (2) the initiative
in all operations; (3) flexible employment of forces; and (4) planning in
all operations.

To start with the first.

If we take the War of Resistance as a whole, the fact that Japan is a strong
country and is attacking while China is a weak country and is defending herself
makes our war strategically a defensive and protracted war. As far as the
operational lines are concerned, the Japanese are operating on exterior and
we on interior lines. This is one aspect of the situation. But there is another
aspect which is just the reverse. The enemy forces, though strong (in arms,
in certain qualities of their men, and certain other factors), are numerically
small, whereas our forces, though weak (likewise, in arms, in certain qualities
of our men, and certain other factors), are numerically very large. Added
to the fact that the enemy is an alien nation invading our country while
we are resisting his invasion on our own soil, this determines the following
strategy. It is possible and necessary to use tactical offensives within
the strategic defensive, to fight campaigns and battles of quick decision
within a strategically protracted war and to fight campaigns and battles
on exterior lines within strategically interior lines. Such is the strategy
to be adopted in the War of Resistance as a whole. It holds true both for
regular and for guerrilla warfare. Guerrilla warfare is different only in
degree and form. Offensives in guerrilla warfare generally take the form
of surprise attacks. Although surprise attacks can and should be employed
in regular warfare too, the degree of surprise is less. In guerrilla warfare,
the need to bring operations to a quick decision is very great, and our
exterior-line ring of encirclement of the enemy in campaigns and battles
is very small. All these distinguish it from regular warfare.

Thus it can be seen that in their operations guerrilla units have to concentrate
the maximum forces, act secretly and swiftly, attack the enemy by surprise
and bring battles to a quick decision, and that they must strictly avoid
passive defence, procrastination and the dispersal of forces before engagements.
Of course, guerrilla warfare includes not only the strategic but also the
tactical defensive. The latter embraces, among other things, containing and
outpost actions during battles; the disposition of forces for resistance
at narrow passes, strategic points, rivers or villages in order to deplete
and exhaust the enemy; and action to cover withdrawal. But the basic principle
of guerrilla warfare must be the offensive, and guerrilla warfare is more
offensive in its character than regular warfare. The offensive, moreover,
must take the form of surprise attacks, and to expose ourselves by ostentatiously
parading our forces is even less permissible in guerrilla warfare than in
regular warfare. From the fact that the enemy is strong and we are weak it
necessarily follows that, in guerrilla operations in general even more than
in regular warfare, battles must be decided quickly, though on some occasions
guerrilla fighting may be kept up for several days, as in an assault on a
small and isolated enemy force cut off from help. Because of its dispersed
character, guerrilla warfare can spread everywhere, and in many of its tasks,
as in harassing, containing and disrupting the enemy and in mass work, its
principle is dispersal of forces; but a guerrilla unit, or a guerrilla formation,
must concentrate its main forces when it is engaged in destroying the enemy,
and especially when it is striving to smash an enemy attack. "Concentrate
a big force to strike at a small section of the enemy force" remains a principle
of field operations in guerrilla warfare.

Thus it can also be seen that, if we take the War of Resistance as a whole,
we can attain the aim of our strategic defensive and finally defeat Japanese
imperialism only through the cumulative effect of many offensive campaigns
and battles in both regular and guerrilla warfare, namely, through the cumulative
effect of many victories in offensive actions. Only through the cumulative
effect of many campaigns and battles of quick decision, namely, the cumulative
effect of many victories achieved through quick decision in offensive campaigns
and battles, can we attain our goal of strategic protractedness, which means
gaining time to increase our capacity to resist while hastening or awaiting
changes in the international situation and the internal collapse of the enemy,
in order to be able to launch a strategic counter-offensive and drive the
Japanese invaders out of China. We must concentrate superior forces and fight
exterior-line operations in every campaign or battle, whether in the stage
of strategic defensive or in that of strategic counter-offensive, in order
to encircle and destroy the enemy forces, encircling part if not all of them,
destroying part if not all of the forces we have encircled, and inflicting
heavy casualties on the encircled forces if we cannot capture them in large
numbers. Only through the cumulative effect of many such battles of annihilation
can we change the relative position as between the enemy and ourselves,
thoroughly smash his strategic encirclement--that is, his scheme of exterior-line
operations--and finally, in co-ordination, with international forces and
the revolutionary struggles of the Japanese people, surround the Japanese
imperialists and deal them the coup de grace. These results are
to be achieved mainly through regular warfare, with guerrilla warfare making
a secondary contribution. What is common to both, however, is the accumulation
of many minor victories to make a major victory. Herein lies the great strategic
role of guerrilla warfare in the War of Resistance.

Now let us discuss initiative, flexibility and planning in guerrilla warfare.

What is initiative in guerrilla warfare?

In any war, the opponents contend for the initiative, whether on a battlefield,
in a battle area, in a war zone or in the whole war, for the initiative means
freedom of action for an army. Any army which, losing the initiative, is
forced into a passive position and ceases to have freedom of action, faces
the danger of defeat or extermination. Naturally, gaining the initiative
is harder in strategic defensive and interior-line operations and easier
in offensive exterior-line operations. However, Japanese imperialism has
two basic weaknesses, namely, its shortage of troops and the fact that it
is fighting on foreign soil. Moreover, its underestimation of China's strength
and the internal contradictions among the Japanese militarists have given
rise to many mistakes in command, such as piecemeal reinforcement, lack of
strategic coordination, occasional absence of a main direction for attack,
failure to grasp opportunities in some operations and failure to wipe out
encircled forces, all of which may be considered the third weakness of Japanese
imperialism. Thus, despite the advantage of being on the offensive and operating
on exterior lines, the Japanese militarists are gradually losing the initiative,
because of their shortage of troops (their small territory, small population,
inadequate resources, feudalistic imperialism, etc.), because of the fact
that they are fighting on foreign soil (their war is imperialist and barbarous)
and because of their stupidities in command. Japan is neither willing nor
able to conclude the war at present, nor has her strategic offensive yet
come to an end, but, as the general trend shows, her offensive is confined
within certain limits, which is the inevitable consequence of her three
weaknesses; she cannot go on indefinitely till she swallows the whole of
China. Already there are signs that Japan will one day find herself in an
utterly passive position. China, on the other hand, was in a rather passive
position at the beginning of the war, but, having gained experience, she
is now turning to the new policy of mobile warfare, the policy of taking
the offensive, seeking quick decisions and operating on exterior lines in
campaigns and battles, which, together with the policy of developing
widespread guerrilla warfare, is helping China to build up a position of
initiative day by day.

The question of the initiative is even more vital in guerrilla warfare. For
most guerrilla units operate in very difficult circumstances, fighting without
a rear, with their own weak forces facing the enemy's strong forces, lacking
experience (when the units are newly organized), being separated, etc.
Nevertheless, it is possible to build up the initiative in guerrilla warfare,
the essential condition being to seize on the enemy's three weaknesses. Taking
advantage of the enemy's shortage of troops (from the viewpoint of the war
as a whole), the guerrilla units can boldly use vast areas as their fields
of operation; taking advantage of the fact that the enemy is an alien invader
and is pursuing a most barbarous policy, the guerrilla units can boldly enlist
the support of millions upon millions of people; and taking advantage of
the stupidities in the enemy's command, the guerrilla units can give full
scope to their resourcefulness. While the regular army must seize on all
these weaknesses of the enemy and turn them to good account in order to defeat
him, it is even more important for the guerrilla units to do so. As for the
guerrilla units' own weaknesses, they can be gradually reduced in the course
of the struggle. Moreover, these weaknesses sometimes constitute the very
condition for gaining the initiative. For example, it is precisely because
the guerrilla units are small that they can mysteriously appear and disappear
in their operations behind enemy lines, without the enemy's being able to
do anything about them, and thus enjoy a freedom of action such as massive
regular armies never can.

When the enemy is making a converging attack from several directions' a guerrilla
unit can exercise initiative only with difficulty and can lose it all too
easily. In such a case, if its appraisals and dispositions are wrong, it
is liable to get into a passive position and consequently fail to smash the
converging enemy attack. This may occur even when the enemy is on the defensive
and we are on the offensive. For the initiative results from making a correct
appraisal of the situation (both our own and that of the enemy) and from
making the correct military and political dispositions. A pessimistic appraisal
out of accord with the objective conditions and the passive dispositions
ensuing from it will undoubtedly result in the loss of the initiative and
throw one into a passive position. On the other hand, an over-optimistic
appraisal out of accord with the objective conditions and the risky
(unjustifiably risky) dispositions ensuing from it will also result in the
loss of the initiative and eventually land one in a position similar to that
of the pessimists. The initiative is not an innate attribute of genius, but
is something an intelligent leader attains through open-minded study and
correct appraisal of the objective conditions and through correct military
and political dispositions. It follows that the initiative is not ready-made
but is something that requires conscious effort.

When forced into a passive position through some incorrect appraisal and
disposition or through overwhelming pressure, a guerrilla unit must strive
to extricate itself. How this can be done depends on the circumstances. In
many cases it is necessary to "move away". The ability to move is the distinctive
feature of a guerrilla unit. To move away is the principal method for getting
out of a passive position and regaining the initiative. But it is not the
sole method. The moment when the enemy is most energetic and we are in the
greatest difficulties is often the very moment when things begin to turn
against him and in our favour. Frequently a favourable situation recurs and
the initiative is regained as a result of "holding out a little longer".

Next, let us deal with flexibility.

Flexibility is a concrete expression of the initiative. The flexible employment
of forces is more essential in guerrilla warfare than in regular warfare.

A guerrilla commander must understand that the flexible employment of his
forces is the most important means of changing the situation as between the
enemy and ourselves and of gaining the initiative. The nature of guerrilla
warfare is such that guerrilla forces must be employed flexibly in accordance
with the task in hand and with such circumstances as the state of the enemy,
the terrain and the local population, and the chief ways of employing the
forces are dispersal, concentration and shifting of position. In employing
his forces, a guerrilla commander is like a fisherman casting his net, which
he should be able to spread wide as well as draw in tight. When casting his
net, the fisherman has to ascertain the depth of the water, the speed of
the current and the presence or absence of obstructions; similarly, when
dispersing his units, a guerrilla commander must take care not to incur losses
through ignorance of the situation or through miscalculated action. Just
as the fisherman must keep a grip on the cord in order to draw his net in
tight, so the guerrilla commander must maintain liaison and communication
with all his forces and keep enough of his main forces at hand. Just as a
frequent change of position is necessary in fishing, so a frequent shift
of position is necessary for a guerrilla unit. Dispersal, concentration and
shifting of position are the three ways of flexibly employing forces in guerrilla
warfare.

Generally speaking, the dispersal of guerrilla units, or "breaking up the
whole into parts", is employed chiefly: (1) when we want to threaten the
enemy with a wide frontal attack because he is on the defensive, and there
is temporarily no chance to mass our forces for action; (2) when we want
to harass and disrupt the enemy throughout an area where his forces are weak;
(3) when we are unable to break through the enemy's encirclement and try
to slip away by making ourselves less conspicuous; (4) when we are restricted
by terrain or supplies; or (5) when we are carrying on mass work over a wide
area. But whatever the circumstances, when dispersing for action we should
pay attention to the following: (1) we should never make an absolutely
even dispersal of forces, but should keep a fairly large part in an area
convenient for manoeuvre, so that any possible exigency can be met and there
is a centre of gravity for the task being carried out in dispersion; and
(2) we should assign to the dispersed units clearly defined tasks, fields
of operation, time limits for actions, places for reassembly and ways and
means of liaison.

Concentration of forces, or "assembling the parts into a whole", is the method
usually applied to destroy an enemy when he is on the offensive and sometimes
to destroy some of his stationary forces when he is on the defensive.
Concentration of forces does not mean absolute concentration, but the massing
of the main forces for use in one important direction while retaining or
dispatching part of the forces for use in other directions to contain, harass
or disrupt the enemy, or to carry on mass work.

Although the flexible dispersal or concentration of forces according to
circumstances is the principal method in guerrilla warfare, we must also
know how to shift (or transfer) our forces flexibly. When the enemy feels
seriously threatened by guerrillas, he will send troops to attack or suppress
them. Hence the guerrilla units will have to take stock of the situation.
If advisable, they should fight where they are; if not, they should lose
no time in shifting elsewhere. Sometimes, in order to crush the enemy units
one by one, guerrilla units which have destroyed an enemy force in one place
may immediately shift to another so as to wipe out a second enemy force;
sometimes, finding it inadvisable to fight in one place, they may have to
disengage quickly and fight the enemy elsewhere. If the enemy's forces in
a certain place present a particularly serious threat, the guerrilla units
should not linger, but should move off with lightning speed. In general,
shifts of position should be made with secrecy and speed. In order to mislead,
decoy and confuse the enemy, they should constantly use stratagems, such
as making a feint to the east but attacking in the west, appearing now in
the south and now in the north, hit-and-run attacks, and night actions.

Flexibility in dispersal, concentration and shifts of position is a concrete
expression of the initiative in guerrilla warfare, whereas rigidness and
inertia inevitably lead to passivity and cause unnecessary losses. But a
commander proves himself wise not just by recognition of the importance of
employing his forces flexibly but by skill in dispersing, concentrating or
shifting them in good time according to the specific circumstances. This
wisdom in sensing changes and choosing the right moment to act is not easily
acquired; it can be gained only by those who study with a receptive mind
and investigate and ponder diligently. Prudent consideration of the circumstances
is essential to prevent flexibility from turning into impulsive action.

Lastly, we come to planning.

Without planning, victories in guerrilla warfare are impossible. Any idea
that guerrilla warfare can be conducted in haphazard fashion indicates either
a flippant attitude or ignorance of guerrilla warfare. The operations in
a guerrilla zone as a whole, or those of a guerrilla unit or formation, must
be preceded by as thorough planning as possible, by preparation in advance
for every action. Grasping the situation, setting the tasks, disposing the
forces, giving military and political training, securing supplies, putting
the equipment in good order, making proper use of the people's help, etc.--all
these are part of the work of the guerrilla commanders, which they must carefully
consider and conscientiously perform and check up on. There can be no initiative,
no flexibility, and no offensive unless they do so. True, guerrilla conditions
do not allow as high a degree of planning as do those of regular warfare,
and it would be a mistake to attempt very thorough planning in guerrilla
warfare. But it is necessary to plan as thoroughly as the objective conditions
permit, for it should be understood that fighting the enemy is no joke.

The above points serve to explain the first of the strategic principles of
guerrilla warfare, the principle of using initiative, flexibility and planning
in conducting offensives within the defensive, battles of quick decision
within protracted war, and exterior-line operations within interior-line
operations. It is the key problem in the strategy of guerrilla warfare. The
solution of this problem provides the major guarantee of victory in guerrilla
warfare so far as military command is concerned.

Although a variety of matters have been dealt with here, they all revolve
around the offensive in campaigns and battles. The initiative can be decisively
grasped only after victory in an offensive. Every offensive operation must
be organized on our initiative and not launched under compulsion. Flexibility
in the employment of forces revolves around the effort to take the offensive,
and planning likewise is necessary chiefly in order to ensure success in
offensive operations. Measures of tactical defence are meaningless if they
are divorced from their role of giving either direct or indirect support
to an offensive. Quick decision refers to the tempo of an offensive, and
exterior lines refer to its scope. The offensive is the only means of destroying
the enemy and is also the principal means of self-preservation, while pure
defence and retreat can play only a temporary and partial role in
self-preservation and are quite useless for destroying the enemy.

The principle stated above is basically the same for both regular and guerrilla
war; it differs to some degree only in its form of expression. But in guerrilla
war it is both important and necessary to note this difference. It is precisely
this difference in form which distinguishes the operational methods of guerrilla
war from those of regular war. If we confuse the two different forms in
which the principle is expressed, victory in guerrilla war will be
impossible.

CHAPTER V


CO-ORDINATION WITH REGULAR WARFARE


The second problem of strategy in guerrilla warfare is its coordination with
regular warfare. It is a matter of clarifying the relation between guerrilla
and regular warfare on the operational level, in the light of the nature
of actual guerrilla operations. An understanding of this relation is very
important for effectiveness in defeating the enemy.

There are three kinds of co-ordination between guerrilla and regular warfare,
co-ordination in strategy, in campaigns and in battles.

Taken as a whole, guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines, which cripples
the enemy, pins him down, disrupts his supply lines and inspires the regular
forces and the people throughout the country, is co-ordinated with regular
warfare in strategy. Take the case of the guerrilla warfare in the three
northeastern provinces. Of course, the question of co-ordination did not
arise before the nation-wide War of Resistance, but since the war began the
significance of such coordination has become obvious. Every enemy soldier
the guerrillas kill there, every bullet they make the enemy expend, every
enemy soldier they stop from advancing south of the Great Wall, can be reckoned
a contribution to the total strength of the resistance. It is, moreover,
clear that they are having a demoralizing effect on the whole enemy army
and all Japan and a heartening effect on our whole army and people. Still
clearer is the role in strategic co-ordination played by the guerrilla warfare
along the Peiping-Suiyuan, Peiping-Hankow, Tientsin-Pukow, Tatung-Puchow,
Chengting-Taiyuan and Shanghai-Hangchow Railways. Not only are the guerrilla
units performing the function of co-ordination with the regular forces in
our present strategic defensive, when the enemy is on the strategic offensive;
not only will they co-ordinate with the regular forces in disrupting the
enemy's hold on the occupied territory, after he concludes his strategic
offensive and switches to the safeguarding of his gains; they will also
co-ordinate with the regular forces in driving out the enemy forces and
recovering all the lost territories, when the regular forces launch the strategic
counter-offensive. The great role of guerrilla warfare in strategic coordination
must not be overlooked. The commanders both of the guerrilla units and of
the regular forces must clearly understand this role.

In addition, guerrilla warfare performs the function of coordination with
regular warfare in campaigns. For instance, in the campaign at Hsinkou, north
of Taiyuan, the guerrillas played a remarkable role in co-ordination both
north and south of Yenmenkuan by wrecking the Tatung-Puchow Railway and the
motor roads running through Pinghsingkuan and Yangfangkou. Or take another
instance. After the enemy occupied Fenglingtu, guerrilla warfare, which was
already widespread throughout Shansi Province and was conducted mainly by
the regular forces, played an even greater role through co-ordination with
the defensive campaigns west of the Yellow River in Shensi Province and south
of the Yellow River in Honan Province. Again, when the enemy attacked southern
Shantung, the guerrilla warfare in the five provinces of northern China
contributed a great deal through co-ordination with the campaigns of our
army. In performing a task of this sort, the leaders of each guerrilla base
behind the enemy lines, or the commanders of a guerrilla formation temporarily
dispatched there, must dispose their forces well and, by adopting different
tactics suited to the time and place, move energetically against the enemy's
most vital and vulnerable spots in order to cripple him, pin him down, disrupt
his supply lines, inspire our armies campaigning on the interior lines, and
so fulfil their duty of co-ordinating with the campaign. If each guerrilla
zone or unit goes it alone without giving any attention to co-ordinating
with the campaigns of the regular forces, its role in strategic co-ordination
will lose a great deal of its significance, although it will still play some
such role in the general strategy. All guerrilla commanders should give this
point serious attention. To achieve co-ordination in campaigns, it is absolutely
necessary for all larger guerrilla units and guerrilla formations to have
radio equipment.

Finally, co-ordination with the regular forces in battles, in actual fighting
on the battlefield, is the task of all guerrilla units in the vicinity of
an interior-line battlefield. Of course, this applies only to guerrilla units
operating close to the regular forces or to units of regulars dispatched
on temporary guerrilla missions. In such cases, a guerrilla unit has to perform
whatever task it is assigned by the commander of the regular forces, which
is usually to pin down some of the enemy's forces, disrupt his supply lines,
conduct reconnaissance, or act as guides for the regular forces. Even without
such an assignment the guerrilla unit should carry out these tasks on its
own initiative. To sit by idly, neither moving nor fighting, or to move about
without fighting, would be an intolerable attitude for a guerrilla unit.

CHAPTER VI


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF BASE AREAS 


The third problem of strategy in anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare is the
establishment of base areas, which is important and essential because of
the protracted nature and ruthlessness of the war. The recovery of our lost
territories will have to await the nation-wide strategic counter-offensive;
by then the enemy's front will have extended deep into central China and
cut it in two from north to south, and a part or even a greater part of our
territory will have fallen into the hands of the enemy and become his rear.
We shall have to extend guerrilla warfare all over this vast enemy-occupied
area, make a front out of the enemy's rear, and force him to fight ceaselessly
throughout the territory he occupies. Until such time as our strategic
counteroffensive is launched and so long as our lost territories are not
recovered, it will be necessary to persist in guerrilla warfare in the enemy's
rear, certainly for a fairly long time, though one cannot say definitely
for how long. This is why the war will be a protracted one. And in order
to safeguard his gains in the occupied areas, the enemy is bound to step
up his anti-guerrilla measures and, especially after the halting of his strategic
offensive, to embark on relentless suppression of the guerrillas. With
ruthlessness thus added to protractedness, it will be impossible to sustain
guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines without base areas.

What, then, are these base areas? They are the strategic bases on which the
guerrilla forces rely in performing their strategic tasks and achieving the
object of preserving and expanding themselves and destroying and driving
out the enemy. Without such strategic bases, there will be nothing to depend
on in carrying out any of our strategic tasks or achieving the aim of the
war. It is a characteristic of guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines that
it is fought without a rear, for the guerrilla forces are severed from the
country's general rear. But guerrilla warfare could not last long or grow
without base areas. The base areas, indeed, are its rear.

History knows many peasant wars of the "roving rebel" type, but none of them
ever succeeded. In the present age of advanced communications and technology,
it would be all the more groundless to imagine that one can win victory by
fighting in the manner of roving rebels. However, this roving-rebel idea
still exists among impoverished peasants, and in the minds of guerrilla
commanders it becomes the view that base areas are neither necessary nor
important. Therefore ridding the minds of guerrilla commanders of this idea
is a prerequisite for deciding on a policy of establishing base areas. The
question of whether or not to have base areas and of whether or not to regard
them as important, in other words, the conflict between the idea of establishing
base areas and that of fighting like roving rebels, arises in all guerrilla
warfare, and, to a certain extent, our anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare is
no exception. Therefore the struggle against the roving-rebel ideology is
an inevitable process. Only when this ideology is thoroughly overcome and
the policy of establishing base areas is mutated and applied will there be
conditions favourable for the maintenance of guerrilla warfare over a long
period.

Now that the necessity and importance of base areas have been made clear,
let us pass on to the following problems which must be understood and solved
when it comes to establishing the base areas. These problems are the types
of base areas, the guerrilla zones and the base areas, the conditions for
establishing base areas, their consolidation and expansion, and the forms
in which we and the enemy encircle one another.

1. THE TYPES OF BASE AREAS


Base areas in anti-Japanese guerrilla warfare are mainly of three types,
those in the mountains, those on the plains and those in the river-lake-estuary
regions.

The advantage of setting up base areas in mountainous regions is obvious,
and those which have been, are being or will be established in the Changpai,
[1] Wutai, [2] Taihang,
[3] Taishan, [4] Yenshan
[5] and Maoshan [6] Mountains
all belong to this type. They are all places where anti-Japanese guerrilla
warfare can be maintained for the longest time and are important strongholds
for the War of Resistance. We must develop guerrilla warfare and set up base
areas in all the mountainous regions behind the enemy lines.

Of course, the plains are less suitable than the mountains, but it is by
no means impossible to develop guerrilla warfare or establish any base areas
there. Indeed, the widespread guerrilla warfare in the plains of Hopei and
of northern and northwestern Shantung proves that it is possible to develop
guerrilla warfare in the plains. While there is as yet no evidence on the
possibility of setting up base areas there and maintaining them for long,
it has been proved that the setting up of temporary base areas is possible,
and it should be possible to set up base areas for small units or for seasonal
use. On the one hand, the enemy does not have enough troops at his disposal
and is pursuing a policy of unparalleled brutality, and on the other hand,
China has a vast territory and vast numbers of people who are resisting Japan;
the objective conditions for spreading guerrilla warfare and setting up temporary
base areas in the plains are therefore fulfilled. Given competent military
command, it should of course be possible to establish bases for small guerrilla
units there, bases which are long-term but not
fixed.[7] Broadly speaking, when the strategic
offensive of the enemy is brought to a halt and he enters the stage of
safeguarding his occupied areas, he will undoubtedly launch savage attacks
on all the guerrilla base areas, and those in the plains will naturally be
the first to bear the brunt. The large guerrilla formations operating on
the plains will be unable to keep on fighting there for long and will gradually
have to move up into the mountains as the circumstances require, as for instance,
from the Hopei Plain to the Wutai and Taihang Mountains, or from the Shantung
Plain to Taishan Mountain and the Shantung Peninsula in the east. But in
the circumstances of our national war it is not impossible for numerous small
guerrilla units to keep going in various counties over the vast plains and
adopt a fluid way of fighting, i.e., by shifting their bases from
place to place. It is definitely possible to conduct seasonal guerrilla warfare
by taking advantage of the "green curtain" of tall crops in summer and of
the frozen rivers in winter. As the enemy has no strength to spare now and
will never be able to attend to everything even when he has the strength
to spare, it is absolutely necessary for us to decide on the policy, for
the present, of spreading guerrilla warfare far and wide and setting up temporary
base areas in the plains and, for the future, of preparing to keep up guerrilla
warfare by small units, if only seasonally, and of creating base areas which
are not fixed.

Objectively speaking, the possibilities of developing guerrilla warfare and
establishing base areas are greater in the river-lake-estuary regions than
in the plains, though less than in the mountains. The dramatic battles fought
by "pirates" and "water-bandits", of which our history is full, and the guerrilla
warfare round the Hunghu Lake kept up for several years in the Red Army period,
both testify to the possibility of developing guerrilla warfare and of
establishing base areas in the river-lake-estuary regions. So far, however,
the political parties and the masses who are resisting Japan have given this
possibility little attention. Though the subjective conditions are as yet
lacking, we should undoubtedly turn our attention to this possibility and
start working on it. As one aspect in the development of our nation-wide
guerrilla warfare, we should effectively organize guerrilla warfare in the
Hungtse Lake region north of the Yangtse River, in the Taihu Lake region
south of the Yangtse, and in all river-lake-estuary regions in the enemy-occupied
areas along the rivers and on the seacoast, and we should create permanent
base areas in and near such places. By overlooking this aspect we are virtually
providing the enemy with water transport facilities; this is a gap in our
strategic plan for the War of Resistance which must be filled in good time.

2. GUERRILLA ZONES AND BASE AREAS


In guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines, there is a difference between
guerrilla zones and base areas. Areas which are surrounded by the enemy but
whose central parts are not occupied or have been recovered, like some counties
in the Wutai mountain region (i.e., the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei border
area) and also some places in the Taihang and Taishan mountain regions, are
ready-made bases for the convenient use of guerrilla units in developing
guerrilla warfare. But elsewhere in these areas the situation is different,
as for instance in the eastern and northern sections of the Wutai mountain
region, which include parts of western Hopei and southern Chahar, and in
many places east of Paoting and west of Tsangchow. When guerrilla warfare
began, the guerrillas could not completely occupy these places but could
only make frequent raids; they are areas which are held by the guerrillas
when they are there and by the puppet regime when they are gone, and are
therefore not yet guerrilla bases but only what may be called guerrilla zones.
Such guerrilla zones will be transformed into base areas when they have gone
through the necessary processes of guerrilla warfare, that is, when large
numbers of enemy troops have been annihilated or defeated there, the puppet
regime has been destroyed, the masses have been roused to activity, anti-Japanese
mass organizations have been formed, people's local armed forces have been
developed, and anti-Japanese political power has been established. By the
expansion of our base areas we mean the addition of areas such as these to
the bases already established.

In some places, for example, eastern Hopei, the whole area of guerrilla
operations has been a guerrilla zone from the very beginning. The puppet
regime is of long standing there, and from the beginning the whole area of
operations has been a guerrilla zone both for the people's armed forces that
have grown out of local uprisings and for the guerrilla detachments dispatched
from the Wutai Mountains. At the outset of their activities, all they could
do was to choose some fairly good spots there as temporary rear or base areas.
Such places will not be transformed from guerrilla zones into relatively
stable base areas until the enemy forces are destroyed and the work of arousing
the people is in full swing.

Thus the transformation of a guerrilla zone into a base area is an arduous
creative process, and its accomplishment depends on the extent to which the
enemy is destroyed and the masses are aroused.

Many regions will remain guerrilla zones for a long time. In these regions
the enemy will not be able to set up stable puppet regimes, however much
he tries to maintain control, while we, on our part, will not be able to
achieve the aim of establishing anti-Japanese political power, however much
we develop guerrilla warfare. Examples of this kind are to be found in the
enemy-occupied regions along the railway lines, in the neighbourhood of big
cities and in certain areas in the plains.

As for the big cities, the railway stops and the areas in the plains which
are strongly garrisoned by the enemy, guerrilla warfare can only extend to
the fringes and not right into these places which have relatively stable
puppet regimes. This is another kind of situation.

Mistakes in our leadership or strong enemy pressure may cause a reversal
of the state of affairs described above, i.e., a guerrilla base
may turn into a guerrilla zone, and a guerrilla zone may turn into an area
under relatively stable enemy occupation. Such changes are possible, and
they deserve special vigilance on the part of guerrilla commanders.

Therefore, as a result of guerrilla warfare and the struggle between us and
the enemy, the entire enemy-occupied territory will fall into the following
three categories: first, anti-Japanese bases held by our guerrilla units
and our organs of political power; second, areas held by Japanese imperialism
and its puppet regimes; and third, intermediate zones contested by both sides,
namely, guerrilla zones. Guerrilla commanders have the duty to expand the
first and third categories to the maximum and to reduce the second category
to the minimum. This is the strategic task of guerrilla warfare.

3. CONDITIONS FOR ESTABLISHING BASE AREAS


The fundamental conditions for establishing a base area are that there should
be anti-Japanese armed forces, that these armed forces should be employed
to inflict defeats on the enemy and that they should arouse the people to
action. Thus the establishment of a base area is first and foremost a matter
of building an armed force. Leaders in guerrilla war must devote their energy
to building one or more guerrilla units, and must gradually develop them
in the course of struggle into guerrilla formations or even into units and
formations of regular troops. The building up of an armed force is the key
to establishing a base area; if there is no armed force or if the armed force
is weak, nothing can be done. This constitutes the first condition.

The second indispensable condition for establishing a base area is that the
armed forces should be used in co-ordination with the people to defeat the
enemy. All places under enemy control are enemy, and not guerrilla,
base areas, and obviously cannot be transformed into guerrilla base areas
unless the enemy is defeated. Unless we repulse the enemy's attacks and defeat
him, even places held by the guerrillas will come under enemy control, and
then it will be impossible to establish base areas.

The third indispensable condition for establishing a base area is the use
of all our strength, including our armed forces, to arouse the masses for
struggle against Japan. In the course of this struggle we must arm the people,
i.e., organize self-defence corps and guerrilla units. In the course
of this struggle, we must form mass organizations, we must organize the workers,
peasants, youth, women, children, merchants and professional people--according
to the degree of their political consciousness and fighting enthusiasm--into
the various mass organizations necessary for the struggle against Japanese
aggression, and we must gradually expand them. Without organization, the
people cannot give effect to their anti-Japanese strength. In the course
of this struggle, we must weed out the open and the hidden traitors, a task
which can be accomplished only by relying on the strength of the people.
In this struggle, it is particularly important to arouse the people to establish,
or to consolidate, their local organs of anti-Japanese political power. Where
the original Chinese organs of political power have not been destroyed by
the enemy, we must reorganize and strengthen them with the support of the
broad masses, and where they have been destroyed by the enemy, we should
rebuild them by the efforts of the masses. They are organs of political power
for carrying out the policy of the Anti-Japanese National United Front and
should unite all the forces of the people to fight against our sole enemy,
Japanese imperialism, and its jackals, the traitors and reactionaries.

A base area for guerrilla war can be truly established only with the gradual
fulfillment of the three basic conditions, i.e., only after the
anti-Japanese armed forces are built up, the enemy has suffered defeats and
the people are aroused.

Mention must also be made of geographical and economic conditions. As for
the former, we have already discussed three different categories in the earlier
section on the types of base areas, and here we need only mention one major
requirement, namely, that the area must be extensive. In places surrounded
by the enemy on all sides, or on three sides, the mountainous regions naturally
offer the best conditions for setting up base areas which can hold out for
a long time, but the main thing is that there must be enough room for the
guerrillas to maneuver, namely, the areas have to be extensive. Given an
extensive area, guerrilla warfare can be developed and sustained even in
the plains, not to mention the river-lake-estuary regions. By and large,
the vastness of China's territory and the enemy's shortage of troops provide
guerrilla warfare in China with this condition. This is an important, even
a primary condition, as far as the possibility of waging guerrilla warfare
is concerned, and small countries like Belgium which lack this condition
have few or no such possibilities.[8] In China,
this condition is not something which has to be striven for, nor does it
present a problem; it is there physically, waiting only to be exploited.

So far as their physical setting is concerned, the economic conditions resemble
the geographical conditions. For now we are discussing the establishment
of base areas not in a desert, where no enemy is to be found, but behind
the enemy lines; every place the enemy can penetrate already has its Chinese
inhabitants and an economic basis for subsistence, so that the question of
choice of economic conditions in establishing base areas simply does not
arise. Irrespective of the economic conditions, we should do our utmost to
develop guerrilla warfare and set up permanent or temporary base areas in
all places where Chinese inhabitants and enemy forces are to be found. In
a political sense, however, the economic conditions do present a problem,
a problem of economic policy which is of immense importance to the establishment
of base areas. The economic policy of the guerrilla base areas must follow
the principles of the Anti-Japanese National United Front by equitably
distributing the financial burden and protecting commerce. Neither the local
organs of political power nor the guerrilla units must violate these principles,
or otherwise the establishment of base areas and the maintenance of guerrilla
warfare would be adversely affected. The equitable distribution of the financial
burden means that "those with money should contribute money", while the peasants
should supply the guerrilla units with grain within certain limits. The
protection of commerce means that the guerrilla units should be highly
disciplined and that the confiscation of shops, except those owned by proved
traitors, should be strictly prohibited. This is no easy matter, but the
policy is set and must be put into effect.

4. THE CONSOLIDATION AND EXPANSION OF BASE AREAS


In order to confine the enemy invaders to a few strongholds, that is, to
the big cities and along the main communication lines, the guerrillas must
do all they can to extend guerrilla warfare from their base areas as widely
as possible and hem in all the enemy's strongholds, thus threatening his
existence and shaking his morale while expanding the base areas. This is
essential. In this context, we must oppose conservatism in guerrilla warfare.
Whether originating in the desire for an easy life or in overestimation of
the enemy's strength, conservatism can only bring losses in the War of Resistance
and is harmful to guerrilla warfare and to the base areas themselves. At
the same time, we must not forget the consolidation of the base areas, the
chief task being to arouse and organize the masses and to train guerrilla
units and local armed forces. Such consolidation is needed for maintaining
protracted warfare and also for expansion, and in its absence energetic expansion
is impossible. If we attend only to expansion and forget about consolidation
in our guerrilla warfare, we shall be unable to withstand the enemy's attacks,
and consequently not only forfeit the possibility of expansion but also endanger
the very existence of the base areas. The correct principle is expansion
with consolidation, which is a good method and allows us to take the offensive
or the defensive as we choose. Given a protracted war, the problem of
consolidating and expanding base areas constantly arises for every guerrilla
unit. The concrete solution depends, of course, on the circumstances. At
one time, the emphasis may be on expansion, i.e., on expanding the
guerrilla zones and increasing the number of guerrillas. At another, the
emphasis may be on consolidation, i.e., on organizing the masses
and training the troops. As expansion and consolidation differ in nature,
and as the military dispositions and other tasks will differ accordingly,
an effective solution of the problem is possible only if we alternate the
emphasis according to time and circumstances.

5. FORMS IN WHICH WE AND THE ENEMY ENCIRCLE ONE
  ANOTHER


Taking the War of Resistance as a whole, there is no doubt that we are
strategically encircled by the enemy, because he is on the strategic offensive
and is operating on exterior lines while we are on the strategic defensive
and are operating on interior lines. This is the first form of enemy
encirclement. We on our part encircle each of the enemy columns advancing
on us along separate routes, because we apply the policy of the offensive
and of exterior-line operations in campaigns and battles by using numerically
preponderant forces against these enemy columns advancing on us from exterior
lines. This is the first form of our encirclement of the enemy. Next, if
we consider the guerrilla base areas in the enemy's rear, each area taken
singly is surrounded by the enemy on all sides, like the Wutai mountain region,
or on three sides, like the northwestern Shansi area. This is the second
form of enemy encirclement. However, if one considers all the guerrilla base
areas together and in their relation to the battle fronts of the regular
forces, one can see that we in turn surround a great many enemy forces. In
Shansi Province, for instance, we have surrounded the Tatung-Puchow Railway
on three sides (the east and west flanks and the southern end) and the city
of Taiyuan on all sides; and there are many similar instances in Hopei and
Shantung Provinces. This is the second form of our encirclement of the enemy.
Thus there are two forms of encirclement by the enemy forces and two forms
of encirclement by our own--rather like a game of
weichi.[9] Campaigns and battles
fought by the two sides resemble the capturing of each other's pieces, and
the establishment of strongholds by the enemy and of guerrilla base areas
by us resembles moves to dominate spaces on the board. It is in the matter
of "dominating the spaces" that the great strategic role of guerrilla base
areas in the rear of the enemy is revealed. We are raising this question
in the War of Resistance in order that the nation's military authorities
and the guerrilla commanders in all areas should place on the agenda the
development of guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines and the establishment
of base areas wherever possible, and carry this out as a strategic task.
If on the international plane we can create an anti-Japanese front in the
Pacific region, with China as one strategic unit, and the Soviet Union and
other countries which may join it as other strategic units, we shall then
have one more form of encirclement against the enemy than he has against
us and bring about exterior-line operations in the Pacific region by which
to encircle and destroy fascist Japan. To be sure, this is of little practical
significance at present, but such a prospect is not impossible.

CHAPTER VII


THE STRATEGIC DEFENSIVE AND THE STRATEGIC OFFENSIVE IN GUERRILLA
  WAR 


The fourth problem of strategy in guerrilla war concerns the strategic defensive
and the strategic offensive. This is the problem of how the policy of offensive
warfare, which we mentioned in our discussion of the first problem, is to
be carried out in practice, when we are on the defensive and when we are
on the offensive in our guerrilla warfare against Japan.

Within the nation-wide strategic defensive or strategic offensive (to be
more exact, the strategic counter-offensive), small-scale strategic defensives
and offensives take place in and around each guerrilla base area. By strategic
defensive we mean our strategic situation and policy when the enemy is on
the offensive and we are on the defensive; by strategic offensive we mean
our strategic situation and policy when the enemy is on the defensive and
we are on the offensive.

1. THE STRATEGIC DEFENSIVE IN GUERRILLA WAR


After guerrilla warfare has broken out and grown to a considerable extent,
the enemy will inevitably attack the guerrilla base areas, especially in
the period when his strategic offensive against the country as a whole is
brought to an end and he adopts the policy of safeguarding his occupied areas.
It is essential to recognize the inevitability of such attacks, for otherwise
the guerrilla commanders will be caught wholly unprepared, and in the face
of heavy enemy attacks they will undoubtedly become alarmed and confused
and their forces will be routed.

To wipe out the guerrillas and their base areas, the enemy frequently resorts
to converging attacks. For instance, in each of the four or five "punitive
expeditions" directed against the Wutai mountain region, the enemy made a
planned advance in three, four or even six or seven columns simultaneously.
The larger the scale of the guerrilla fighting, the more important the position
of the base areas, and the greater the threat to the enemy's strategic centres
and vital communication lines, the fiercer will be the enemy's attacks.
Therefore, the fiercer the enemy's attacks on a guerrilla area, the greater
the indication that the guerrilla warfare there is successful and is being
effectively coordinated with the regular fighting.

When the enemy launches a converging attack in several columns, the guerrilla
policy should be to smash it by counter-attack. It can be easily smashed
if each advancing enemy column consists of only one unit, whether big or
small, has no follow-up units and is unable to station troops along the route
of advance, construct blockhouses or build motor roads. When the enemy launches
a converging attack, he is on the offensive and operating on exterior lines,
while we are on the defensive and operating on interior lines. As for our
dispositions, we should use our secondary forces to pin down several enemy
columns, while our main force should launch surprise attacks (chiefly in
the form of ambushes) in a campaign or battle against a single enemy column,
striking it when it is on the move. The enemy, though strong, will be weakened
by repeated surprise attacks and will often withdraw when he is halfway;
the guerrilla units can then make more surprise attacks during the pursuit
and weaken him still further. The enemy generally occupies the county towns
or other towns in our base areas before he stops his offensive or begins
to withdraw, and we should encircle these towns, cutting off his grain supply
and severing his communications, so that when he cannot hold out and begins
to retreat, we can seize the opportunity to pursue and attack him. After
smashing one column, we should shift our forces to smash another, and, by
smashing them one by one, shatter the converging attack.

A big base area like the Wutai mountain region forms a military area, which
is divided into four or five, or even more, military subareas, each with
its own armed forces operating independently. By employing the tactics described
above, these forces have often smashed the enemy's attacks simultaneously
or successively.

In our plan of operations against a converging attack by the enemy, we generally
place our main force on interior lines. But when we have the strength to
spare, we should use our secondary forces (such as the county or the district
guerrilla units, or even detachments of the main force) on exterior lines
to disrupt the enemy's communications and pin down his reinforcements. Should
the enemy stay put in our base area, we may reverse the tactics, namely,
leave some of our forces in the base area to invest the enemy while employing
the main force to attack the region whence he has come and to step up our
activities there, in order to induce him to withdraw and attack our main
force; this is the tactic of "relieving the state of Chao by besieging the
state of Wei".[10]

In the course of operations against a converging attack, the local anti-Japanese
self-defence corps and all the mass organizations should mobilize for action
and in every way help our troops to fight the enemy. In fighting the enemy,
it is important both to enforce local martial law and, as far as possible,
to "strengthen our defence works and clear the fields". The purpose of the
former is to suppress traitors and prevent the enemy from getting information,
and of the latter to assist our own operations (by strengthening our defence
works) and prevent the enemy from getting food (by clearing the herds). "Clearing
the fields" means harvesting the crops as soon as they are ripe.

When the enemy retreats, he often burns down the houses in the cities and
towns he has occupied and razes the villages along his route, with the purpose
of destroying the guerrilla base areas; but in so doing he deprives himself
of shelter and food in his next offensive, and the damage recoils upon his
own head. This is a concrete illustration of what we mean by one and the
same thing having two contradictory aspects.

A guerrilla commander should not think of abandoning his base area and shifting
to another, unless it proves impossible, after repeated operations to smash
the enemy's heavy converging attacks. In these circumstances he must guard
against pessimism. So long as the leaders do not blunder in matters of principle,
it is generally possible to smash the converging attacks and hold on to the
base areas in the mountainous regions. It is only in the plains that, when
confronted by a heavy converging attack, the guerrilla commander should consider
other measures in the light of the specific circumstances, namely, leaving
many small units for scattered operations, while temporarily shifting large
guerrilla formations to some mountainous region, so that they can return
and resume their activities in the plains once the main forces of the enemy
move away.

Generally speaking, the Japanese cannot adopt the principle of blockhouse
warfare, which the Kuomintang employed in the days of the civil war, because
their forces are inadequate in relation to China's vast territory. However,
we should reckon with the possibility that they may use it to some extent
against those guerrilla base areas which pose a particular threat to their
vital positions, but even in such circumstances we should be prepared to
keep up guerrilla warfare in those areas. Since we have had the experience
of being able to maintain guerrilla warfare during the civil war, there is
not the slightest doubt of our greater capacity to do so in a national war.
Though, in point of relative military strength, the enemy can throw forces
that are vastly superior in quantity as well as in quality against some of
our base areas, there remain the insoluble national contradiction between
us and the enemy and the unavoidable weaknesses of his command. Our victories
are based on thorough work among the masses and flexible tactics in our
operations.

2. THE STRATEGIC OFFENSIVE IN GUERRILLA WAR


After we have smashed an enemy offensive and before the enemy starts a new
offensive, he is on the strategic defensive and we are on the strategic
offensive.

At such times our operational policy is not to attack enemy forces which
are entrenched in defensive positions and which we are not sure of defeating,
but systematically to destroy or drive out the small enemy units and puppet
forces in certain areas, which our guerrilla units are strong enough to deal
with, and to expand our areas, arouse the masses for struggle against Japan,
replenish and train our troops and organize new guerrilla units. If the enemy
still remains on the defensive when these tasks are under way, we can expand
our new areas still further and attack weakly garrisoned cities and communication
lines and hold them for as long as circumstances permit. These are all tasks
of the strategic offensive, and the purpose is to take advantage of the fact
that the enemy is on the defensive so that we may effectively build up our
own military and mass strength, effectively reduce the enemy's strength and
prepare to smash the enemy methodically and vigorously when he mounts an
offensive again.

It is essential to rest and train our troops, and the best time for doing
so is when the enemy is on the defensive. It is not a question of shutting
ourselves off from everything else for rest and training, but of funding
time for rest and training while expanding our areas, mopping up small enemy
units and arousing the people. This is usually also the time for tackling
the difficult problem of getting food supplies, bedding, clothing, etc.

It is also the time for destroying the enemy's communication lines on a large
scale, hampering his transport and giving direct support to the regular forces
in their campaigns.

At such times the guerrilla base areas, guerrilla zones and guerrilla units
are in high spirits, and the areas devastated by the enemy are gradually
rehabilitated and revived. The people in the enemy-occupied territories are
also delighted, and the fame of the guerrillas resounds everywhere. On the
other hand, in the camp of the enemy and his running dogs, the traitors,
panic and disintegration are mounting, while there is growing hatred of the
guerrillas and their base areas and preparations to deal with them are
intensified. During the strategic offensive, therefore, it is impermissible
for the guerrilla commanders to become so elated as to underrate the enemy
and forget to strengthen unity in their own ranks and to consolidate their
base areas and their forces. At such times, they must skilfully watch the
enemy's every move for signs of any new offensive against us, so that the
moment it comes they can wind up their strategic offensive in good order,
turn to the strategic defensive and thereby smash the enemy's offensive

CHAPTER VIII


DEVELOPMENT OF GUERRILLA WAR INTO MOBILE WAR


The fifth problem of strategy in guerrilla war against Japan is its development
into mobile war, a development which is necessary and possible because the
war is protracted and ruthless. If China could speedily defeat the Japanese
invaders and recover her lost territories, and if the war were neither protracted
nor ruthless, this would not be necessary. But as, on the contrary, the war
is protracted and ruthless, guerrilla warfare cannot adapt itself to such
a war except by developing into mobile warfare. Since the war is protracted
and ruthless, it is possible for the guerrilla units to undergo the necessary
steeling and gradually to transform themselves into regular forces, so that
their mode of operations is gradually regularized and guerrilla warfare develops
into mobile warfare. The necessity and possibility of this development must
be clearly recognized by the guerrilla commanders if they are to persist
in, and systematically carry out, the policy of turning guerrilla warfare
into mobile warfare.

In many places, such as the Wutai mountain region, the present guerrilla
warfare owes its growth to the strong detachments sent there by the regular
forces. The operations there, though generally of a guerrilla character,
have contained an element of mobile warfare from the very beginning. This
element will gradually increase as the war goes on. Herein lies the advantage
which makes possible the swift expansion of the present anti-Japanese guerrilla
warfare and its rapid development to a higher level; thus the conditions
for guerrilla warfare are far superior to what they were in the three
northeastern provinces.

To transform guerrilla units waging guerrilla warfare into regular forces
waging mobile warfare, two conditions are necessary--an increase in numbers,
and an improvement in quality. Apart from directly mobilizing the people
to join the forces, increased numbers can be attained by amalgamating small
units, while better quality depends on steeling the fighters and improving
their weapons in the course of the war.

In amalgamating small units, we must, on the one hand, guard against localism,
whereby attention is concentrated exclusively on local interests and
centralization is impeded, and, on the other, guard against the purely military
approach, whereby local interests are brushed aside.

Localism exists among the local guerrilla units and local governments, which
are frequently preoccupied with local considerations to the neglect of the
general interest, or which prefer to act each on its own because they are
unaccustomed to acting in larger groups. The commanders of the main guerrilla
units or of the guerrilla formations must take this into account and adopt
the method of gradual amalgamation of part of the local units, allowing the
localities to keep some of their forces and expand their guerrilla warfare;
the commanders should draw these units into joint operations and then bring
about their amalgamation without breaking up their original organization
or reshuffling their cadres, so that the small groups may integrate smoothly
into the larger group.

As against localism, the purely military approach represents the wrong viewpoint
held in the main forces by those who are bent on expanding their own strength
and who neglect to assist the local armed units. They do not realize that
the development of guerrilla warfare into mobile warfare means not the
abandonment of guerrilla warfare but the gradual formation, in the midst
of widespread guerrilla warfare, of a main force capable of conducting mobile
warfare, a force around which there must still be numerous guerrilla units
carrying on extensive guerrilla operations. These guerrilla units are powerful
auxiliaries to the main force and serve as inexhaustible reserves for its
continuous growth. Therefore, if a commander of a main force has made the
mistake of neglecting the interests of the local population and the local
government as a result of a purely military approach, he must correct it
in order that the expansion of the main force and the multiplication of the
local armed units may both receive due attention.

To raise the quality of the guerrilla units it is imperative to raise their
political and organizational level and improve their equipment, military
technique, tactics and discipline, so that they gradually pattern themselves
on the regular forces and shed their guerrilla ways. Politically, it is
imperative to get both the commanders and the fighters to realize the necessity
of raising the guerrilla units to the level of the regular forces, to encourage
them to strive towards this end, and to guarantee its attainment by means
of political work. Organizationally, it is imperative gradually to fulfil
all the requirements of a regular formation in the following respects--military
and political organs, staff and working methods, a regular supply system,
a medical service, etc. In the matter of equipment, it is imperative to acquire
better and more varied weapons and increase the supply of the necessary
communications equipment. In the matter of military technique and tactics,
it is imperative to raise the guerrilla units to the level required of a
regular formation. In the matter of discipline, it is imperative to raise
the level so that uniform standards are observed, every order is executed
without fail and all slackness is eliminated. To accomplish all these tasks
requires a prolonged effort, and it cannot be done overnight; but that is
the direction in which we must develop. Only thus can a main force be built
up in each guerrilla base area and mobile warfare emerge for more effective
attacks on the enemy. Where detachments or cadres have been sent in by the
regular forces, the goal can be achieved more easily. Hence all the regular
forces have the responsibility of helping the guerrilla units to develop
into regular units.

CHAPTER IX


THE RELATIONSHIP OF COMMAND


The last problem of strategy in guerrilla war against Japan concerns the
relationship of command. A correct solution of this problem is one of the
prerequisites for the unhampered development of guerrilla warfare.

Since guerrilla units are a lower level of armed organization characterized
by dispersed operations, the methods of command in guerrilla warfare do not
allow as high a degree of centralization as in regular warfare. If any attempt
is made to apply the methods of command in regular warfare to guerrilla warfare,
its great flexibility will inevitably be restricted and its vitality sapped.
A highly centralized command is in direct contradiction to the great flexibility
of guerrilla warfare and must not and cannot be applied to it.

However, guerrilla warfare cannot be successfully developed without some
centralized command. When extensive regular warfare and extensive guerrilla
warfare are going on at the same time, their operations must be properly
co-ordinated; hence the need for a command co-ordinating the two,
i.e., for a unified strategic command by the national general staff
and the war-zone commanders. In a guerrilla zone or guerrilla base area with
many guerrilla units, there are usually one or more guerrilla formations
(sometimes together with regular formations) which constitute the main force,
a number of other guerrilla units, big and small, which represent the
supplementary force, and many armed units composed of people not withdrawn
from production; the enemy forces there usually form a unified complex to
concert their operations against the guerrillas. Consequently, the problem
arises of setting up a unified or centralized command in such guerrilla zones
or base areas.

Hence, as opposed both to absolute centralization and to absolute
decentralization, the principle of command in guerrilla war should be centralized
strategic command and decentralized command in campaigns and battles.

Centralized strategic command includes the planning and direction of guerrilla
warfare as a whole by the state, the co-ordination of guerrilla warfare with
regular warfare in each war zone, and the unified direction of all the
anti-Japanese armed forces in each guerrilla zone or base area. Here lack
of harmony, unity and centralization is harmful, and every effort must be
made to ensure all three. In general matters, that is, matters of strategy,
the lower levels should report to the i higher and follow their instructions
so as to ensure concerted action. Centralization, however, stops at this
point, and it would likewise be harmful to go beyond it and interfere with
the lower levels in matters of detail like the specific dispositions for
a campaign or battle. For such details must be settled in the light of specific
conditions, which change from time to time and from place to place and are
quite beyond the knowledge of the distant higher levels of command. This
is what is meant by the principle of decentralized command in campaigns and
battles. The same principle generally applies in regular operations, especially
when communications are inadequate. In a word, it means guerrilla warfare
waged independently and with the initiative in our hands within the framework
of a unified strategy.

Where a guerrilla base area constitutes a military area divided into sub-areas,
each comprising several counties, each of which is again divided into districts,
the relationship between the various levels, from the headquarters of the
military area and sub-areas down to the county and district governments,
is one of consecutive subordination, and every armed force must, according
to its nature, be under the direct command of one of these. On the principle
that has been enunciated, in the relationship of command at these levels
matters of general policy should be centralized in the higher levels, while
actual operations should be carried out in the light of the specific
circumstances by the lower levels, which should have the right of independent
action. If a higher level has something to say about the actual operations
undertaken at a lower level, it can and should advance its views as
"instructions" but must not issue hard and fast "commands". The more extensive
the area, the more complex the situation and the greater the distance between
the higher and the lower levels, the more advisable it becomes to allow greater
independence to the lower levels in their actual operations and thus give
those operations a character conforming more closely to the local requirements,
so that the lower levels and the local personnel may develop the ability
to work independently, cope with complicated situations, and successfully
expand guerrilla warfare. For an armed unit or bigger formation which is
engaged in a concentrated operation, the principle to be applied is one of
centralization in its internal relationship of command, since the situation
is clear to the higher command; but the moment this unit or formation breaks
up for dispersed action, the principle of centralization in general matters
and of decentralization in details should be applied, for then the specific
situation cannot be clear to the higher command.

Absence of centralization where it is needed means negligence by the higher
levels or usurpation of authority by the lower levels, neither of which can
be tolerated in the relationship between higher and lower levels, especially
in the military sphere. If decentralization is not effected where it should
be, that means monopolization of power by the higher levels and lack of
initiative on the part of the lower levels, neither of which can be tolerated
in the relationship between higher and lower levels, especially in the command
of guerrilla warfare. The above principles constitute the only correct policy
for solving the problem of the relationship of command.

NOTES


1. The Changpai mountain range is situated on the northeastern
border of China. After the Japanese invasion on September 18, 1931, the region
became a base area for the anti-Japanese guerrillas led by the Chinese Communist
Party.

2. The Wutai mountain range is situated on the borders
between Shansi, Hopei and what was then Chahar Province. In October 1937
the Eighth Route Army led by the Chinese Communist Party started building
the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei anti-Japanese base area with the Wutai mountain region
as its centre.

3. The Taihang mountain range is situated on the borders
between Shansi, Hopei and Honan Provinces. In November 1937 the Eighth Route
Army started building the southeastern Shansi anti-Japanese base area with
the Taihang mountain region as its centre.

4. The Taishan Mountain is one of the chief peaks of the
Tai-Yi mountain range in central Shantung. In the winter of 1937 the guerrilla
forces led by the Communist Party started building the central Shantung
anti-Japanese base area with the Tai-Yi mountain region as its centre.

5. The Yenshan mountain range is situated on the border
of Hopei and what was then Jehol Province. In the summer of 1938 the Eighth
Route Army started building the eastern Hopei anti-Japanese base area with
the Yenshan mountain region as its centre.

6. The Maoshan Mountains are in southern Kiangsu. In June
1938 the New Fourth Army led by the Communist Party started building the
southern Kiangsu anti-Japanese base area with the Maoshan mountain region
as its centre.

7. Experience gained in the War of Resistance proved that
it was possible to establish long-term and, in many places, stable base areas
in the plains. This was due to their vastness and big populations, the
correctness of the Communist Party's policies, the extensive mobilization
of the people and the enemy's shortage of troops. Comrade Mao Tse-tung affirmed
this possibility more definitely in later directives.

8. Ever since the end of World War II, the national and
democratic revolutionary movement has been surging forward in Asia, Africa
and Latin America. In many countries the people, led by their own revolutionary
and progressive forces, have carried on sustained armed struggles to overthrow
the dark rule of imperialism and reaction. This demonstrates that in the
new historical circumstances--when the socialist camp, the revolutionary
forces of the people in the colonial countries and the forces of the people
striving for democracy and progress in all countries are taking giant strides
forward, when the world capitalist system is weakening still further, and
when the colonial rule of imperialism is heading for disintegration--the
conditions under which the people of various countries conduct guerrilla
warfare today need not be quite the same as those which were necessary in
the days of the guerrilla warfare waged by the Chinese people against Japan.
In other words, guerrilla war can be victoriously waged in a county which
is not large in territory, as for instance, in Cuba, Algeria, Laos and southern
Viet Nam.

9. Weichi is an old Chinese game, in which the
two players try to encircle each ocher's pieces on the board. When a player's
pieces are encircled, they are counted as "dead" (captured). But if there
is a sufficient number of blank spaces among the encircled pieces, then the
latter are still "alive" (not captured).

10. In 353 BC the state of Wei laid siege to Hantan, capital
of the state of Chao. The king of the state of Chi, an ally of Chao, ordered
his generals Tien Chi and Sun Pin to aid Chao with their troops. Knowing
that the crack forces of Wei had entered Chao and left their own territory
weakly garrisoned, General Sun Pin attacked the state of Wei whose troops
withdrew to defend their own country. Taking advantage of their exhaustion,
the troops of Chi engaged and routed them at Kueiling (northeast of the present
Horse County in Shantung). The siege of Hanean, capital of Chao, was thus
lifted. Since then Chinese strategists have referred to similar tactics as
"relieving the state of Chao by besieging the state of Wei".

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On Protracted War







ON PROTRACTED WAR 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON PROTRACTED WAR


May 1938

[This series of lectures was delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung from May
26 to June 3, 1938, at the Yenan Association for the Study of the War of
Resistance Against Japan.] 
  

STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM


1. It will soon be July 7, the first anniversary of the great War of Resistance
Against Japan. Rallying in unity, persevering in resistance and persevering
in the united front, the forces of the whole nation have been valiantly fighting
the enemy for almost a year. The people of the whole world are attentively
following this war, which has no precedent in the history of the East, and
which will go down as a great war in world history too. Every Chinese suffering
from the disasters of the war and fighting for the survival of his nation
daily yearns for victory. But what actually will be the course of the war?
Can we win? Can we win quickly? Many people are talking about a protracted
war, but why is it a protracted war? How to carry on a protracted war? Many
people are talking about Final victory, but why will final victory be ours?
How shall we strive for final victory? Not everyone has found answers to
these questions; in fact, to this day most people have not done so. Therefore
the defeatist exponents of the theory of national subjugation have come forward
to tell people that China will be subjugated, that final victory will not
be China's. On the other hand, some impetuous friends have come forward to
tell people that China will win very quickly without having to exert any
great effort. But are these views correct? We have said all along they are
not. However, most people have not yet grasped what we have been saying.
This is partly because we did not do enough propaganda and explanatory work,
and partly because the development of objective events had not yet fully
and clearly revealed their inherent nature and their features to the people,
who were thus not in a position to foresee the over-all trend and the outcome
and hence to decide on a complete set of policies and tactics. Now things
are better, the experience of ten months of war has been quite sufficient
to explode the utterly baseless theory of national subjugation and to dissuade
our impetuous friends from their theory of quick victory. In these circumstances
many people are asking for a comprehensive explanation. All the more so with
regard to protracted war, not only because of the opposing theories of national
subjugation and quick victory but also because of the shallow understanding
of its nature. "Our four hundred million people have been making a concerted
effort since the Lukouchiao Incident, and the final victory will belong to
China." This formula has a wide currency. It is a correct formula but needs
to be given more content. Our perseverance in the War of Resistance and in
the united front has been possible because of many factors. Internally, they
comprise all the political parties in the country from the Communist Party
to the Kuomintang, all the people from the workers and peasants to the
bourgeoisie, and all the armed forces from the regular forces to the guerrillas;
internationally, they range from the land of socialism to justice-loving
people in all countries; in the camp of the enemy, they range from those
people in Japan who are against the war to those Japanese soldiers at the
front who are against the war. In short, all these forces have contributed
in varying degrees to our War of Resistance. Every man with a conscience
should salute them. We Communists, together with all the other ant-Japanese
political parties and the whole people, have no other course than to strive
to unite all forces for the defeat of the diabolical Japanese aggressors.
July 1 this year will be the 17th anniversary of the founding
of the Communist Party of China. A serious study of protracted war is necessary
in order to enable every Communist to play a better and greater part in the
War of Resistance. Therefore my lectures will be devoted to such a study.
I shall try to speak on all the problems relevant to the protracted war,
but I cannot possibly go into everything in one series of lectures.

2. All the experience of the ten months of war proves the error both of the
theory of China's inevitable subjugation and of the theory of China's quick
victory. The former gives rise to the tendency to compromise and the latter
to the tendency to underestimate the enemy. Both approaches to the problem
are subjective and one-sided, or, in a word, unscientific.

3. Before the War of Resistance, there was a great deal of talk about national
subjugation. Some said, "China is inferior in arms and is bound to lose in
a war." Others said, "If China offers armed resistance, she is sure to become
another Abyssinia." Since the beginning of the war, open talk of national
subjugation has disappeared, but secret talk, and quite a lot of it too,
still continues. For instance, from time to time an atmosphere of compromise
arises and the advocates of compromise argue that "the continuance of the
war spells subjugation".[1] In a letter from Hunan
a student has written:

  In the countryside everything seems difficult. Doing propaganda work on my
  own, I have to talk to people when and where I find them. The people I have
  talked to are by no means ignoramuses; they all have some understanding of
  what is going on and are very interested in what I have to say. But when
  I run into my own relatives, they always say: "China cannot win; she is doomed."
  They make one sick ! Fortunately, they do not go around spreading their views,
  otherwise things would really be bad. The peasants would naturally put more
  stock in what they say.


Such exponents of the theory of China's inevitable subjugation form the social
basis of the tendency to compromise. They are to be found everywhere in China,
and therefore the problem of compromise is liable to crop up within the
anti-Japanese front at any time and will probably remain with us right until
the end of the war. Now that Hsuchow has fallen and Wuhan is in danger, it
will not be unprofitable, I think, to knock the bottom out of the theory
of national subjugation.

4. During these ten months of war all kinds of views which are indicative
of impetuosity have also appeared. For instance, at the outset of the war
many people were groundlessly optimistic, underestimating Japan and even
believing that the Japanese could not get as far as Shansi. Some belittled
the strategic role of guerrilla warfare in the War of Resistance and doubted
the proposition, "With regard to the whole, mobile warfare is primary and
guerrilla warfare supplementary; with regard to the parts, guerrilla warfare
is primary and mobile warfare supplementary." They disagreed with the Eighth
Route Army's strategy, "Guerrilla warfare is basic, but lose no chance for
mobile warfare under favourable conditions", which they regarded as a
"mechanical" approach.[2] During the battle of
Shanghai some people said: "If we can fight for just three months, the
international situation is bound to change, the Soviet Union is bound to
send troops, and the war will be over." They pinned their hopes for the future
of the War of Resistance chiefly on foreign
aid.[3] After the Taierhchuang
victory,[4] some people maintained that the Hsuchow
campaign should be fought as a "quasi-decisive campaign" and that the policy
of protracted war should be changed. They said such things as, "This campaign
marks the last desperate struggle of the enemy," or, "If we win, the Japanese
warlords will be demoralized and able only to await their Day of
Judgement."[5] The victory at Pinghsingkuan turned
some people's heads, and further victory at Taierhchuang has turned more
people's heads. Doubts have arisen as to whether the enemy will attack Wuhan.
Many people think "probably not", and many others "definitely not". Such
doubts may affect all major issues. For instance, is our anti-Japanese strength
already sufficient? Some people may answer affirmatively, for our present
strength is already sufficient to check the enemy's advance, so why increase
it? Or, for instance, is the slogan "Consolidate and expand the Anti-Japanese
National United Front" still correct? Some people may answer negatively,
for the united front in its present state is already strong enough to repulse
the enemy, so why consolidate and expand it? Or, for instance, should our
efforts in diplomacy and international propaganda be intensified? Here again
the answer may be in the negative. Or, for instance, should we proceed in
earnest to reform the army system and the system of government, develop the
mass movement, enforce education for national defence, suppress traitors
and Trotskyites, develop war industries and improve the people's livelihood?
Or, for instance, are the slogans calling for the defence of Wuhan, of Canton
and of the Northwest and for the vigorous development of guerrilla warfare
in the enemy's rear still correct? The answers might all be in the negative.
There are even some people who, the moment a slightly favourable turn occurs
in the war situation, are prepared to intensify the "friction" between the
Kuomintang and the Communist Party, diverting attention from external to
internal matters. This almost invariably occurs whenever a comparatively
big battle is won or the enemy's advance comes to a temporary halt. All the
above can be termed political and military short-sightedness. Such talk,
however plausible, is actually specious and groundless. To sweep away such
verbiage should help the victorious prosecution of the War of Resistance.

5. The question now is: Will China be subjugated? The answer is, No,
she will not be subjugated, but will win final victory. Can China win quickly?
The answer is, No, she cannot win quickly, and the War of Resistance will
be a protracted war.

6. As early as two years ago, we broadly indicated the main arguments on
these questions. On July 16, 1936, five months before the Sian Incident and
twelve months before the Lukouchiao Incident, in an interview with the American
correspondent, Mr. Edgar Snow, I made a general estimate of the situation
with regard to war between China and Japan and advanced various principles
for winning victory. The following excerpts may serve as a reminder:

Question: Under what conditions do you think China can defeat and
  destroy the forces of Japan?
  
Answer: Three conditions are required: first, the establishment
  of an anti-Japanese united front in China; second, the formation of an
  international anti-Japanese united front; third, the rise of the revolutionary
  movement of the people in Japan and the Japanese colonies. From the standpoint
  of the Chinese people, the unity of the people of China is the most important
  of the three conditions.
  
Question: How long do you think such a war would last?
  
Answer: That depends on the strength of China's anti-Japanese united
  front and many other conditioning factors involving China and Japan. That
  is to say, apart from China's own strength, which is the main thing,
  international help to China and the help rendered by the revolution in Japan
  are also important. If China's anti-Japanese united front is greatly expanded
  and effectively organized horizontally and vertically, if the necessary help
  is given to China by those governments and peoples which recognize the Japanese
  imperialist menace to their own interests and if revolution comes quickly
  in Japan, the war will speedily be brought to an end and China will speedily
  win victory. If these conditions are not realized quickly, the war will be
  prolonged. But in the end, just the same, Japan will certainly be defeated
  and China will certainly be victorious. Only the sacrifices will be great
  and there will be a very painful period.
  
Question: What is your opinion of the probable course of development
  of such a war, politically and militarily?
  
Answer: Japan's continental policy is already fixed, and those who
  think they can halt the Japanese advance by making compromises with Japan
  at the expense of more Chinese territory and sovereign rights are indulging
  in mere fantasy. We definitely know that the lower Yangtse valley and our
  southern seaports are already included in the continental programme of Japanese
  imperialism. Moreover, Japan wants to occupy the Philippines, Siam, Indo-China,
  the Malay Peninsula and the Dutch East Indies in order to cut off other countries
  from China and monopolize the southwestern Pacific. This is Japan's maritime
  policy. In such a period, China will undoubtedly be in an extremely difficult
  position. But the majority of the Chinese people believe that such difficulties
  can be overcome; only the rich in the big port cities are defeatists because
  they are afraid of losing their property. Many people think it would be
  impossible for China to continue the war, once her coastline is blockaded
  by Japan. This is nonsense. To refute them we need only cite the war history
  of the Red Army. In the present War of Resistance Against Japan, China's
  position is much superior to that of the Red Army in the civil war. China
  is a vast country, and even if Japan should succeed in occupying a section
  of China with as many as 100 to 200 million people, we would still be far
  from defeated. We would still have ample strength to fight against Japan,
  while the Japanese would have to fight defensive battles in their rear throughout
  the war. The heterogeneity and uneven development of China's economy are
  rather advantageous in the war of resistance. For example, to sever Shanghai
  from the rest of China would definitely not be as disastrous to China as
  would be the severance of New York from the rest of the United States. Even
  if Japan blockades the Chinese coastline, it is impossible for her to blockade
  China's Northwest, Southwest and West. Thus, once more the central point
  of the problem is the unity of the entire Chinese people and the building
  up of a nation-wide anti-Japanese front. This is what we have long been
  advocating.
  
Question: If the war drags on for a long time and Japan is not
  completely defeated, would the Communist Party agree to the negotiation of
  a peace with Japan and recognize her rule in northeastern China?
  
Answer: No. Like the people of the whole country, the Chinese Communist
  Party will not allow Japan to retain an inch of Chinese territory.
  
Question: What, in your opinion, should be the main strategy and
  tactics to be followed in this "war of liberation"?
  
Answer: Our strategy should be to employ our main forces to operate
  over an extended and fluid front. To achieve success, the Chinese troops
  must conduct their warfare with a high degree of mobility on extensive
  battlefields, making swift advances and withdrawals, swift concentrations
  and dispersals. This means large-scale mobile warfare, and not positional
  warfare depending exclusively on defence works with deep trenches, high
  fortresses and successive rows of defensive positions. It does not mean the
  abandonment of all the vital strategic points, which should be defended by
  positional warfare as long as profitable. But the pivotal strategy must be
  mobile warfare. Positional warfare is also necessary, but strategically it
  is auxiliary and secondary. Geographically the theatre of the war is so vast
  that it is possible for us to conduct mobile warfare most effectively. In
  the face of the vigorous actions of our forces, the Japanese army will have
  to be cautious. Its war-machine is ponderous and slow-moving, with limited
  efficiency. If we concentrate our forces on a narrow front for a defensive
  war of attrition, we would be throwing away the advantages of our geography
  and economic organization and repeating the mistake of Abyssinia. In the
  early period of the war, we must avoid any major decisive battles, and must
  first employ mobile warfare gradually to break the morale and combat
  effectiveness of the enemy troops.
  
  Besides employing trained armies to carry on mobile warfare, we must organize
  great numbers of guerrilla units among the peasants. One should know that
  the anti-Japanese volunteer units in the three northeastern provinces are
  only a minor demonstration of the latent power of resistance that can be
  mobilized from the peasants of the whole country. The Chinese peasants have
  very great latent power; properly organized and directed, they can keep the
  Japanese army busy twenty-four hours a day and worry it to death. It must
  be remembered that the war will be fought in China, that is to say, the Japanese
  army will be entirely surrounded by the hostile Chinese people, it will be
  forced to move in all its provisions and guard them, it must use large numbers
  of troops to protect its lines of communications and constantly guard against
  attacks and it needs large forces to garrison Manchuria and Japan as well.
  
  In the course of the war, China will be able to capture many Japanese soldiers
  and seize many weapons and munitions with which to arm herself; at the same
  time China will win foreign aid to reinforce the equipment of her troops
  gradually. Therefore China will be able to conduct positional warfare in
  the latter period of the war and make positional attacks on the Japanese-occupied
  areas. Thus Japan's economy will crack under the strain of China's long
  resistance and the morale of the Japanese forces will break under the trial
  of innumerable battles. On the Chinese side, however, the growing latent
  power of resistance will be constantly brought into play and large numbers
  of revolutionary people will be pouring into the front lines to fight for
  their freedom. The combination of all these and other factors will enable
  us to make the final and decisive attacks on the fortifications and bases
  in the Japanese-occupied areas and drive the Japanese forces of aggression
  out of China.


The above views have been proved correct in the light of the experience of
the ten months of war and will also be borne out in the future.

7. As far back as August 25, 1937, less than two months after the Lukouchiao
Incident, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party clearly pointed
out in its "Resolution on the Present Situation and the Tasks of the Party":

  The military provocation by the Japanese aggressors at Lukouchiao and their
  occupation of Peiping and Tientsin represent only the beginning of their
  large-scale invasion of China south of the Great Wall. They have already
  begun their national mobilization for war. Their propaganda that they have
  "no desire to aggravate the situation" is only a smokescreen for further
  attacks.
  
  The resistance at Lukouchiao on July 7 marked the starting point of China's
  national War of Resistance.
  
  Thus a new stage has opened in China's political situation, the stage of
  actual resistance. The stage of preparation for resistance is over. In the
  present stage the central task is to mobilize all the nation's forces for
  victory in the War of Resistance.
  
  The key to victory in the war now lies in developing the resistance that
  has already begun into a war of total resistance by the whole nation. Only
  through such a war of total resistance can final victory be won.
  
  The existence of serious weaknesses in the War of Resistance may lead to
  many setbacks, retreats, internal splits, betrayals, temporary and partial
  compromises and other such reverses. Therefore it should be realized that
  the war will be an arduous and protracted war. But we are confident that,
  through the efforts of our Party and the whole people, the resistance already
  started will sweep aside all obstacles and continue to advance and develop.


The above thesis, too, has been proved correct in the light of the experience
of the ten months of war and will also be borne out in the future.

8. Epistemologically speaking, the source of all erroneous views on war lies
in idealist and mechanistic tendencies on the question. People with such
tendencies are subjective and one-sided in their approach to problems. They
either indulge in groundless and purely subjective talk, or, basing themselves
upon a single aspect or a temporary manifestation, magnify it with similar
subjectivity into the whole of the problem. But there are two categories
of erroneous views, one comprising fundamental, and therefore consistent,
errors which are hard to correct, and the other comprising accidental, and
therefore temporary, errors which are easy to correct. Since both are wrong,
both need to be corrected. Therefore, only by opposing idealist and mechanistic
tendencies and taking an objective and all-sided view in making a study of
war can we draw correct conclusions on the question of war.

THE BASIS OF THE PROBLEM


9. Why is the War of Resistance Against Japan a protracted war? Why will
the final victory be China's? What is the basis for these statements?

The war between China and Japan is not just any war, it is specifically a
war of life and death between semi-colonial and semi-feudal China and imperialist
Japan, fought in the Nineteen Thirties. Herein lies the basis of the whole
problem. The two sides in the war have many contrasting features, which will
be considered in turn below.

10. The Japanese side. First, Japan is a powerful imperialist country,
which ranks first in the East in military, economic and political-organizational
power, and is one of the five or six foremost imperialist countries of the
world. These are the basic factors in Japan's war of aggression. The
inevitability of the war and the impossibility of quick victory for China
are due to Japan's imperialist system and her great military, economic and
political-organizational power. Secondly, however, the imperialist character
of Japan's social economy determines the imperialist character of her war,
a war that is retrogressive and barbarous. In the Nineteen Thirties, the
internal and external contradictions of Japanese imperialism have driven
her not only to embark on an adventurist war unparalleled in scale but also
to approach her final collapse. In terms of social development, Japan is
no longer a thriving country; the war will not lead to the prosperity sought
by her ruling classes but to the very reverse, the doom of Japanese imperialism.
This is what we mean by the retrogressive nature of Japan's war. It is this
reactionary quality, coupled with the military-feudal character of Japanese
imperialism, that gives rise to the peculiar barbarity of Japan's war. All
of which will arouse to the utmost the class antagonisms within Japan, the
antagonism between the Japanese and the Chinese nations, and the antagonism
between Japan and most other countries of the world. The reactionary and
barbarous character of Japan's war constitutes the primary reason for her
inevitable defeat. Thirdly, Japan's war is conducted on the basis of her
great military, economic and political-organizational power, but at the same
time it rests on an inadequate natural endowment. Japan's military, economic
and political-organizational power is great but quantitatively inadequate.
Japan is a comparatively small country, deficient in manpower and in military,
financial and material resources, and she cannot stand a long war. Japan's
rulers are endeavouring to resolve this difficulty through war, but again
they will get the very reverse of what they desire; that is to say, the war
they have launched to resolve this difficulty will eventually aggravate it
and even exhaust Japan's original resources. Fourthly and lastly, while Japan
can get international support from the fascist countries, the international
opposition she is bound to encounter will be greater than her international
support. This opposition will gradually grow and eventually not only cancel
out the support but even bear down upon Japan herself. Such is the law that
an unjust cause finds meagre support, and such is the consequence of the
very nature of Japan's war. To sum up, Japan's advantage lies in her great
capacity to wage war, and her disadvantages lie in the reactionary and barbarous
nature of her war, in the inadequacy of her manpower and material resources,
and in her meagre international support. These are the characteristics on
the Japanese side.

11. The Chinese side. First, we are a semi-colonial and semi-feudal
country. The Opium War, [6] the Taiping Revolution,
[7] the Reform Movement of 1898,
[8] the Revolution of 1911
[9] and the Northern Expedition
[10]--the revolutionary or reform movements which
aimed at extricating China from her semi-colonial and semi-feudal state--all
met with serious setbacks, and China remains a semi-colonial and semi-feudal
country. We are still a weak country and manifestly inferior to the enemy
in military, economic and political-organizational power. Here again one
can find the basis for the inevitability of the war and the impossibility
of quick victory for China. Secondly, however, China's liberation movement,
with its cumulative development over the last hundred years, is now different
from that of any previous period. Although the domestic and foreign forces
opposing it have caused it serious setbacks, at the same time they have tempered
the Chinese people. Although China today is not so strong as Japan militarily,
economically, politically and culturally, yet there are factors in China
more progressive than in any other period of her history. The Communist Party
of China and the army under its leadership represent these progressive factors.
It is on the basis of this progress that China's present war of liberation
can be protracted and can achieve final victory. By contrast with Japanese
imperialism, which is declining, China is a country rising like the morning
sun. China's war is progressive, hence its just character. Because it is
a just war, it is capable of arousing the nation to unity, of evoking the
sympathy of the people in Japan and of winning the support of most countries
in the world. Thirdly, and again by contrast with Japan, China is a very
big country with vast territory, rich resources, a large population and plenty
of soldiers, and is capable of sustaining a long war. Fourthly and lastly,
there is broad international support for China stemming from the progressive
and just character of her war, which is again exactly the reverse of the
meagre support for Japan's unjust cause. To sum up, China's disadvantage
lies in her military weakness, and her advantages lie in the progressive
and just character of her war, her great size and her abundant international
support. These are China's characteristics.

12. Thus it can be seen that Japan has great military, economic and
political-organizational power, but that her war is reactionary and barbarous,
her manpower and material resources are inadequate, and she is in an unfavourable
position internationally. China, on the contrary, has less military, economic
and political-organizational power, but she is in her era of progress, her
war is progressive and just, she is moreover a big country, a factor which
enables her to sustain a protracted war, and she will be supported by most
countries. The above are the basic, mutually contradictory characteristics
of the Sino-Japanese war. They have determined and are determining all the
political policies and military strategies and tactics of the two sides;
they have determined and are determining the protracted character of the
war and its outcome, namely, that the final victory will go to China
and not to Japan. The war is a contest between these characteristics. They
will change in the course of the war, each according to its own nature; and
from this everything else will follow. These characteristics exist objectively
and are not invented to deceive people; they constitute all the basic elements
of the war, and are not incomplete fragments; they permeate all major and
minor problems on both sides and all stages of the war, and they are not
matters of no consequence. If anyone forgets these characteristics in studying
the Sino-Japanese war, he will surely go wrong; and even though some of his
ideas win credence for a time and may seem right, they will inevitably be
proved wrong by the course of the war. On the basis of these characteristics
we shall now proceed to explain the problems to be dealt with.

REFUTATION OF THE THEORY OF NATIONAL SUBJUGATION


13. The theorists of national subjugation, who see nothing but the contrast
between the enemy's strength and our weakness, used to say, "Resistance will
mean subjugation," and now they are saying, "The continuance of the war spells
subjugation." We shall not be able to convince them merely by stating that
Japan, though strong; is small, while China, though weak, is large. They
can adduce historical instances, such as the destruction of the Sung Dynasty
by the Yuan and the destruction of the Ming Dynasty by the Ching, to prove
that small but strong country can vanquish a large but weak one and, moreover,
that a backward country can vanquish an advanced one. If we say these events
occurred long ago and do not prove the point, they can cite the British
subjugation of India to prove that a small but strong capitalist country
can vanquish a large but weak and backward country. Therefore, we have to
produce other grounds before we can silence and convince all the subjugationists,
and supply everyone engaged in propaganda with adequate arguments to persuade
those who are still confused or irresolute and so strengthen their faith
in the War of Resistance.

14. What then are the grounds we should advance? The characteristics of the
epoch. These characteristics are concretely reflected in Japan's retrogression
and paucity of support and in China's progress and abundance of support.

15. Our war is not just any war, it is specifically a war between China and
Japan fought in the Nineteen Thirties. Our enemy, Japan, is first of all
a moribund imperialist power; she is already in her era of decline and is
not only different from Britain at the time of the subjugation of India,
when British capitalism was still in the era of its ascendancy, but also
different from what she herself was at the time of World War I twenty years
ago. The present war was launched on the eve of the general collapse of world
imperialism and, above all, of the fascist countries; that is the very reason
the enemy has launched this adventurist war, which is in the nature of a
last desperate struggle. Therefore, it is an inescapable certainty that it
will not be China but the ruling circles of Japanese imperialism which will
be destroyed as a result of the war. Moreover, Japan has undertaken this
war at a time when many countries have been or are about to be embroiled
in war, when we are all fighting or preparing to fight against barbarous
aggression, and China's fortunes are linked with those of most of the countries
and peoples of the world. This is the root cause of the opposition Japan
has aroused and will increasingly arouse among those countries and peoples.

16. What about China? The China of today cannot be compared with the China
of any other historical period. She is a semi-colony and a semi-feudal society,
and she is consequently considered a weak country. But at the same time,
China is historically in her era of progress; this is the primary reason
for her ability to defeat Japan. When we say that the War of Resistance Against
Japan is progressive we do not mean progressive in the ordinary or general
sense, nor do we mean progressive in the sense that the Abyssinian war against
Italy, or the Taiping Revolution or the Revolution of 1911 were progressive,
we mean progressive in the sense that China is progressive today. In what
way is the China of today progressive? She is progressive because she is
no longer a completely feudal country and because we already have some capitalism
in China, we have a bourgeoisie and a proletariat, we have vast numbers of
people who have awakened or are awakening, we have a Communist Party, we
have a politically progressive army--the Chinese Red Army led by the Communist
Party--and we have the tradition and the experience of many decades of
revolution, and especially the experience of the seventeen years since the
founding of the Chinese Communist Party. This experience has schooled the
people and the political parties of China and forms the very basis for the
present unity against Japan. If it is said that without the experience of
1905 the victory of 1917 would have been impossible in Russia, then we can
also say that without the experience of the last seventeen years it would
be impossible to win our War of Resistance. Such is the internal situation.

In the existing international situation, China is not isolated in the war,
and this fact too is without precedent in history. In the past, China's wars,
and India's too, were wars fought in isolation. It is only today that we
meet with world-wide popular movements, extraordinary in breadth and depth,
which have arisen or are arising and which are supporting China. The Russian
Revolution of 1917 also received international support, and thus the Russian
workers and peasants won; but that support was not so broad in scale and
deep in nature as ours today. The popular movements in the world today are
developing on a scale and with a depth that are unprecedented. The existence
of the Soviet Union is a particularly vital factor in present-day international
politics, and the Soviet Union will certainly support China with the greatest
enthusiasm; there was nothing like this twenty years ago. All these factors
have created and are creating important conditions indispensable to China's
final victory. Large-scale direct assistance is as yet lacking and will come
only in the future, but China is progressive and is a big country, and these
are the factors enabling her to protract the war and to promote as well as
await international help.

17. There is the additional factor that while Japan is a small country with
a small territory, few resources, a small population and a limited number
of soldiers, China is a big country with vast territory, rich resources,
a large population and plenty of soldiers, so that, besides the contrast
between strength and weakness, there is the contrast between a small country,
retrogression and meagre support and a big country, progress and abundant
support. This is the reason why China will never be subjugated. It follows
from the contrast between strength and weakness that Japan can ride roughshod
over China for a certain time and to a certain extent, that China must
unavoidably travel a hard stretch of road, and that the War of Resistance
will be a protracted war and not a war of quick decision; nevertheless, it
follows from the other contrast--a small country, retrogression and meagre
support versus a big country, progress and abundant support--that Japan cannot
ride roughshod over China indefinitely but is sure to meet final defeat,
while China can never be subjugated but is sure to win final victory.

18. Why was Abyssinia vanquished? First, she was not only weak but also small.
Second, she was not as progressive as China; she was an old country passing
from the slave to the serf system, a country without any capitalism or bourgeois
political parties, let alone a Communist Party, and with no army such as
the Chinese army, let alone one like the Eighth Route Army. Third, she was
unable to hold out and wait for international assistance and had to fight
her war in isolation. Fourth, and most important of all, there were mistakes
in the direction of her war against Italy. Therefore Abyssinia was subjugated.
But there is still quite extensive guerrilla warfare in Abyssinia, which,
if persisted in, will enable the Abyssinians to recover their country when
the world situation changes.

19. If the subjugationists quote the history of the failure of liberation
movements in modern China to prove their assertions first that "resistance
will mean subjugation", and then that "the continuance of the war spells
subjugation", here again our answer is, "Times are different." China herself,
the internal situation in Japan and the international environment are all
different now. It is a serious matter that Japan is stronger than before
while China in her unchanged semi-colonial and semi-feudal position is still
fairly weak. It is also a fact that for the time being Japan can still control
her people at home and exploit international contradictions in order to invade
China. But during a long war, these things are bound to change in the opposite
direction. Such changes are not yet accomplished facts, but they will become
so in future. The subjugationists dismiss this point. As for China, we already
have new people, a new political party, a new army and a new policy of resistance
to Japan, a situation very different from that of over a decade ago, and
what is more, all these will inevitably make further progress. It is true
that historically the liberation movements met with repeated setbacks with
the result that China could not accumulate greater strength for the present
War of Resistance--this is a very painful historical lesson, and never again
should we destroy any of our revolutionary forces. Yet even on the present
basis, by exerting great efforts we can certainly forge ahead gradually and
increase the strength of our resistance. All such efforts should converge
on the great Anti-Japanese National United Front. As for international support,
though direct and large-scale assistance is not yet in sight, it is in the
making, the international situation being fundamentally different from before.
The countless failures in the liberation movement of modern China had their
subjective and objective causes, but the situation today is entirely different.
Today, although there are many difficulties which make the War of Resistance
arduous--such as the enemy's strength and our weakness, and the fact that
his difficulties are just starting, while our own progress is far from
sufficient--nevertheless many favourable conditions exist for defeating the
enemy; we need only add our subjective efforts, and we shall be able to overcome
the difficulties and win through to victory. These are favourable conditions
such as never existed before in any period of our history, and that is why
the War of Resistance Against Japan, unlike the liberation movements of the
past, will not end in failure.

COMPROMISE OR RESISTANCE? CORRUPTION OR PROGRESS?


20. It has been fully explained above that the theory of national subjugation
is groundless. But there are many people who do not subscribe to this theory;
they are honest patriots, who are nevertheless deeply worried about the present
situation. Two things are worrying them, fear of a compromise with Japan
and doubts about the possibility of political progress. These two vexing
questions are being widely discussed and no key has been found to their solution.
Let us now examine them.

21. As previously explained, the question of compromise has its social roots,
and as long as these roots exist the question is bound to arise. But compromise
will not avail. To prove the point, again we need only look for substantiation
to Japan, China, and the international situation. First take Japan. At the
very beginning of the War of Resistance, we estimated that the time would
come when an atmosphere conducive to compromise would arise, in other words,
that after occupying northern China, Kiangsu and Chekiang, Japan would probably
resort to the scheme of inducing China to capitulate. True enough, she did
resort to the scheme, but the crisis soon passed, one reason being that the
enemy everywhere pursued a barbarous policy and practiced naked plunder.
Had China capitulated, every Chinese would have become a slave without a
country. The enemy's predatory policy, the policy of subjugating China, has
two aspects, the material and the spiritual, both of which are being applied
universally to all Chinese, not only to the people of the lower strata but
also to members of the upper strata; of course the latter are treated a little
more politely, but the difference is only one of degree, not of principle.
In the main the enemy is transplanting into the interior of China the same
old measures he adopted in the three northeastern provinces. Materially,
he is robbing the common people even of their food and clothing, making them
cry out in hunger and cold; he is plundering the means of production, thus
ruining and enslaving China's national industries. Spiritually, he is working
to destroy the national consciousness of the Chinese people. Under the flag
of the "Rising Sun" all Chinese are forced to be docile subjects, beasts
of burden forbidden to show the slightest trace of Chinese national spirit.
This barbarous enemy policy will be carried deeper into the interior of China.
Japan with her voracious appetite is unwilling to stop the war. As was
inevitable, the policy set forth in the Japanese cabinet's statement of January
16, 1938 [11] is still being obstinately carried
out, which has enraged all strata of the Chinese people. This rage is engendered
by the reactionary and barbarous character of Japan's war--"there is no escape
from fate", and hence an absolute hostility has crystallized. It is to be
expected that on some future occasion the enemy will once again resort to
the scheme of inducing China to capitulate and that certain subjugationists
will again crawl out and most probably collude with certain foreign elements
(to be found in Britain, the United States and France, and specially among
the upper strata in Britain) as partners in crime. But the general trend
of events will not permit capitulation; the obstinate and peculiarly barbarous
character of Japan's war has decided this aspect of the question.

22. Second, let us take China. There are three factors contributing to China's
perseverance in the War of Resistance. In the first place the Communist Party,
which is the reliable force leading the people to resist Japan. Next, the
Kuomintang, which depends on Britain and the United States and hence will
not capitulate to Japan unless they tell it to. Finally, the other political
parties and groups, most of which oppose compromise and support the War of
Resistance. With unity among these three, whoever compromises will be standing
with the traitors, and anybody will have the right to punish him. All those
unwilling to be traitors have no choice but to unite and carry on the War
of Resistance to the end; therefore compromise can hardly succeed.

23. Third, take the international aspect. Except for Japan's allies and certain
elements in the upper strata of other capitalist countries, the whole world
is in favour of resistance, and not of compromise by China. This factor
reinforces China's hopes. Today the people throughout the country cherish
the hope that international forces will gradually give China increasing help.
It is not a vain hope; the existence of the Soviet Union in particular encourages
China in her War of Resistance. The socialist Soviet Union, now strong as
never before, has always shared China's joys and sorrows. In direct contrast
to all the members of the upper strata in the capitalist countries who seek
nothing but profits, the Soviet Union considers it its duty to help all weak
nations and all revolutionary wars. That China is not fighting her war in
isolation has its basis not only in international support in general but
in Soviet support in particular. China and the Soviet Union are in close
geographical proximity, which aggravates Japan's crisis and facilitates China's
War of Resistance. Geographical proximity to Japan increases the difficulties
of China's resistance. Proximity to the Soviet Union, on the other hand,
is a favourable condition for the War of Resistance.

24. Hence we may conclude that the danger of compromise exists but can be
overcome. Even if the enemy can modify his policy to some extent, he cannot
alter it fundamentally. In China the social roots of compromise are present,
but the opponents of compromise are in the majority. Internationally, also,
some forces favour compromise but the main forces favour resistance. The
combination of these three factors makes it possible to overcome the danger
of compromise and persist to the end in the War of Resistance.

25. Let us now answer the second question. Political progress at home and
perseverance in the War of Resistance are inseparable. The greater the political
progress, the more we can persevere in the war, and the more we persevere
in the war, the greater the political progress. But, fundamentally, everything
depends on our perseverance in the War of Resistance. The unhealthy phenomena
in various herds under the Kuomintang regime are very serious, and the
accumulation of these undesirable factors over the years has caused great
anxiety and vexation among the broad ranks of our patriots. But there is
no ground for pessimism, since experience in the War of Resistance has already
proved that the Chinese people have made as much progress in the last ten
months as in many years in the past. Although the cumulative effects of long
years of corruption are seriously retarding the growth of the people's strength
to resist Japan, thus reducing the extent of our victories and causing us
losses in the war, yet the over-all situation in China, in Japan and in the
world is such that the Chinese people cannot but make progress. This progress
will be slow because of the factor of corruption, which impedes progress.
Progress and the slow pace of progress are two characteristics of the present
situation, and the second ill accords with the urgent needs of the war, which
is a source of great concern to patriots. But we are in the midst of a
revolutionary war, and revolutionary war is an antitoxin which not only
eliminates the enemy's poison but also purges us of our own filth. Every
just, revolutionary war is endowed with tremendous power, which can transform
many things or clear the way for their transformation. The Sino-Japanese
war will transform both China and Japan; provided China perseveres in the
War of Resistance and in the united front, the old Japan will surely be
transformed into a new Japan and the old China into a new China, and people
and everything else in both China and Japan will be transformed during and
after the war. It is proper for us to regard the anti-Japanese war and our
national reconstruction as interconnected. To say that Japan can also be
transformed is to say that the war of aggression by her rulers will end in
defeat and may lead to a revolution by the Japanese people. The day of triumph
of the Japanese people's revolution will be the day Japan is transformed.
All this is closely linked with China's War of Resistance and is a prospect
we should take into account.

THE THEORY OF NATIONAL SUBJUGATION IS WRONG AND THE THEORY
  OF QUICK VICTORY IS LIKEWISE WRONG


26. In our comparative study of the enemy and ourselves with respect to the
basic contradictory characteristics, such as relative strength, relative
size, progress or reaction, and the relative extent of support, we have already
refuted the theory of national subjugation, and we have explained why compromise
is unlikely and why political progress is possible. The subjugationists stress
the contradiction between strength and weakness and puff it up until it becomes
the basis of their whole argument on the question, neglecting all the other
contradictions. Their preoccupation with the contrast in strength shows their
one-sidedness, and their exaggeration of this one side of the matter into
the whole shows their subjectivism. Thus, if one looks at the matter as a
whole, it will be seen that they have no ground to stand on and are wrong.
As for those who are neither subjugationists nor confirmed pessimists, but
who are in a pessimistic frame of mind for the moment simply because they
are confused by the disparity between our strength and that of the enemy
at a given time and in certain respects or by the corruption in the country,
we should point out to them that their approach also tends to be one-sided
and subjective. But in their case correction is relatively easy; once they
are alerted, they will understand, for they are patriots and their error
s only momentary.

27. The exponents of quick victory are likewise wrong. Either they completely
forget the contradiction between strength and weakness, remembering only
the other contradictions, or they exaggerate China's advantages beyond all
semblance of reality and beyond recognition, or they presumptuously take
the balance of forces at one time and place for the whole situation, as in
the old saying, "A leaf before the eye shuts out Mount Tail" In a word, they
lack the courage to admit that the enemy is strong while we are weak. They
often deny this point and consequently deny one aspect of the truth. Nor
do they have the courage to admit the limitations of our advantages, and
thus they deny another aspect of the truth. The result is that they make
mistakes, big and small, and here again it is subjectivism and one-sidedness
that are doing the mischief. These friends have their hearts in the right
place, and they, too, are patriots. But while "the gentlemen aspirations
are indeed lofty", their views are wrong, and to act according to them would
certainly be to run into a brick wall. For if appraisal does not conform
to reality, action cannot attain its objective; and to act notwithstanding
would mean the army's defeat and the nation's subjugation, so that the result
would be the same as with the defeatists. Hence this theory of quick victory
will not do either.

28. Do we deny the danger of national subjugation? No, we do not. We recognize
that China faces two possible prospects, liberation or subjugation, and that
the two are in violent conflict. Our task is to achieve liberation and to
avert subjugation. The conditions for liberation are China's progress, which
is basic, the enemy's difficulties, and international support. We differ
from the subjugationists. Taking an objective and all-sided view, we recognize
the two possibilities of national subjugation and liberation, stress that
liberation is the dominant possibility, point out the conditions for its
achievement, and strive to secure them. The subjugationists, on the other
hand, taking a subjective and one-sided view, recognize only one possibility,
that of subjugation; they do not admit the possibility of liberation, and
still less point out the conditions necessary for liberation or strive to
secure them. Moreover, while acknowledging the tendency to compromise and
the corruption, we see other tendencies and phenomena which, we indicate,
will gradually prevail and are already in violent conflict with the former;
in addition, we point out the conditions necessary for the healthy tendencies
and phenomena to prevail, and we strive to overcome the tendency to compromise
and to change the state of corruption. Therefore, contrary to the pessimists,
we are not at all down-hearted.

29. Not that we would not like a quick victory; everybody would be in favour
of driving the "devils" out overnight. But we point out that, in the absence
of certain definite conditions, quick victory is something that exists only
in one's mind and not in objective reality, and that it is a mere illusion,
a false theory. Accordingly, having made an objective and comprehensive appraisal
of all the circumstances concerning both the enemy and ourselves, we point
out that the only way to final victory is the strategy of protracted war,
and we reject the groundless theory of quick victory. We maintain that we
must strive to secure all the conditions indispensable to final victory,
and the more fully and the earlier these conditions are secured, the surer
we shall be of victory and the earlier we shall win it. We believe that only
in this way can the course of the war be shortened, and we reject the theory
of quick victory, which is just idle talk and an effort to get things on
the cheap.

WHY A PROTRACTED WAR? 


30. Let us now examine the problem of protracted war. A correct answer to
the question "Why a protracted war?" can be arrived at only on the basis
of all the fundamental contrasts between China and Japan. For instance, if
we say merely that the enemy is a strong imperialist power while we are a
weak semi-colonial and semi-feudal country, we are in danger of falling into
the theory of national subjugation. For neither in theory nor in practice
can a struggle become protracted by simply pitting the weak against the strong.
Nor can it become protracted by simply pitting the big against the small,
the progressive against the reactionary, or abundant support against meagre
support. The annexation of a small country by a big one or of a big country
by a small one is a common occurrence. It often happens that a progressive
country which is not strong is destroyed by a big, reactionary country, and
the same holds for everything that is progressive but not strong. Abundant
or meagre support is an important but a subsidiary factor, and the degree
of its effect depends upon the fundamental factors on both sides. Therefore
when we say that the War of Resistance Against Japan is a protracted war,
our conclusion is derived from the interrelations of all the factors at work
on both sides. The enemy is strong and we are weak, and the danger of subjugation
is there. But in other respects the enemy has shortcomings and we have
advantages. The enemy's advantage can be reduced and his shortcomings aggravated
by our efforts. On the other hand, our advantages can be enhanced and our
shortcoming remedied by our efforts. Hence, we can win final victory and
avert subjugation, while the enemy will ultimately be defeated and will be
unable to avert the collapse of his whole imperialist system.

31. Since the enemy has advantages only in one respect but shortcomings in
all others and we have shortcomings in only one respect but advantages in
all others, why has this produced not a balance, but, on the contrary, a
superior position for him and an inferior position for us at the present
time? Quite clearly, we cannot consider the question in such a formal way.
The fact is that the disparity between the enemy's strength and our own is
now so great that the enemy's shortcomings have not developed, and for the
time being cannot develop, to a degree sufficient to offset his strength,
while our advantages have not developed, and for the time being cannot develop,
to a degree sufficient to compensate for our weakness. Therefore there can
as yet be no balance, only imbalance.

32. Although our efforts in persevering in the War of Resistance and the
united front have somewhat changed the enemy's strength and superiority as
against our weakness and inferiority, there has as yet been no basic change.
Hence during a certain stage of the war, to a certain degree the enemy will
be victorious and we shall suffer defeat. But why is it that in this stage
the enemy's victories and our defeats are definitely restricted in degree
and cannot be transcended by complete victory or complete defeat? The reason
is that, first, from the very beginning the enemy's strength and our weakness
have been relative and not absolute, and that, second, our efforts in persevering
in the War of Resistance and in the united front have further accentuated
this relativeness. In comparison with the original situation, the enemy is
still strong, but unfavourable factors have reduced his strength, although
not yet to a degree sufficient to destroy his superiority, and similarly
we are still weak, but favourable factors have compensated for our weakness,
although not yet to a degree sufficient to transform our inferiority. Thus
it turns out that the enemy is relatively strong and we are relatively weak,
that the enemy is in a relatively superior and we are in a relatively inferior
position. On both sides, strength and weakness, superiority and inferiority,
have never been absolute, and besides, our efforts in persevering in resistance
to Japan and in the united front during the war have brought about further
changes in the original balance of forces between us and the enemy. Therefore,
in this stage the enemy's victory and our defeat are definitely restricted
in degree, and hence the war becomes protracted.

33. But circumstances are continually changing. In the course of the war,
provided we employ correct military and political tactics, make no mistakes
of principle and exert our best efforts, the enemy's disadvantages and China's
advantages will both grow as the war is drawn out, with the inevitable result
that there will be a continual change in the difference in comparative strength
and hence in the relative position of the two sides. When a new stage
is reached, a great change will take place in the balance of forces, resulting
in the enemies defeat and our victory.

34. At present the enemy can still manage to exploit his strength, and our
War of Resistance has not yet fundamentally weakened him. The insufficiency
in his manpower and material resources is not yet such as to prevent his
offensive; on the contrary, they can still sustain his offensive to a certain
extent. The reactionary and barbarous nature of his war, a factor which
intensifies both class antagonisms within Japan and the resistance of the
Chinese nation, has not yet brought about a situation which radically impedes
his advance. The enemy's international isolation is increasing but is not
yet complete. In many countries which have indicated they will help us, the
capitalists dealing in munitions and war materials and bent solely on profit
are still furnishing Japan with large quantities of war supplies,
[12] and their governments
[13] are still reluctant to join the Soviet Union
in practical sanctions against Japan. From all this it follows that our War
of Resistance cannot be won quickly and can only be a protracted war. As
for China, although there has been some improvement with regard to her weakness
in the military, economic, political and cultural spheres in the ten months
of resistance, it is still a long way from what is required to prevent the
enemy's offensive and prepare our counteroffensive. Moreover, quantitatively
speaking, we have had to sustain certain losses. Although all the factors
favourable to us are having a positive effect, it will not be sufficient
to halt the enemy's offensive and to prepare for our counter-offensive unless
we make an immense effort. Neither the abolition of corruption and the
acceleration of progress at home, nor the curbing of the pro-Japanese forces
and the expansion of the anti-Japanese forces abroad, are yet accomplished
facts. From all this it follows that our war cannot be won quickly but can
only be a protracted war.

THE THREE STAGES OF THE PROTRACTED WAR


35. Since the Sino-Japanese war is a protracted one and final victory will
belong to China, it can reasonably be assumed that this protracted war will
pass through three stages. The first stage covers the period of the enemy's
strategic offensive and our strategic defensive. The second stage will be
the period of the enemy's strategic consolidation and our preparation for
the counter-offensive. The third stage will be the period of our strategic
counter-offensive and the enemy's strategic retreat. It is impossible to
predict the concrete situation in the three stages, but certain main trends
in the war may be pointed out in the light of present conditions. The objective
course of events will be exceedingly rich and varied, with many twists and
turns, and nobody can cast a horoscope for the Sino-Japanese war; nevertheless
it is necessary for the strategic direction of the war to make a rough sketch
of its trends. Although our sketch may not be in full accord with the subsequent
facts and will be amended by them, it is still necessary to make it in order
to give firm and purposeful strategic direction to the protracted war.

36. The first stage has not yet ended. The enemy's design is to occupy Canton,
Wuhan and Lanchow and link up these three points. To accomplish this aim
the enemy will have to use at least fifty divisions, or about one and a half
million men, spend from one and a half to two years, and expend more than
ten thousand million yen. In penetrating so deeply, he will encounter immense
difficulties, with consequences disastrous beyond imagination. As for attempting
to occupy the entire length of the Canton-Hankow Railway and the Sian-Lanchow
Railway, he will have to fight perilous battles and even so may not fully
accomplish his design. But in drawing up our operational plan we should base
ourselves on the assumption that the enemy may occupy the three points and
even certain additional areas, as well as link them up, and we should make
dispositions for a protracted war, so that even if he does so, we shall be
able to cope with him. In this stage the form of fighting we should adopt
is primarily mobile warfare, supplemented by guerrilla and positional warfare.
Through the subjective errors of the Kuomintang military authorities, positional
warfare was assigned the primary role in the first phase of this stage, but
it is nevertheless supplementary from the point of view of the stage as a
whole. In this stage, China has already built up a broad united front and
achieved unprecedented unity. Although the enemy has used and will continue
to use base and shameless means to induce China to capitulate in the attempt
to realize his plan for a quick decision and to conquer the whole country
without much effort, he has failed so far, nor is he likely to succeed in
the future. In this stage, in spite of considerable losses, China will make
considerable progress, which will become the main basis for her continued
resistance in the second stage. In the present stage the Soviet Union has
already given substantial aid to China. On the enemy side, there are already
signs of flagging morale, and his army's momentum of attack is less in the
middle phase of this stage than it was in the initial phase, and it will
diminish still further in the concluding phase. Signs of exhaustion are beginning
to appear in his finances and economy; war-weariness is beginning to set
in among his people and troops and within the clique at the helm of the war,
"war frustrations" are beginning to manifest themselves and pessimism about
the prospects of the war is growing.

37. The second stage may be termed one of strategic stalemate. At the tail
end of the first stage, the enemy will be forced to fix certain terminal
points to his strategic offensive owing to his shortage of troops and our
firm resistance, and upon reaching them he will stop his strategic offensive
and enter the stage of safeguarding his occupied areas. In the second stage,
the enemy will attempt to safeguard the occupied areas and to make them his
own by the fraudulent method of setting up puppet governments, while plundering
the Chinese people to the limit; but again he will be confronted with stubborn
guerrilla warfare. Taking advantage of the fact that the enemy's rear is
unguarded, our guerrilla warfare will develop extensively in the first stage,
and many base areas will be established, seriously threatening the enemy's
consolidation of the occupied areas, and so in the second stage there will
still be widespread fighting. In this stage, our form of fighting will be
primarily guerrilla warfare, supplemented by mobile warfare. China will still
retain a large regular army, but she will find it difficult to launch
the strategic counter-offensive immediately because, on the one hand, the
enemy will adopt a strategically defensive position in the big cities and
along the main lines of communication under his occupation and, on the other
hand, China will not yet be adequately equipped technically. Except for the
troops engaged in frontal defence against the enemy, our forces will be switched
in large numbers to the enemy's rear in comparatively dispersed dispositions,
and, basing themselves on all the areas not actually occupied by the enemy
and co-ordinating with the people's local armed forces, they will launch
extensive, fierce guerrilla warfare against enemy-occupied areas, keeping
the enemy on the move as far as possible in order to destroy him in mobile
warfare, as is now being done in Shansi Province. The fighting in the second
stage will be ruthless, and the country will suffer serious devastation.
But the guerrilla warfare will be successful, and if it is well conducted
the enemy may be able to retain only about one-third of his occupied territory,
with the remaining two-thirds in our hands, and this will constitute a great
defeat for the enemy and a great victory for China. By then the enemy-occupied
territory as a whole will fall into three categories: first, the enemy base
areas; second, our base areas for guerrilla warfare; and, third, the guerrilla
areas contested by both sides. The duration of this stage will depend on
the degree of change in the balance of forces between us and the enemy and
on the changes in the international situation; generally speaking, we should
be prepared to see this stage last a comparatively long time and to weather
its hardships. It will be a very painful period for China; the two big problems
will be economic difficulties and the disruptive activities of the traitors.
The enemy will go all out to wreck China's united front, and the traitor
organizations in all the occupied areas will merge into a so-called "unified
government". Owing to the loss of big cities and the hardships of war,
vacillating elements within our ranks will clamour for compromise, and pessimism
will grow to a serious extent. Our tasks will then be to mobilize the whole
people to unite as one man and carry on the war with unflinching perseverance,
to broaden and consolidate the united front, sweep away all pessimism and
ideas of compromise, promote the will to hard struggle and apply new wartime
policies, and so to weather the hardships. In the second stage, we will have
to call upon the whole country resolutely to maintain a united government,
we will have to oppose splits and systematically improve fighting techniques,
reform the armed forces, mobilize the entire people and prepare for the
counter-offensive. The international situation will become still more
unfavourable to Japan and the main international forces will incline towards
giving more help to China, even though there may be talk of "realism" of
the Chamberlain type which accommodates itself to faits accomplis.
Japan's threat to Southeast Asia and Siberia will become greater, and
there may even be another war. As regards Japan, scores of her divisions
will be inextricably bogged down in China. Widespread guerrilla warfare and
the people's anti-Japanese movement will wear down this big Japanese force,
greatly reducing it and also disintegrating its morale by stimulating the
growth of homesickness, war-weariness and even anti-war sentiment. Though
it would be wrong to say that Japan will achieve no results at all in her
plunder of China, yet, being short of capital and harassed by guerrilla warfare,
she cannot possibly achieve rapid or substantial results. This second stage
will be the transitional stage of the entire war; it will be the most trying
period but also the pivotal one. Whether China becomes an independent country
or is reduced to a colony will be determined not by the retention or loss
of the big cities in the first stage but by the extent to which the whole
nation exerts itself in the second. If we can persevere in the War of Resistance,
in the united front and in the protracted war, China will in that stage gain
the power to change from weakness to strength. It will be the second act
in the three-act drama of China's War of Resistance. And through the efforts
of the entire cast it will become possible to perform a most brilliant last
act.

38. The third stage will be the stage of the counter-offensive to recover
our lost territories. Their recovery will depend mainly upon the strength
which China has built up in the preceding stage and which will continue to
grow in the third stage. But China's strength alone will not be sufficient,
and we shall also have to rely on the support of international forces and
on the changes that will take place inside Japan, or otherwise we shall not
be able to win; this adds to China's tasks in international propaganda and
diplomacy. In the third stage, our war will no longer be one of strategic
defensive, but will turn into a strategic counter-offensive manifesting itself
in strategic offensives; and it will no longer be fought on strategically
interior lines, but will shift gradually to strategically exterior lines.
Not until we fight our way to the Yalu River can this war be considered over.
The third stage will be the last in the protracted war, and when we talk
of persevering in the war to the end, we mean going all the way through
this stage. Our primary form of fighting will still be mobile warfare,
but positional warfare will rise to importance. While positional defence
cannot be regarded as important in the first stage because of the prevailing
circumstances, positional attack will become quite important in the third
stage because of the changed conditions and the requirements of the task.
In the third stage guerrilla warfare will again provide strategic support
by supplementing mobile and positional warfare, but it will not be the primary
form as in the second stage.

39. It is thus obvious that the war is protracted and consequently ruthless
in nature. The enemy will not be able to gobble up the whole of China but
will be able to occupy many places for a considerable time. China will not
be able to oust the Japanese quickly, but the greater part of her territory
will remain in her hands. Ultimately the enemy will lose and we will win,
but we shall have a hard stretch of road to travel.

40. The Chinese people will become tempered in the course of this long and
ruthless war. The political parties taking part in the war will also be steeled
and tested. The united front must be persevered in; only by persevering in
the united front can we persevere in the war; and only by persevering in
the united front and in the war can we win final victory. Only thus can all
difficulties be overcome. After travelling the hard stretch of road we shall
reach the highway to victory. This is the natural logic of the war.

41. In the three stages the changes in relative strength will proceed along
the following lines. In the first stage, the enemy is superior and we are
inferior in strength. With regard to our inferiority we must reckon on changes
of two different kinds from the eve of the War of Resistance to the end of
this stage. The first kind is a change for the worse. China's original
inferiority will be aggravated by war losses, namely, decreases in territory,
population, economic strength, military strength and cultural institutions.
Towards the end of the first stage, the decrease will probably be considerable,
especially on the economic side. This point will be exploited by some people
as a basis for their theories of national subjugation and of compromise.
But the second kind of change, the change for the better, must also be noted.
It includes the experience gained in the war, the progress made by the armed
forces, the political progress, the mobilization of the people, the development
of culture in a new direction, the emergence of guerrilla warfare, the increase
in international support, etc. What is on the downgrade in the first stage
is the old quantity and the old quality, the manifestations being mainly
quantitative. What is on the upgrade is the new quantity and the new quality,
the manifestations being mainly qualitative. It is the second kind of change
that provides a basis for our ability to fight a protracted war and win final
victory.

42. In the first stage, changes of two kinds are also occurring on the enemies
side. The first kind is a change for the worse and manifests itself in hundreds
of thousands of casualties, the drain on arms and ammunition, deterioration
of troop morale, popular discontent at home, shrinkage of trade, the expenditure
of over ten thousand million yen, condemnation by world opinion, etc. This
trend also provides a basis for our ability to fight a protracted war and
win final victory. But we must likewise reckon with the second kind of change
on the enemy's side, a change for the better, that is, his expansion in
territory, population and resources. This too is a basis for the protracted
nature of our War of Resistance and the impossibility of quick victory, but
at the same time certain people will use it as a basis for their theories
of national subjugation and of compromise. However, we must take into account
the transitory and partial character of this change for the better on the
enemy's side. Japan is an imperialist power heading for collapse, and her
occupation of China's territory is temporary. The vigorous growth of guerrilla
warfare in China will restrict her actual occupation to narrow zones. Moreover,
her occupation of Chinese territory has created and intensified contradictions
between Japan and other foreign countries. Besides, generally speaking, such
occupation involves a considerable period in which Japan will make capital
outlays without drawing any profits, as is shown by the experience in the
three northeastern provinces. All of which again gives us a basis for demolishing
the theories of national subjugation and of compromise and for establishing
the theories of protracted war and of final victory.

43. In the second stage, the above changes on both sides will continue to
develop. While the situation cannot be predicted in detail, on the whole
Japan will continue on the downgrade and China on the
upgrade.[14] For example, Japan's military and
financial resources will be seriously drained by China's guerrilla warfare,
popular discontent will grow in Japan, the morale of her troops will deteriorate
further, and she will become more isolated internationally. As for China,
she will make further progress in the political, military and cultural spheres
and in the mobilization of the people; guerrilla warfare will develop further;
there will be some new economic growth on the basis of the small industries
and the widespread agriculture in the interior; international support will
gradually increase; and the whole picture will be quite different from what
it is now. This second stage may last quite a long time, during which there
will be a great reversal in the balance of forces, with China gradually rising
and Japan gradually declining. China will emerge from her inferior position,
and Japan will lose her superior position; first the two countries will become
evenly matched, and then their relative positions will be reversed. Thereupon,
China will in general have completed her preparations for the strategic
counter-offensive and will enter the stage of the counter-offensive and the
expulsion of the enemy. It should be reiterated that the change from inferiority
to superiority and the completion of preparations for the counter-offensive
will involve three things, namely, an increase in China's own strength, an
increase in Japan's difficulties, and an increase in international support;
it is the combination of all these forces that will bring about China's
superiority and the completion of her preparations for the counter-offensive.

44. Because of the unevenness in China's political and economic development,
the strategic counter-offensive of the third stage will not present a uniform
and even picture throughout the country in its initial phase but will be
regional in character, rising here and subsiding there. During this stage,
the enemy will not relax his divisive tricks to break China's united front,
hence the task of maintaining internal unity in China will become still more
important, and we shall have to ensure that the strategic counter-offensive
does not collapse halfway through internal dissension. In this period the
international situation will become very favourable to China. China's task
will be to take advantage of it in order to attain complete liberation and
establish an independent democratic state, which at the same time will mean
helping the world anti-fascist movement.

45. China moving from inferiority to parity and then to superiority, Japan
moving from superiority to parity and then to inferiority; China moving from
the defensive to stalemate and then to the counter-offensive, Japan moving
from the offensive to the safeguarding of her gains and then to retreat--such
will be the course of the Sino-Japanese war and its inevitable trend.

46. Hence the questions and the conclusions are as follows: Will China be
subjugated? The answer is, No, she will not be subjugated, but will win final
victory. Can China win quickly? The answer is, No, she cannot win quickly,
and the war must be a protracted one. Are these conclusions correct? I think
they are.

47. At this point, the exponents of national subjugation and of compromise
will again rush in and say, "To move from inferiority to parity China needs
a military and economic power equal to Japan's, and to move from parity to
superiority she will need a military and economic power greater than Japan's.
But this is impossible, hence the above conclusions are not correct."

48. This is the so-called theory that "weapons decide
everything",[15] which constitutes a mechanical
approach to the question of war and a subjective and one-sided view. Our
view is opposed to this; we see not only weapons but also people. Weapons
are an important factor in war, but not the decisive factor; it is people,
not things, that are decisive. The contest of strength is not only a contest
of military and economic power, but also a contest of human power and morale.
Military and economic power is necessarily wielded by people. If the great
majority of the Chinese, of the Japanese and of the people of other countries
are on the side of our War of Resistance Against Japan, how can Japan's military
and economic power, wielded as it is by a small minority through coercion,
count as superiority? And if not, then does not China, though wielding relatively
inferior military and economic power, become the superior? There is no doubt
that China will gradually grow in military and economic power, provided she
perseveres in the War of Resistance and in the united front. As for our enemy,
weakened as he will be by the long war and by internal and external
contradictions, his military and economic power is bound to change in the
reverse direction. In these circumstances, is there any reason why China
cannot become the superior? And that is not all. Although we cannot as yet
count the military and economic power of other countries as being openly
and to any great extent on our side, is there any reason why we will not
be able to do so in the future? If Japan's enemy is not just China, if in
future one or more other countries make open use of their considerable military
and economic power defensively or offensively against Japan and openly help
us, then will not our superiority be still greater? Japan is a small country,
her war is reactionary and barbarous, and she will become more and more isolated
internationally; China is a large country, her war is progressive and just,
and she will enjoy more and more support internationally. Is there any reason
why the long-term development of these factors should not definitely change
the relative position between the enemy and ourselves?

49. The exponents of quick victory, however, do not realize that war is a
contest of strength, and that before a certain change has taken place in
the relative strength of the belligerents, there is no basis for trying to
fight strategically decisive battles and shorten the road to liberation.
Were their ideas to be put into practice, we should inevitably run our heads
into a brick wall. Or perhaps they are just talking for their own pleasure
without really intending to put their ideas into practice. In the end Mr.
Reality will come and pour a bucket of cold water over these chatterers,
showing them up as mere windbags who want to get things on the cheap, to
have gains without pains. We have had this kind of idle chatter before and
we have it now, though not very much so far; but there may be more as the
war develops into the stage of stalemate and then of counter-offensive. But
in the meantime, if China's losses in the first stage are fairly heavy and
the second stage drags on very long, the theories of national subjugation
and of compromise will gain great currency. Therefore, our fire should be
directed mainly against them and only secondarily against the idle chatter
about quick victory.

50. That the war will be protracted is certain, but nobody can predict exactly
how many months or years it will last, as this depends entirely upon the
degree of the change in the balance of forces. All those who wish to shorten
the war have no alternative but to work hard to increase our own strength
and reduce that of the enemy. Specifically, the only way is to strive to
win more battles and wear down the enemy's forces, develop guerrilla warfare
to reduce enemy-occupied territory to a minimum, consolidate and expand the
united front to rally the forces of the whole nation, build up new armies
and develop new war industries, promote political, economic and cultural
progress, mobilize the workers, peasants, businessmen, intellectuals and
other sections of the people, disintegrate the enemy forces and win over
their soldiers, carry on international propaganda to secure foreign support,
and win the support of the Japanese people and other oppressed peoples. Only
by doing all this can we reduce the duration of the war. There is no magic
short-cut.

A WAR OF JIG-SAW PATTERN


51. We can say with certainty that the protracted War of Resistance Against
Japan will write a splendid page unique in the war history of mankind. One
of the special features of this war is the interlocking "jig-saw" pattern
which arises from such contradictory factors as the barbarity of Japan and
her shortage of troops on the one hand, and the progressiveness of China
and the extensiveness of her territory on the other. There have been other
wars of jig-saw pattern in history, the three years' civil war in Russia
after the October Revolution being a case in point. But what distinguishes
this war in China is its especially protracted and extensive character, which
will set a record in history. Its jig-saw pattern manifests itself as follows.

52. Interior and exterior lines. The anti-Japanese war as a whole
is being fought on interior lines; but as far as the relation between the
main forces and the guerrilla units is concerned, the former are on the interior
lines while the latter are on the exterior lines, presenting a remarkable
spectacle of pincers around the enemy. The same can be said of the relationship
between the various guerrilla areas. From its own viewpoint each guerrilla
area is on interior lines and the other areas are on exterior lines; together
they form many battle fronts, which hold the enemy in pincers. In the first
stage of the war, the regular army operating strategically on interior lines
is withdrawing but the guerrilla units operating strategically on exterior
lines will advance with great strides over wide areas to the rear of the
enemy-- they will advance even more fiercely in the second stage--thereby
presenting a remarkable picture of both withdrawal and advance.

53. Possession and non-possession of a rear area. The main forces,
which extend the front lines to the outer limits of the enemy's occupied
areas, are operating from the rear area of the country as a whole. The guerrilla
units, which extend the battle lines into the enemy rear, are separated from
the rear area of the country as a whole. But each guerrilla area has a small
rear of its own, upon which it relies to establish its fluid battle lines.
The case is different with the guerrilla detachments which are dispatched
by a guerrilla area for short-term operations in the rear of the enemy in
the same area; such detachments have no rear, nor do they have a battle line.
"Operating without a rear area" is a special feature of revolutionary war
in the new era, wherever a vast territory, a progressive people, and an advanced
political party and army are to be found; there is nothing to fear but much
to gain from it, and far from having doubts about it we should promote it.

54. Encirclement and counter-encirclement. Taking the war as a whole,
there is no doubt that we are strategically encircled by the enemy because
he is on the strategic offensive and operating on exterior lines while we
are on the strategic defensive and operating on interior lines. This is the
first form of enemy encirclement. We on our part can encircle one or more
of the enemy columns advancing on us along separate routes, because we apply
the policy of fighting campaigns and battles from tactically exterior lines
by using numerically preponderant forces against these enemy columns advancing
on us from strategically exterior lines. This is the first form of our
counter-encirclement of the enemy. Next, if we consider the guerrilla base
areas in the enemy's rear, each area taken singly is surrounded by the enemy
on all sides, like the Wutai Mountains, or on three sides, like the northwestern
Shansi area. This is the second form of enemy encirclement. However, if one
considers all the guerrilla base areas together and in their relation to
the positions of the regular forces, one can see that we in turn surround
a great many enemy forces. In Shansi Province, for instance, we have surrounded
the Tatung-puchow Railway on three sides (the east and west flanks and the
southern end) and the city of Taiyuan on all sides; and there are many similar
instances in Hopei and Shantung Provinces. This is the second form of our
counter-encirclement of the enemy. Thus there are two forms of encirclement
by the enemy forces and two forms of encirclement by our own--rather like
a game of weichi. [16] Campaigns
and battles fought by the two sides resemble the capturing of each other's
pieces, and the establishment of enemy strongholds (such as Talyuan) and
our guerrilla base areas (such as the Wutai Mountains) resembles moves to
dominate spaces on the board. If the game of weichi is extended
to include the world, there is yet a third form of encirclement as between
us and the enemy, namely, the interrelation between the front of aggression
and the front of peace. The enemy encircles China, the Soviet Union, France
and Czechoslovakia with his front of aggression, while we counter-encircle
Germany, Japan and Italy with our front of peace. But our encirclement, like
the hand of Buddha, will turn into the Mountain of Five Elements lying athwart
the Universe, and the modern Sun Wu-kungs
[17]--the fascist aggressors--will finally be buried
underneath it, never to rise again. Therefore, if on the international plane
we can create an anti-Japanese front in the Pacific region, with China as
one strategic unit, with the Soviet Union and other countries which may join
it as other strategic units, and with the Japanese people's movement as still
another strategic unit, and thus form a gigantic net from which the fascist
Sun Wu-kungs can find no escape, then that will be our enemy's day of doom.
Indeed, the day when this gigantic net is formed will undoubtedly be the
day of the complete overthrow of Japanese imperialism. We are not jesting;
this is the inevitable trend of the war.

55. Big areas and little areas. There is a possibility that the
enemy will occupy the greater part of Chinese territory south of the Great
Wall, and only the smaller part will be kept intact. That is one aspect of
the situation. But within this greater part, which does not include the three
northeastern provinces, the enemy can actually hold only the big cities,
the main lines of communication and some of the plains--which may rank first
in importance, but will probably constitute only the smaller part of the
occupied territory in size and population, while the greater part will be
taken up by the guerrilla areas that will grow up everywhere. That is another
aspect of the situation. If we go beyond the provinces south of the Great
Wall and include Mongolia, Sinkiang, Chinghai and Tibet, then the unoccupied
area will constitute the greater part of China's territory, and the
enemy-occupied area will become the smaller part, even with the three
northeastern provinces. That is yet another aspect of the situation. The
area kept intact is undoubtedly important, and we should devote great efforts
to developing it, not only politically, militarily and economically but,
what is also important, culturally. The enemy has transformed our former
cultural centres into culturally backward areas, and we on our part must
transform the former culturally backward areas into cultural centres. At
the same time, the work of developing extensive guerrilla areas behind the
enemy lines is also extremely important, and we should attend to every aspect
of this work, including the cultural. All in all, big pieces of China's
territory, namely, the rural areas, will be transformed into regions of progress
and light, while the small pieces, namely, the enemy-occupied areas and
especially the big cities, will temporarily become regions of backwardness
and darkness.

56. Thus it can be seen that the protracted and far-flung War of Resistance
Against Japan is a war of a jig-saw pattern militarily, politically, economically
and culturally. It is a marvellous spectacle in the annals of war, a heroic
undertaking by the Chinese nation, a magnificent and earth-shaking feat.
This war will not only affect China and Japan, strongly impelling both to
advance, but will also affect the whole world, impelling all nations, especially
the oppressed nations such as India, to march forward. Every Chinese should
consciously throw himself into this war of a jig-saw pattern, for this is
the form of war by which the Chinese nation is liberating itself, the special
form of war of liberation waged by a big semi-colonial country in the Nineteen
Thirties and the Nineteen Forties.

FIGHTING FOR PERPETUAL PEACE


57. The protracted nature of China's anti-Japanese war is inseparably connected
with the fight for perpetual peace in China and the whole world. Never has
there been a historical period such as the present in which war is so close
to perpetual peace. For several thousand years since the emergence of classes,
the life of mankind has been full of wars; each nation has fought countless
wars, either internally or with other nations. In the imperialist epoch of
capitalist society, wars are waged on a particularly extensive scale and
with a peculiar ruthlessness. The first great imperialist war of twenty years
ago was the first of its kind in history, but not the last. Only the war
which has now begun comes close to being the final war, that is, comes close
to the perpetual peace of mankind. By now one-third of the world's population
has entered the war. Look ! Italy, then Japan; Abyssinia, then Spain, then
China. The population of the countries at war now amounts to almost 600 million,
or nearly a third of the total population of the world. The characteristics
of the present war are its uninterruptedness and its proximity to perpetual
peace. Why is it uninterrupted? After attacking Abyssinia, Italy attacked
Spain, and Germany joined in; then Japan attacked China. What will come next?
Undoubtedly Hitler will fight the great powers. "Fascism is war"
[18]--this is perfectly true. There will be no
interruption in the development of the present war into a world war; mankind
will not be able to avoid the calamity of war. Why then do we say the present
war is near to perpetual peace? The present war is the result of the development
of the general crisis of world capitalism which began with World War I; this
general crisis is driving the capitalist countries into a new war and, above
all, driving the fascist countries into new war adventures. This war, we
can foresee, will not save capitalism, but will hasten its collapse. It will
be greater in scale and more ruthless than the war of twenty years ago, all
nations will inevitably be drawn in, it will drag on for a very long time,
and mankind will suffer greatly. But, owing to the existence of the Soviet
Union and the growing political consciousness of the people of the world,
great revolutionary wars will undoubtedly emerge from this war to oppose
all counter-revolutionary wars, thus giving this war the character of a struggle
for perpetual peace. Even if later there should be another period of war,
perpetual world peace will not be far off. Once man has eliminated capitalism,
he will attain the era of perpetual peace, and there will be no more need
for war. Neither armies, nor warships, nor military aircraft, nor poison
gas will then be needed. Thereafter and for all time, mankind will never
again know war. The revolutionary wars which have already begun are part
of the war for perpetual peace. The war between China and Japan, two countries
which have a combined population of over 500 million, will take an important
place in this war for perpetual peace, and out of it will come the liberation
of the Chinese nation. The liberated new China of the future will be inseparable
from the liberated new world of the future. Hence our War of Resistance Against
Japan takes on the character of a struggle for perpetual peace.

58. History shows that wars are divided into two kinds, just and unjust.
All wars that are progressive are just, and all wars that impede progress
are unjust. We Communists oppose all unjust wars that impede progress, but
we do not oppose progressive, just wars. Not only do we Communists not oppose
just wars, we actively participate in them. As for unjust wars, World War
I is an instance in which both sides fought for imperialist interests; therefore
the Communists of the whole world firmly opposed that war. The way to oppose
a war of this kind is to do everything possible to prevent it before it breaks
out and, once it breaks out, to oppose war with war, to oppose unjust war
with just war, whenever possible. Japan's war is an unjust war that impedes
progress, and the peoples of the world, including the Japanese people, should
oppose it and are opposing it. In our country the people and the government,
the Communist Party and the Kuomintang, have all raised the banner of
righteousness in the national revolutionary war against aggression. Our war
is sacred and just, it is progressive and its aim is peace. The aim is peace
not just in one country but throughout the world, not just temporary but
perpetual peace. To achieve this aim we must wage a life-and-death struggle,
be prepared for any sacrifice, persevere to the end and never stop short
of the goal. However great the sacrifice and however long the time needed
to attain it, a new world of perpetual peace and brightness already lies
clearly before us. Our faith in waging this war is based upon the new China
and the new world of perpetual peace and brightness for which we are striving.
Fascism and imperialism wish to perpetuate war, but we wish to put an end
to it in the not too distant future. The great majority of mankind should
exert their utmost efforts for this purpose. The 450 million people of China
constitute one quarter of the world's population, and if by their concerted
efforts they overthrow Japanese imperialism and create a new China of freedom
and equality, they will most certainly be making a tremendous contribution
to the struggle for perpetual world peace. This is no vain hope, for the
whole world is approaching this point in the course of its social and economic
development, and provided that the majority of mankind work together, our
goal will surely be attained in several decades.

MAN'S DYNAMIC ROLE IN WAR


59.We have so far explained why the war is a protracted war and why the final
victory will be China's, and in the main dealt with what protracted war is
and what it is not. Now we shall turn to the question of what to do and what
not to do. How to conduct protracted war and how to win the final victory?
These are the questions answered below. We shall therefore successively discuss
the following problems: man's dynamic role in war, war and politics, political
mobilization for the War of Resistance, the object of war, offence within
defence, quick decisions within a protracted war, exterior lines within interior
lines, initiative, flexibility, planning, mobile warfare, guerrilla warfare,
positional warfare, war of annihilation, war of attrition, the possibilities
of exploiting the enemy's mistakes, the question of decisive engagements
in the anti-Japanese war, and the army and the people as the foundation of
victory. Let us start with the problem of man's dynamic role.

60. When we say we are opposed to a subjective approach to problems, we mean
that we must oppose ideas which are not based upon or do not correspond to
objective facts, because such ideas are fanciful and fallacious and will
lead to failure if acted on. But whatever is done has to be done by human
beings; protracted war and final victory will not come about without human
action. For such action to be effective there must be people who derive ideas,
principles or views from the objective facts, and put forward plans, directives,
policies, strategies and tactics. Ideas, etc. are subjective, while deeds
or actions are the subjective translated into the objective, but both represent
the dynamic role peculiar to human beings. We term this kind of dynamic role
"man's conscious dynamic role", and it is a characteristic that distinguishes
man from all other beings. All ideas based upon and corresponding to objective
facts are correct ideas, and all deeds or actions based upon correct ideas
are correct actions. We must give full scope to these ideas and actions,
to this dynamic role. The anti-Japanese war is being waged to drive out
imperialism and transform the old China into a new China; this can be achieved
only when the whole Chinese people are mobilized and full scope is given
to their conscious dynamic role in resisting Japan. If we just sit by and
take no action, only subjugation awaits us and there will be neither protracted
war nor final victory.

61. It is a human characteristic to exercise a conscious dynamic role. Man
strongly displays this characteristic in war. True, victory or defeat in
war is decided by the military, political, economic and geographical conditions
on both sides, the nature of the war each side is waging and the international
support each enjoys, but it is not decided by these alone; in themselves,
all these provide only the possibility of victory or defeat but do not decide
the issue. To decide the issue, subjective effort must be added, namely,
the directing and waging of war, man's conscious dynamic role in war.

62. In seeking victory, those who direct a war cannot overstep the limitations
imposed by the objective conditions; within these limitations, however, they
can and must play a dynamic role in striving for victory. The stage of action
for commanders in a war must be built upon objective possibilities, but on
that stage they can direct the performance of many a drama, full of sound
and colour, power and grandeur. Given the objective material foundations,
the commanders in the anti-Japanese war should display their prowess and
marshal all their forces to crush the national enemy, transform the present
situation in which our country and society are suffering from aggression
and oppression, and create a new China of freedom and equality; here is where
our subjective faculties for directing war can and must be exercised. We
do not want any of our commanders in the war to detach himself from the objective
conditions and become a blundering hothead, but we decidedly want every commander
to become a general who is both bold and sagacious. Our commanders should
have not only the boldness to overwhelm the enemy but also the ability to
remain masters of the situation throughout the changes and vicissitudes of
the entire war. Swimming in the ocean of war, they must not flounder but
make sure of reaching the opposite shore with measured strokes. Strategy
and tactics, as the laws for directing war, constitute the art of swimming
in the ocean of war.

WAR AND POLITICS


63. "War is the continuation of politics." In this sense war is politics
and war itself is a political action; since ancient times there has never
been a war that did not have a political character. The anti-Japanese war
is a revolutionary war waged by the whole nation, and victory is inseparable
from the political aim of the war--to drive out Japanese imperialism and
build a new China of freedom and equality--inseparable from the general policy
of persevering in the War of Resistance and in the united front, from the
mobilization of the entire people, and from the political principles of the
unity between officers and men, the unity between army and people and the
disintegration of the enemy forces, and inseparable from the effective
application of united front policy, from mobilization on the cultural front,
and from the efforts to win international support and the support of the
people inside Japan. In a word, war cannot for a single moment be separated
from politics. Any tendency among the anti-Japanese armed forces to belittle
politics by isolating war from it and advocating the idea of war as an absolute
is wrong and should be corrected.

64. But war has its own particular characteristics and in this sense it cannot
be equated with politics in general. "War is the continuation of politics
by other . . . means." [19] When politics develops
to a certain stage beyond which it cannot proceed by the usual means, war
breaks out to sweep the obstacles from the way. For instance, the
semi-independent status of China is an obstacle to the political growth of
Japanese imperialism, hence Japan has unleashed a war of aggression to sweep
away that obstacle. What about China? Imperialist oppression has long been
an obstacle to China's bourgeois-democratic revolution, hence many wars of
liberation have been waged in the effort to sweep it away. Japan is now using
war for the purpose of oppressing China and completely blocking the advance
of the Chinese revolution, and therefore China is compelled to wage the War
of Resistance in her determination to sweep away this obstacle. When the
obstacle is removed, our political aim will be attained and the war concluded.
But if the obstacle is not completely swept away, the war will have to continue
till the aim is fully accomplished. Thus anyone who seeks a compromise before
the task of the anti-Japanese war is fulfilled is bound to fail, because
even if a compromise were to occur for one reason or another, the war would
break out again, since the broad masses of the people would certainly not
submit but would continue the war until its political objective was achieved.
It can therefore be said that politics is war without bloodshed while war
is politics with bloodshed.

65. From the particular characteristics of war there arise a particular set
of organizations, a particular series of methods and a particular kind of
process. The organizations are the armed forces and everything that goes
with them. The methods are the strategy and tactics for directing war. The
process is the particular form of social activity in which the opposing armed
forces attack each other or defend themselves against one another, employing
strategy and tactics favourable to themselves and unfavourable to the enemy.
Hence war experience is a particular kind of experience. All who take part
in war must rid themselves of their customary ways and accustom themselves
to war before they can win victory.

POLITICAL MOBILIZATION FOR THE WAR OF RESISTANCE


66. A national revolutionary war as great as ours cannot be won without extensive
and thoroughgoing political mobilization. Before the anti-Japanese war there
was no political mobilization for resistance to Japan, and this was a great
drawback, as a result of which China has already lost a move to the enemy.
After the war began, political mobilization was very far from extensive,
let alone thoroughgoing. It was the enemy's gunfire and the bombs dropped
by enemy airplanes that brought news of the war to the great majority of
the people. That was also a kind of mobilization, but it was done for us
by the enemy, we did not do it ourselves. Even now the people in the remoter
regions beyond the noise of the guns are carrying on quietly as usual. This
situation must change, or otherwise we cannot win in our life-and-death struggle.
We must never lose another move to the enemy; on the contrary, we must make
full use of this move, political mobilization, to get the better of him.
This move is crucial; it is indeed of primary importance, while our inferiority
in weapons and other things is only secondary. The mobilization of the common
people throughout the country will create a vast sea in which to drown the
enemy, create the conditions that will make up for our inferiority m arms
and other things, and create the prerequisites for overcoming every difficulty
in the war. To win victory, we must persevere in the War of Resistance, in
the united front and in the protracted war. But all these are inseparable
from the mobilization of the common people. To wish for victory and yet neglect
political mobilization is like wishing to "go south by driving the chariot
north", and the result would inevitably be to forfeit victory.

67. What does political mobilization mean? First, it means telling the army
and the people about the political aim of the war. It is necessary for every
soldier and civilian to see why the war must be fought and how it concerns
him. The political aim of the war is "to drive out Japanese imperialism and
build a new China of freedom and equality"; we must proclaim this aim to
everybody, to all soldiers and civilians, before we can create an anti-Japanese
upsurge and unite hundreds of millions as one man to contribute their all
to the war. Secondly, it is not enough merely to explain the aim to them;
the steps and policies for its attainment must also be given, that is, there
must be a political programme. We already have the Ten-Point Programme for
Resisting Japan and Saving the Nation and also the Programme of Armed Resistance
and National Reconstruction; we should popularize both of them in the army
and among the people and mobilize everyone to carry them out. Without a
clear-cut, concrete political programme it is impossible to mobilize all
the armed forces and the whole people to carry the war against Japan through
to the end. Thirdly, how should we mobilize them? By word of mouth, by leaflets
and bulletins, by newspapers, books and pamphlets, through plays and films,
through schools, through the mass organizations and through our cadres. What
has been done so far in the Kuomintang areas is only a drop in the ocean,
and moreover it has been done in a manner ill-suited to the people's tastes
and in a spirit uncongenial to them; this must be drastically changed. Fourthly,
to mobilize once is not enough; political mobilization for the War of Resistance
must be continuous. Our job is not to recite our political programme to the
people, for nobody will listen to such recitations; we must link the political
mobilization for the war with developments in the war and with the life of
the soldiers and the people, and make it a continuous movement. This is a
matter of immense importance on which our victory in the war primarily depends.

THE OBJECT OF WAR


68. Here we are not dealing with the political aim of war; the political
aim of the War of Resistance Against Japan has been defined above as "to
drive out Japanese imperialism and build a new China of freedom and equality".
Here we are dealing with the elementary object of war, war as "politics with
bloodshed", as mutual slaughter by opposing armies. The object of war is
specifically "to preserve oneself and destroy the enemy" (to destroy the
enemy means to disarm him or "deprive him of the power to resist", and does
not mean to destroy every member of his forces physically). In ancient warfare,
the spear and the shield were used, the spear to attack and destroy the enemy,
and the shield to defend and preserve oneself. To the present day, all weapons
are still an extension of the spear and the shield. The bomber, the machine-gun,
the long-range gun and poison gas are developments of the spear, while the
air-raid shelter, the steel helmet, the concrete fortification and the gas
mask are developments of the shield. The tank is a new weapon combining the
functions of both spear and shield. Attack is the chief means of destroying
the enemy, but defence cannot be dispensed with. In attack the immediate
object is to destroy the enemy, but at the same time it is self-preservation,
because if the enemy is not destroyed, you will be destroyed. In defence
the immediate object is to preserve yourself, but at the same time defence
is a means of supplementing attack or preparing to go over to the attack.
Retreat is in the category of defence and is a continuation of defence, while
pursuit is a continuation of attack. It should be pointed out that destruction
of the enemy is the primary object of war and self-preservation the secondary,
because only by destroying the enemy in large numbers can one effectively
preserve oneself. Therefore attack, the chief means of destroying the enemy,
is primary, while defence, a supplementary means of destroying the enemy
and a means of self-preservation, is secondary. In actual warfare the chief
role is played by defence much of the time and by attack for the rest of
the time, but if war is taken as a whole, attack remains primary.

69. How do we justify the encouragement of heroic sacrifice in war? Does
it not contradict "self-preservation"? No, it does not; sacrifice and
self-preservation are both opposite and complementary to each other. War
is politics with bloodshed and exacts a price, sometimes an extremely high
price. Partial and temporary sacrifice (non-preservation) is incurred for
the sake of general and permanent preservation. This is precisely why we
say that attack, which is basically a means of destroying the enemy, also
has the function of self-preservation. It is also the reason why defence
must be accompanied by attack and should not be defence pure and simple.

70. The object of war, namely, the preservation of oneself and the destruction
of the enemy, is the essence of war and the basis of all war activities,
an essence which pervades all war activities, from the technical to the
strategic. The object of war is the underlying principle of war, and no
technical, tactical, or strategic concepts or principles can in any way depart
from it. What for instance is meant by the principle of "taking cover and
making full use of fire-power" in shooting? The purpose of the former is
self-preservation, of the latter the destruction of the enemy. The former
gives rise to such techniques as making use of the terrain and its features,
advancing in spurts, and spreading out in dispersed formation. The latter
gives rise to other techniques, such as clearing the field of fire and organizing
a fire-net. As for the assault force, the containing force and the reserve
force in a tactical operation, the first is for annihilating the enemy, the
second for preserving oneself, and the third is for either purpose according
to circumstances--either for annihilating the enemy (in which case it reinforces
the assault force or serves as a pursuit force), or for self-preservation
(in which case it reinforces the containing force or serves as a covering
force). Thus, no technical, tactical, or strategical principles or operations
can in any way depart from the object of war, and this object pervades the
whole of a war and runs through it from beginning to end.

71. In directing the anti-Japanese war, leaders at the various levels must
lose sight neither of the contrast between the fundamental factors on each
side nor of the object of this war. In the course of military operations
these contrasting fundamental factors unfold themselves in the struggle by
each side to preserve itself and destroy the other. In our war we strive
in every engagement to win a victory, big or small, and to disarm a part
of the enemy and destroy a part of his men and materiel. We must
accumulate the results of these partial destructions of the enemy into major
strategic victories and so achieve the final political aim of expelling the
enemy, protecting the motherland and building a new China.

OFFENCE WITHIN DEFENCE, QUICK DECISIONS WITHIN A PROTRACTED
  WAR EXTERIOR LINES WITHIN INTERIOR LINES


72. Now let us examine the specific strategy of the War of Resistance Against
Japan. We have already said that our strategy for resisting Japan is that
of protracted war, and indeed this is perfectly right. But this strategy
is general, not specific. Specifically, how should the protracted war be
conducted? We shall now discuss this question. Our answer is as follows.
In the first and second stages of the war, i.e., in the stages of
the enemy's offensive and preservation of his gains, we should conduct tactical
offensives within the strategic defensive, campaigns and battles of quick
decision within the strategically protracted war, and campaigns and battles
on exterior lines within strategically interior lines. In the third stage,
we should launch the strategic counter-offensive.

73. Since Japan is a strong imperialist power and we are a weak semi-colonial
and semi-feudal country, she has adopted the policy of the strategic offensive
while we are on the strategic defensive. Japan is trying to execute the strategy
of a war of quick decision; we should consciously execute the strategy of
protracted war. Japan is using dozens of army divisions of fairly high combat
effectiveness (now numbering thirty) and part of her navy to encircle and
blockade China from both land and sea, and is using her air force to bomb
China. Her army has already established a long front stretching from Paotow
to Hangchow and her navy has reached Fukien and Kwangtung; thus exterior-line
operations have taken shape on a vast scale. On the other hand, we are in
the position of operating on interior lines. All this is due to the fact
that the enemy is strong while we are weak. This is one aspect of the situation.

74. But there is another and exactly opposite aspect. Japan, though strong,
does not have enough soldiers. China, though weak, has a vast territory,
a large population and plenty of soldiers. Two important consequences follow.
First, the enemy, employing his small forces against a vast country, can
only occupy some big cities and main lines of communication and part of the
plains. Thus there are extensive areas in the territory under his occupation
which he has had to leave ungarrisoned, and which provide a vast arena for
our guerrilla warfare. Taking China as a whole, even if the enemy manages
to occupy the line connecting Canton, Wuhan and Lanchow and its adjacent
areas, he can hardly seize the regions beyond, and this gives China a general
rear and vital bases from which to carry on the protracted war to final victory.
Secondly, in pitting his small forces against large forces, the enemy is
encircled by our large forces. The enemy is attacking us along several routes,
strategically he is on exterior lines while we are on interior lines,
strategically he is on the offensive while we are on the defensive; all this
looks very much to our disadvantage. However, we can make use of our two
advantages, namely, our vast territory and large forces, and, instead of
stubborn positional warfare, carry on flexible mobile warfare, employing
several divisions against one enemy division, several tens of thousands of
our men against ten thousand of his, several columns against one of his columns,
and suddenly encircling and attacking a single column from the exterior lines
of the battlefield. In this way, while the enemy is on exterior lines and
on the offensive in strategic operations, he will be forced to fight on interior
lines and on the defensive in campaigns and battles. And for us, interior
lines and the defensive in strategic operations will be transformed into
exterior lines and the offensive in campaigns and battles. This is the way
to deal with one or indeed with any advancing enemy column. Both the consequences
discussed above follow from the fact that the enemy is small while we are
big. Moreover, the enemy forces, though small, are strong (in arms and in
training) while our forces, though large, are weak (in arms and in training
but not in morale), and in campaigns and battles, therefore, we should not
only employ large forces against small and operate from exterior against
interior lines, but also follow the policy of seeking quick decisions. In
general, to achieve quick decision, we should attack a moving and not a
stationary enemy. We should concentrate a big force under cover beforehand
alongside the route which the enemy is sure to take, and while he is on the
move, advance suddenly to encircle and attack him before he knows what is
happening, and thus quickly conclude the battle. If we fight well, we may
destroy the entire enemy force or the greater part or some part of it, and
even if we do not fight so well, we may still inflict heavy casualties. This
applies to any and every one of our battles. If each month we could win one
sizable victory like that at Pinghsingkuan or Taierhchuang, not to speak
of more, it would greatly demoralize the enemy, stimulate the morale of our
own forces and evoke international support. Thus our strategically protracted
war is translated in the field into battles of quick decision. The enemy's
war of strategic quick decision is bound to change into protracted war after
he is defeated in many campaigns and battles.

75. In a word, the above operational principle for fighting campaigns and
battles is one of "quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines". It
is the opposite of our strategic principle of "protracted defensive warfare
on interior lines", and yet it is the indispensable principle for carrying
out this strategy. If we should use "protracted defensive warfare on interior
lines" as the principle for campaigns and battles too, as we did at the beginning
of the War of Resistance, it would be totally unsuited to the circumstances
in which the enemy is small while we are big and the enemy is strong while
we are weak; in that case we could never achieve our strategic objective
of a protracted war and we would be defeated by the enemy. That is why we
have always advocated the organization of the forces of the entire country
into a number of large field armies, each counterposed to one of the enemy's
field armies but having two, three or four times its strength, and so keeping
the enemy engaged in extensive theatres of war in accordance with the principle
outlined above. This principle of "quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior
lines" can and must be applied in guerrilla as well as in regular warfare.
It is applicable not only to any one stage of the war but to its entire course.
In the stage of strategic counter-offensive, when we are better equipped
technically and are no longer in the position of the weak fighting the strong,
we shall be able to capture prisoners and booty on a large scale all the
more effectively if we continue to employ superior numbers in quick-decision
offensive battles from exterior lines. For instance, if we employ two, three
or four mechanized divisions against one mechanized enemy division, we can
be all the more certain of destroying it. It is common sense that several
hefty fellows can easily beat one.

76. If we resolutely apply "quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior
lines" on a battlefield, we shall not only change the balance of forces on
that battlefield, but also gradually change the general situation. On the
battlefield we shall be on the offensive and the enemy on the defensive,
we shall be employing superior numbers on exterior lines and the enemy inferior
numbers on interior lines, and we shall seek quick decisions, while the enemy,
try as he may, will not be able to protract the fighting in the expectation
of reinforcements; for all these reasons, the enemy's position will change
from strong to weak, from superior to inferior, while that of our forces
will change from weak to strong, from inferior to superior. After many such
battles have been victoriously fought, the general situation between us and
the enemy will change. That is to say, through the accumulation of victories
on many battlefields by quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines,
we shall gradually strengthen ourselves and weaken the enemy, which will
necessarily affect the general balance of forces and bring about changes
in it. When that happens, these changes, together with other factors on our
side and together with the changes inside the enemy camp and a favourable
international situation, will turn the over-all situation between us and
the enemy first into one of parity and then into one of superiority for us.
That will be the time for us to launch the counter-offensive and drive the
enemy out of the country.

77. War is a contest of strength, but the original pattern of strength changes
in the course of war. Here the decisive factor is subjective effort--winning
more victories and committing fewer errors. The objective factors provide
the possibility for such change, but in order to turn this possibility into
actuality both correct policy and subjective effort are essential. It is
then that the subjective plays the decisive role.

INITIATIVE, FLEXIBILITY AND PLANNING


78. In quick-decision offensive campaigns and battles on exterior lines,
as discussed above, the crucial point is the "offensive"; "exterior lines"
refers to the sphere of the offensive and "quick-decision" to its duration.
Hence the name "quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines". It is
the best principle for waging a protracted war and it is also the principle
for what is known as mobile warfare. But it cannot be put into effect without
initiative, flexibility and planning. Let us now study these three questions.

79. We have already discussed man's conscious dynamic role, so why do we
talk about the initiative again? By conscious dynamic role we mean conscious
action and effort, a characteristic distinguishing man from other beings,
and this human characteristic manifests itself most strongly in war; all
this has been discussed already. The initiative here means an army's freedom
of action as distinguished from an enforced loss of freedom. Freedom of action
is the very life of an army and, once it is lost, the army is close to defeat
or destruction. The disarming of a soldier is the result of his losing freedom
of action through being forced into a passive position. The same is true
of the defeat of an army. For this reason both sides in war do all they can
to gain the initiative and avoid passivity. It may be said that the
quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines which we advocate and
the flexibility and planning necessary for its execution are designed to
gain the initiative and thus force the enemy into a passive position and
achieve the object of preserving ourselves and destroying the enemy. But
initiative or passivity is inseparable from superiority or inferiority in
the capacity to wage war. Consequently it is also inseparable from the
correctness or incorrectness of the subjective direction of war. In addition,
there is the question of exploiting the enemy's misconceptions and unpreparedness
in order to gain the initiative and force the enemy into passivity. These
points are analysed below.

80. Initiative is inseparable from superiority in capacity to wage war, while
passivity is inseparable from inferiority in capacity to wage war. Such
superiority or inferiority is the objective basis of initiative or passivity.
It is natural that the strategic initiative can be better maintained and
exercised through a strategic offensive, but to maintain the initiative always
and everywhere, that is, to have the absolute initiative, is possible only
when there is absolute superiority matched against absolute inferiority.
When a strong, healthy man wrestles with an invalid, he has the absolute
initiative. If Japan were not riddled with insoluble contradictions, if,
for instance, she could throw in a huge force of several million or ten million
men all at once, if her financial resources were several times what they
are, if she had no opposition from her own people or from other countries,
and if she did not pursue the barbarous policies which arouse the desperate
resistance of the Chinese people, then she would be able to maintain absolute
superiority and have the absolute initiative always and everywhere. In history,
such absolute superiority rarely appears in the early stages of a war or
a campaign but is to be found towards its end. For instance, on the eve of
Germany's capitulation in World War I, the Entente countries became absolutely
superior and Germany absolutely inferior, so that Germany was defeated and
the Entente countries were victorious; this is an example of absolute superiority
and inferiority towards the end of a war. Again, on the eve of the Chinese
victory at Taierhchuang, the isolated Japanese forces there were reduced
after bitter fighting to absolute inferiority while our forces achieved absolute
superiority, so that the enemy was defeated and we were victorious; this
is an example of absolute superiority and inferiority towards the end of
a campaign. A war or campaign may also end in a situation of relative superiority
or of parity, in which case there is compromise in the war or stalemate in
the campaign. But in most cases it is absolute superiority and inferiority
that decide victory and defeat. All this holds for the end of a war or a
campaign, and not for the beginning. The outcome of the Sino-Japanese war,
it can be predicted, will be that Japan will become absolutely inferior and
be defeated and that China will become absolutely superior and gain victory.
But at present superiority or inferiority is not absolute on either side,
but is relative. With the advantages of her military, economic and
political-organizational power, Japan enjoys superiority over us with our
military, economic and political-organizational weakness, which creates the
basis for her initiative. But since quantitatively her military and other
power is not great and she has many other disadvantages, her superiority
is reduced by her own contradictions. Upon her invasion of China, her superiority
has been reduced still further because she has come up against our vast
territory, large population, great numbers of troops and resolute nation-wide
resistance. Hence, Japan's general position has become one of only relative
superiority, and her ability to exercise and maintain the initiative, which
is thereby restricted, has likewise become relative. As for China, though
placed in a somewhat passive position strategically because of her inferior
strength, she is nevertheless quantitatively superior in territory, population
and troops, and also superior in the morale of her people and army and their
patriotic hatred of the enemy; this superiority, together with other advantages,
reduces the extent of her inferiority in military, economic and other power,
and changes it into a relative strategic inferiority. This also reduces the
degree of China's passivity so that her strategic position is one of only
relative passivity. Any passivity, however, is a disadvantage, and one must
strive hard to shake it off. Militarily, the way to do so is resolutely to
wage quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines, to launch guerrilla
warfare in the rear of the enemy and so secure overwhelming local superiority
and initiative in many campaigns of mobile and guerrilla warfare. Through
such local superiority and local initiative in many campaigns, we can gradually
create strategic superiority and strategic initiative and extricate ourselves
from strategic inferiority and passivity. Such is the interrelation between
initiative and passivity, between superiority and inferiority.

81. From this we can also understand the relationship between initiative
or passivity and the subjective directing of war. As already explained, it
is possible to escape from our position of relative strategic inferiority
and passivity, and the method is to create local superiority and initiative
in many campaigns, so depriving the enemy of local superiority and initiative
and plunging him into inferiority and passivity. These local successes will
add up to strategic superiority and initiative for us and strategic inferiority
and passivity for the enemy. Such a change depends upon correct subjective
direction. Why? Because while we seek superiority and the initiative, so
does the enemy; viewed from this angle, war is a contest in subjective ability
between the commanders of the opposing armies in their struggle for superiority
and for the initiative on the basis of material conditions such as military
forces and financial resources. Out of the contest there emerge a victor
and a vanquished; leaving aside the contrast in objective material conditions,
the victor will necessarily owe his success to correct subjective direction
and the vanquished his defeat to wrong subjective direction. We admit that
the phenomenon of war is more elusive and is characterized by greater uncertainty
than any other social phenomenon, in other words, that it is more a matter
of "probability". Yet war is in no way supernatural, but a mundane process
governed by necessity. That is why Sun Wu Tzu's axiom, "Know the enemy and
know yourself, and you can fight a hundred battles with no danger of defeat",
[20] remains a scientific truth. Mistakes arise
from ignorance about the enemy and about ourselves, and moreover the peculiar
nature of war makes it impossible in many cases to have full knowledge about
both sides; hence the uncertainty about military conditions and operations,
and hence mistakes and defeats. But whatever the situation and the moves
in a war, one can know their general aspects and essential points. It is
possible for a commander to reduce errors and give generally correct direction,
first through all kinds of reconnaissance and then through intelligent inference
and judgement. Armed with the weapon of "generally correct direction", we
can win more battles and transform our inferiority into superiority and our
passivity into initiative. This is how initiative or passivity is related
to the correct or incorrect subjective direction of a war.

82. The thesis that incorrect subjective direction can change superiority
and initiative into inferiority and passivity, and that correct subjective
direction can effect a reverse change, becomes all the more convincing when
we look at the record of defeats suffered by big and powerful armies and
of victories won by small and weak armies. There are many such instances
in Chinese and foreign history. Examples in China are the Battle of Chengpu
between the states of Tsin and Chu, [21] the Battle
of Chengkao between the states of Chu and Han,
[22] the Battle in which Han Hsin defeated the Chao
armies, [23] the Battle of Kunyang between the
states of Hsin and Han, [24] the Battle of Kuantu
between Yuan Shao and Tsao Tsao, [25] the Battle
of Chihpi between the states of Wu and Wei, [26]
the Battle of Yiling between the states of Wu and Shu,
[27] the Battle of Feishui between the states of
Chin and Tsin, [28] etc. Among examples to be found
abroad are most of Napoleon's campaigns and the civil war in the Soviet Union
after the October Revolution. In all these instances, victory was won by
small forces over big and by inferior over superior forces. In every case,
the weaker force, pitting local superiority and initiative against the enemy's
local inferiority and passivity, first inflicted one sharp defeat on the
enemy and then turned on the rest of his forces and smashed them one by one,
thus transforming the over-all situation into one of superiority and initiative.
The reverse was the case with the enemy who originally had superiority and
held the initiative; owing to subjective errors and internal contradictions,
it sometimes happened that he completely lost an excellent or fairly good
position in which he enjoyed superiority and initiative, and became a general
without an army or a king without a kingdom. Thus it can be seen that although
superiority or inferiority in the capacity to wage war is the objective basis
determining initiative or passivity, it is not in itself actual initiative
or passivity; it is only through a struggle, a contest of ability, that actual
initiative or passivity can emerge. In the struggle, correct subjective direction
can transform inferiority into superiority and passivity into initiative,
and incorrect subjective direction can do the opposite. The fact that every
ruling dynasty was defeated by revolutionary armies shows that mere superiority
in certain respects does not guarantee the initiative, much less the final
victory. The inferior side can wrest the initiative and victory from the
superior side by securing certain conditions through active subjective endeavour
in accordance with the actual circumstances.

83. To have misconceptions and to be caught unawares may mean to lose superiority
and initiative. Hence, deliberately creating misconceptions for the enemy
and then springing surprise attacks upon him are two ways--indeed two important
means--of achieving superiority and seizing the initiative. What are
misconceptions? "To see every bush and tree on Mount Pakung as an enemy
soldier" [29] is an example of misconception.
And "making a feint to the east but attacking in the west" is a way of creating
misconceptions among the enemy. When the mass support is sufficiently good
to block the leakage of news, it is often possible by various ruses to succeed
in leading the enemy into a morass of wrong judgements and actions so that
he loses his superiority and the initiative. The saying, "There can never
be too much deception in war", means precisely this. What does "being caught
unawares" mean? It means being unprepared. Without preparedness superiority
is not real superiority and there can be no initiative either. Having grasped
this point, a force which is inferior but prepared can often defeat a superior
enemy by surprise attack. We say an enemy on the move is easy to attack precisely
because he is then off guard, that is, unprepared. These two points--creating
misconceptions among the enemy and springing surprise attacks on him-- mean
transferring the uncertainties of war to the enemy while securing the greatest
possible certainty for ourselves and thereby gaining superiority, the initiative
and victory. Excellent organization of the masses is the prerequisite for
attaining all this. Therefore it is extremely important to arouse all the
people who are opposed to the enemy, to arm themselves to the last man, make
widespread raids on the enemy and also prevent the leakage of news and provide
a screen for our own forces; in this way the enemy will be kept in the dark
about where and when our forces will attack, and an objective basis will
be created for misconceptions and unpreparedness on his part. It was largely
owing to the organized, armed masses of the people that the weak and small
force of the Chinese Red Army was able to win many battles in the period
of the Agrarian Revolutionary War. Logically, a national war should win broader
mass support than an agrarian revolutionary war; however, as a result of
past mistakes [30] the people are in an unorganized
state, cannot be promptly drawn in to serve the cause and are sometimes even
made use of by the enemy. The resolute rallying of the people on a broad
scale is the only way to secure inexhaustible resources to meet all the
requirements of the war. Moreover, it will definitely play a big part in
carrying out our tactics of defeating the enemy by misleading him and catching
him unawares. We are not Duke Hsiang of Sung and have no use for his asinine
ethics.[31] In order to achieve victory we must
as far as possible make the enemy blind and deaf by sealing his eyes and
ears and drive his commanders to distraction by creating confusion in their
minds. The above concerns the way in which the initiative or passivity is
related to the subjective direction of the war. Such subjective direction
is indispensable for defeating Japan.

84. By and large, Japan has held the initiative in the stage of her offensive
by reason of her military power and her exploitation of our subjective errors,
past and present. But her initiative is beginning to wane to some extent
because of her many inherent disadvantages and of the subjective errors she
too has committed in the course of the war (of which more later) and also
because of our many advantages. The enemy's defeat at Taierhchuang and his
predicament in Shansi prove this clearly. The widespread development of guerrilla
warfare in the enemy's rear has placed his garrisons in the occupied areas
in a completely passive position. Although he is still on the offensive
strategically and still holds the initiative, his initiative will end when
his strategic offensive ends. The first reason why the enemy will not be
able to maintain the initiative is that his shortage of troops renders it
impossible for him to carry on the offensive indefinitely. Our offensive
warfare in campaigns and our guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines, together
with other factors, constitute the second reason why he will have to cease
his offensive at a certain limit and will not be able to keep his initiative.
The existence of the Soviet Union and changes in the international situation
constitute the third reason. Thus it can be seen that the enemy's initiative
is limited and can be shattered. If, in military operations, China can keep
up offensive warfare by her main forces in campaigns and battles, vigorously
develop guerrilla warfare in the enemy's rear and mobilize the people on
a broad scale politically, we can gradually build up a position of strategic
initiative.

85. Let us now discuss flexibility. What is flexibility? It is the concrete
realization of the initiative in military operations; it is the flexible
employment of armed forces. The flexible employment of armed forces is the
central task in directing a war, a task most difficult to perform well. In
addition to organizing and educating the army and the people, the business
of war consists in the employment of troops in combat, and all these things
are done to win the fight. Of course it is difficult to organize an army,
etc., but it is even more difficult to employ it, particularly when the weak
are fighting the strong. To do so requires subjective ability of a very high
order and requires the overcoming of the confusion, obscurity and uncertainty
peculiar to war and the discovery of order, clarity and certainty in it;
only thus can flexibility in command be realized.

86. The basic principle of field operations for the War of Resistance Against
Japan is quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines. There are various
tactics or methods for giving effect to this principle, such as dispersion
and concentration of forces, diverging advance and converging attack, the
offensive and the defensive, assault and containment, encirclement and
outflanking, advance and retreat. It is easy to understand these tactics,
but not at all easy to employ and vary them flexibly. Here the three crucial
links are the time, the place and the troops. No victory can be won unless
the time, the place and the troops are well chosen. For example, in attacking
an enemy force on the move, if we strike too early, we expose ourselves and
give the enemy a chance to prepare, and if we strike too late, the enemy
may have encamped and concentrated his forces, presenting us with a hard
nut to crack. This is the question of the time. If we select a point of assault
on the left flank which actually turns out to be the enemy's weak point,
victory will be easy; but if we select the right flank and hit a snag, nothing
will be achieved. This is the question of the place. If a particular unit
of our forces is employed for a particular task, victory may be easy; but
if another unit is employed for the same task, it may be hard to achieve
results. This is the question of the troops. We should know not only how
to employ tactics but how to vary them. For flexibility of command the important
task is to make changes such as from the offensive to the defensive or from
the defensive to the offensive, from advance to retreat or from retreat to
advance, from containment to assault or from assault to containment, from
encirclement to outflanking or from outflanking to encirclement, and to make
such changes properly and in good time according to the circumstances of
the troops and terrain on both sides. This is true of command in campaigns
and strategic command as well as of command in battles.

87. The ancients said: "Ingenuity in varying tactics depends on mother wit";
this "ingenuity", which is what we mean by flexibility, is the contribution
of the intelligent commander. Flexibility does not mean recklessness;
recklessness must be rejected. Flexibility consists in the intelligent
commander's ability to take timely and appropriate measures on the basis
of objective conditions after "judging the hour and sizing up the situation"
(the "situation" includes the enemy's situation, our situation and the terrain),
and this flexibility is "ingenuity in varying tactics". On the basis of this
ingenuity, we can win more victories in quick-decision offensive warfare
on exterior lines, change the balance of forces in our favour, gain the
initiative over the enemy, and overwhelm and crush him so that the final
victory will be ours.

88. Let us now discuss the question of planning. Because of the uncertainty
peculiar to war, it is much more difficult to prosecute war according to
plan than is the case with other activities. Yet, since "preparedness ensures
success and unpreparedness spells failure", there can be no victory in war
without advance planning and preparations. There is no absolute certainty
in war, and yet it is not without some degree of relative certainty. We are
comparatively certain about our own situation. We are very uncertain about
the enemy's, but here too there are signs for us to read, clues to follow
and sequences of phenomena to ponder. These form what we call a degree of
relative certainty, which provides an objective basis for planning in war.
Modern technical developments (telegraphy, radio, airplanes, motor vehicles,
railways, steamships, etc.) have added to the possibilities of planning in
war. However, complete or stable planning is difficult because there is only
very limited and transient certainty in war; such planning must change with
the movement (flow or change) of the war and vary in degree according to
the scale of the war. Tactical plans, such as plans for attack or defence
by small formations or units, often have to be changed several times a day.
A plan of campaign, that is, of action by large formations, can generally
stand till the conclusion of the campaign, in the course of which, however,
it is often changed partially or sometimes even wholly. A strategic plan
based on the over-all situation of both belligerents is still more stable,
but it too is applicable only in a given strategic stage and has to be changed
when the war moves towards a new stage. The making and changing of tactical,
campaign and strategic plans in accordance with scope and circumstance is
a key factor in directing a war; it is the concrete expression of flexibility
in war, in other words, it is also ingenuity in varying one's tactics. Commanders
at all levels in the anti-Japanese war should take note.

89. Because of the fluidity of war, some people categorically deny that war
plans or policies can be relatively stable, describing such plans or policies
as "mechanical". This view is wrong. In the preceding section we fully recognized
that, because the circumstances of war are only relatively certain and the
flow (movement or change) of war is rapid, war plans or policies can be only
relatively stable and have to be changed or revised in good time in accordance
with changing circumstances and the flow of the war; otherwise we would become
mechanists. But one must not deny the need for war plans or policies that
are relatively stable over given periods; to negate this is to negate everything,
including the war itself as well as the negator himself. As both military
conditions and operations are relatively stable, we must grant the relative
stability of the war plans and policies resulting from them. For example,
since both the circumstances of the war in northern China and the dispersed
nature of the Eighth Route Army's operations are relatively stable for a
particular stage, it is absolutely necessary during this stage to acknowledge
the relative stability of the Eighth Route Army's strategic principle of
operation, namely "Guerrilla warfare is basic, but lose no chance for mobile
warfare under favourable conditions." The period of validity of a plan for
a campaign is shorter than that of a strategic plan, and for a tactical plan
it is shorter still, but each is stable over a given period. Anyone denying
this point would have no way of handling warfare and would become a relativist
in war with no settled views, for whom one course is just as wrong or just
as right as another. No one denies that even a plan valid for a given period
is fluid; otherwise, one plan would never be abandoned in favour of another.
But it is fluid within limits, fluid within the bounds of the various war
operations undertaken for carrying it out, but not fluid as to its essence;
in other words it is quantitatively but not qualitatively fluid. Within such
a given period of time, this essence is definitely not fluid, which is what
we mean by relative stability within a given period. In the great river of
absolute fluidity throughout the war there is relative stability at each
particular stretch--such is our fundamental view regarding war plans or policies.

90. Having dealt with protracted defensive warfare on interior lines in strategy
and with quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines in campaigns
and battles, and also with the initiative, flexibility and planning, we can
now sum up briefly. The anti-Japanese war must have a plan. War plans, which
are the concrete application of strategy and tactics, must be flexible so
that they can be adapted to the circumstances of the war. We should always
seek to transform our inferiority into superiority and our passivity into
the initiative so as to change the situation as between the enemy and ourselves.
All these find expression in quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior
lines in campaigns and battles and protracted defensive warfare on interior
lines in strategy.

MOBILE WARFARE, GUERRILLA WARFARE AND POSITIONAL
  WARFARE


91. A war will take the form of mobile warfare when its content is quick-decision
offensive warfare on exterior lines in campaigns and battles within the framework
of the strategy of interior lines, protracted war and defence. Mobile warfare
is the form in which regular armies wage quick-decision offensive campaigns
and battles on exterior lines along extensive fronts and over big areas of
operation. At the same time, it includes "mobile defence", which is conducted
when necessary to facilitate such offensive battles; it also includes positional
attack and positional defence in a supplementary role. Its characteristics
are regular armies, superiority of forces in campaigns and battles, the
offensive, and fluidity.

92. China has a vast territory and an immense number of soldiers, but her
troops are inadequately equipped and trained; the enemy's forces, on the
other hand, are inadequate in number, but better equipped and trained. In
this situation, there is no doubt that we must adopt offensive mobile warfare
as our primary form of warfare, supplementing it by others and integrating
them all into mobile warfare. We must oppose "only retreat, never advance",
which is flightism, and at the same time oppose "only advance, never retreat"
which is desperate recklessness.

93. One of the characteristics of mobile warfare is fluidity, which not only
permits but requires a field army to advance and to withdraw in great strides.
However, it has nothing in common with flightism of the Han Fu-chu
brand.[32] The primary requirement of war is to
destroy the enemy, and the other requirement is self-preservation. The object
of self-preservation is to destroy the enemy, and to destroy the enemy is
in turn the most effective means of self-preservation. Hence mobile warfare
is in no way an excuse for people like Han Pu-chu and can never mean moving
only backward, and never forward; that kind of "moving" which negates the
basic offensive character of mobile warfare would, in practice, "move" China
out of existence despite her vastness.

94. However, the other view, which we call the desperate recklessness of
"only advance, never retreat", is also wrong. The mobile warfare we advocate,
the content of which is quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines
in campaigns and battles, includes positional warfare in a supplementary
role, "mobile defence" and retreat, without all of which mobile warfare cannot
be fully carried out. Desperate recklessness is military short-sightedness,
originating often from fear of losing territory. A man who acts with desperate
recklessness does not know that one characteristic of mobile warfare is fluidity,
which not only permits but requires a field army to advance and to withdraw
in great strides. On the positive side, in order to draw the enemy into a
fight unfavourable to him but favourable to us, it is usually necessary that
he should be on the move and that we should have a number of advantages,
such as favourable terrain, a vulnerable enemy, a local population that can
prevent the leakage of information, and the enemy's fatigue and unpreparedness.
This requires that the enemy should advance, and we should not grudge a temporary
loss of part of our territory. For the temporary loss of part of our territory
is the price we pay for the permanent preservation of all our territory,
including the recovery of lost territory. On the negative side, whenever
we are forced into a disadvantageous position which fundamentally endangers
the preservation of our forces, we should have the courage to retreat, so
as to preserve our forces and hit the enemy when new opportunities arise.
In their ignorance of this principle, the advocates of desperate action will
contest a city or a piece of ground even when the position is obviously and
definitely unfavourable; as a result, they not only lose the city or ground
but fail to preserve their forces. We have always advocated the policy of
"luring the enemy in deep", precisely because it is the most effective military
policy for a weak army strategically on the defensive to employ against a
strong army.

95. Among the forms of warfare in the anti-Japanese war mobile warfare comes
first and guerrilla warfare second. When we say that in the entire war mobile
warfare is primary and guerrilla warfare supplementary, we mean that the
outcome of the war depends mainly on regular warfare, especially in its mobile
form, and that guerrilla warfare cannot shoulder the main responsibility
in deciding the outcome. It does not follow, however, that the role of guerrilla
warfare is unimportant in the strategy of the war. Its role in the strategy
of the war as a whole is second only to that of mobile warfare, for without
its support we cannot defeat the enemy. In saying this we also have in mind
the strategic task of developing guerrilla warfare into mobile warfare. Guerrilla
warfare will not remain the same throughout this long and cruel war, but
will rise to a higher level and develop into mobile warfare. Thus the strategic
role of guerrilla warfare is twofold, to support regular warfare and to transform
itself into regular warfare. Considering the unprecedented extent and duration
of guerrilla warfare in China's War of Resistance, it is all the more important
not to underestimate its strategic role. Guerrilla warfare in China, therefore,
has not only its tactical but also its peculiar strategic problems. I have
already discussed this in "Problems of Strategy in Guerrilla War Against
Japan". As indicated above, the forms of warfare in the three strategic stages
of the War of Resistance are as follows. In the first stage mobile warfare
is primary, while guerrilla and positional warfare are supplementary. In
the second stage guerrilla warfare will advance to the first place and will
be supplemented by mobile and positional warfare. In the third stage mobile
warfare will again become the primary form and will be supplemented by positional
and guerrilla warfare. But the mobile warfare of the third stage will no
longer be undertaken solely by the original regular forces; part, possibly
quite an important part, will be undertaken by forces which were originally
guerrillas but which will have progressed from guerrilla to mobile warfare.
From the viewpoint of all three stages in China's War of Resistance Against
Japan, guerrilla warfare is definitely indispensable. Our guerrilla war will
present a great drama unparalleled in the annals of war. For this reason,
out of the millions of China's regular troops, it is absolutely necessary
to assign at least several hundred thousand to disperse through all
enemy-occupied areas, arouse the masses to arm themselves, and wage guerrilla
warfare in co-ordination with the masses. The regular forces so assigned
should shoulder this sacred task conscientiously, and they should not think
their status lowered because they fight fewer big battles and for the time
being do not appear as national heroes. Any such thinking is wrong. Guerrilla
warfare does not bring as quick results or as great renown as regular warfare,
but "a long road tests a horse's strength and a long task proves a man's
heart", and in the course of this long and cruel war guerrilla warfare will
demonstrate its immense power; it is indeed no ordinary undertaking. Moreover,
such regular forces can conduct guerrilla warfare when dispersed and mobile
warfare when concentrated, as the Eighth Route Army has been doing. The principle
of the Eighth Route Army is, "Guerrilla warfare is basic, but lose no chance
for mobile warfare under favourable conditions." This principle is perfectly
correct; the views of its opponents are wrong.

96. At China's present technical level, positional warfare, defensive or
offensive, is generally impracticable, and this is where our weakness manifests
itself. Moreover, the enemy is also exploiting the vastness of our territory
to bypass our fortified positions. Hence positiona1 warfare cannot be an
important, still less the principal, means for us. But in the first and second
stages of the war, it is possible and essential, within the scope of mobile
warfare, to employ localized positional warfare in a supplementary role in
campaigns. Semi-positional "mobile defence" is a still more essential part
of mobile warfare undertaken for the purpose of resisting the enemy at every
step, thereby depleting his forces and gaining extra time. China must strive
to increase her supplies of modern weapons so that she can fully carry out
the tasks of positional attack in the stage of the strategic counter-offensive.
In this third stage positional warfare will undoubtedly play a greater role,
for then the enemy will be holding fast to his positions, and we shall not
be able to recover our lost territory unless we launch powerful positional
attacks in support of mobile warfare. Nevertheless, in the third stage too,
we must exert our every effort to make mobile warfare the primary form of
warfare. For the art of directing war and the active role of man are largely
nullified in positional warfare such as that fought in Western Europe in
the second half of World War I. It is only natural that the war should be
taken "out of the trenches", since the war is being fought in the vast expanses
of China and since our side will remain poorly equipped technically for quite
a long time. Even during the third stage, when China's technical position
will be better, she will hardly surpass her enemy in that respect, and so
will have to concentrate on highly mobile warfare, without which she cannot
achieve final victory. Hence, throughout the War of Resistance China will
not adopt positional warfare as primary; the primary or important forms are
mobile warfare and guerrilla warfare. These two forms of warfare will afford
full play to the art of directing war and to the active role of man-- what
a piece of good fortune out of our misfortune!

WAR OF ATTRITION AND WAR OF ANNIHILATION


97. As we have said before, the essence, or the object, of war is to preserve
oneself and destroy the enemy. Since there are three forms of warfare, mobile,
positional and guerrilla, for achieving this object, and since they differ
in degrees of effectiveness, there arises the broad distinction between war
of attrition and war of annihilation.

98. To begin with, we may say that the anti-Japanese war is at once a war
of attrition and a war of annihilation. Why? Because the enemy is still
exploiting his strength and retains strategic superiority and strategic
initiative, and therefore, unless we fight campaigns and battles of annihilation,
we cannot effectively and speedily reduce his strength and break his superiority
and initiative. We still have our weakness and have not yet rid ourselves
of strategic inferiority and passivity; therefore, unless we fight campaigns
and battles of annihilation, we cannot win time to improve our internal and
international situation and alter our unfavourable position. Hence campaigns
of annihilation are the means of attaining the objective of strategic attrition.
In this sense war of annihilation is war of attrition. It is chiefly by using
the method of attrition through annihilation that China can wage protracted
war.

99. But the objective of strategic attrition may also be achieved by campaigns
of attrition. Generally speaking, mobile warfare performs the task of
annihilation, positional warfare performs the task of attrition, and guerrilla
warfare performs both simultaneously; the three forms of warfare are thus
distinguished from one another. In this sense war of annihilation is different
from war of attrition. Campaigns of attrition are supplementary but necessary
in protracted war.

100. Speaking theoretically and in terms of China's needs, in order to achieve
the strategic objective of greatly depleting the enemy's forces, China in
her defensive stage should not only exploit the function of annihilation,
which is fulfilled primarily by mobile warfare and partially by guerrilla
warfare, but also exploit the function of attrition, which is fulfilled primarily
by positional warfare (which itself is supplementary) and partially by guerrilla
warfare. In the stage of stalemate we should continue to exploit the functions
of annihilation and attrition fulfilled by guerrilla and mobile warfare for
further large-scale depletion of the enemy's forces. All this is aimed at
protracting the war, gradually changing the general balance of forces and
preparing the conditions for our counter-offensive. During the strategic
counter-offensive, we should continue to employ the method of attrition through
annihilation so as finally to expel the enemy.

101. But as a matter of fact, it was our experience in the last ten months
that many or even most of the mobile warfare campaigns became campaigns of
attrition, and guerrilla warfare did not adequately fulfil its proper function
of annihilation in certain areas. The positive aspect is that at least we
depleted the enemy's forces, which is important both for the protracted warfare
and for our final victory, and did not shed our blood in vain. But the drawbacks
are first, that we did not sufficiently deplete the enemy, and second, that
we were unable to avoid rather heavy losses and captured little war booty.
Although we should recognize the objective cause of this situation, namely,
the disparity between us and the enemy in technical equipment and in the
training of troops, in any case it is necessary, both theoretically and
practically, to urge that our main forces should fight vigorous battles of
annihilation whenever circumstances are favourable. And although our guerrilla
units have to wage battles of pure attrition in performing specific tasks
such as sabotage and harassment, it is necessary to advocate and vigorously
carry out campaigns and battles of annihilation whenever circumstances are
favourable, so as greatly to deplete the enemy's forces and greatly replenish
our own.

102. The "exterior lines", the "quick-decision" and the "offensive" in
quick-decision offensive warfare on exterior lines and the "mobility" in
mobile warfare find their main operational expression in the use of encircling
and outflanking tactics; hence the necessity for concentrating superior forces.
Therefore concentration of forces and the use of encircling and outflanking
tactics are the prerequisites for mobile warfare, that is, for quick-decision
offensive warfare on exterior lines. All this is aimed at annihilating the
enemy forces.

103. The strength of the Japanese army lies not only in its weapons but also
in the training of its officers and men--its degree of organization, its
self-confidence arising from never having been defeated, its superstitious
belief in the Mikado and in supernatural beings, its arrogance, its contempt
for the Chinese people and other such characteristics, all of which stem
from long years of indoctrination by the Japanese warlords and from the Japanese
national tradition. This is the chief reason why we have taken very few
prisoners, although we have killed and wounded a great many enemy troops.
It is a point that has been underestimated by many people in the past. To
destroy these enemy characteristics will be a long process. The first thing
to do is to give the matter serious attention, and then patiently and
systematically to work at it in the political field and in the fields of
international propaganda and the Japanese people's movement; in the military
sphere war of annihilation is of course one of the means. In these enemy
characteristics pessimists may find a basis for the theory of national
subjugation, and passively minded military men a basis for opposition to
war of annihilation. We, on the contrary, maintain that these strong points
of the Japanese army can be destroyed and that their destruction has already
begun. The chief method of destroying them is to win over the Japanese soldiers
politically. We should understand, rather than hurt, their pride and channel
it in the proper direction and, by treating prisoners of war leniently, lead
the Japanese soldiers to see the anti-popular character of the aggression
committed by the Japanese rulers. On the other hand, we should demonstrate
to the Japanese soldiers the indomitable spirit and the heroic, stubborn
fighting capacity of the Chinese army and the Chinese people, that is, we
should deal them blows in battles of annihilation. Our experience in the
last ten months of military operations shows that it is possible to annihilate
enemy forces--witness the Pinghsingkuan and Taierhchuang campaigns. The Japanese
army's morale is beginning to sag, its soldiers do not understand the aim
of the war, they are engulfed by the Chinese armies and by the Chinese people,
in assault they show far less courage than the Chinese soldiers, and so on;
all these are objective factors favourable to waging battles of annihilation,
and they will, moreover, steadily develop as the war becomes protracted.
From the viewpoint of destroying the enemy's overweening arrogance through
battles of annihilation, such battles are one of the prerequisites for shortening
the war and accelerating the emancipation of the Japanese soldiers and the
Japanese people. Cats make friends with cats, and nowhere in the world do
cats make friends with mice.

104. On the other hand, it must be admitted that for the present we are inferior
to the enemy in technical equipment and in troop training. Therefore, it
is often difficult to achieve the maximum in annihilation, such as capturing
the whole or the greater part of an enemy force, especially when fighting
on the plains. In this connection the excessive demands of the theorists
of quick victory are wrong. What should be demanded of our forces in the
anti-Japanese war is that they should fight battles of annihilation as far
as possible. In favourable circumstances, we should concentrate superior
forces in every battle and employ encircling and outflanking tactics--encircle
part if not all of the enemy forces, capture part if not all of the encircled
forces, and inflict heavy casualties on part of the encircled forces if we
cannot capture them. In circumstances which are unfavourable for battles
of annihilation, we should fight battles of attrition. In favourable
circumstances, we should employ the principle of concentration of forces,
and in unfavourable circumstances that of their dispersion. As for the
relationship of command in campaigns, we should apply the principle of
centralized command in the former and that of decentralized command in the
latter. These are the basic principles of field operations for the War of
Resistance Against Japan.

THE POSSIBILITIES OF EXPLOITING THE ENEMY'S MISTAKES


105. The enemy command itself provides a basis for the possibility of defeating
Japan. History has never known an infallible general and the enemy makes
mistakes just as we ourselves can hardly avoid making them; hence, the
possibility exists of exploiting the enemy's errors. In the ten months of
his war of aggression the enemy has already made many mistakes in strategy
and tactics. There are five major ones.

  First, piecemeal reinforcement. This is due to the enemy's underestimation
  of China and also to his shortage of troops. The enemy has always looked
  down on us. After grabbing the four northeastern provinces at small cost,
  he occupied eastern Hopei and northern Chahar, all by way of strategic
  reconnaissance. The conclusion the enemy came to was that the Chinese nation
  is a heap of loose sand. Thus, thinking that China would crumble at a single
  blow, he mapped out a plan of "quick decision", attempting with very small
  forces to send us scampering in panic. He did not expect to find such great
  unity and such immense powers of resistance as China has shown during the
  past ten months, forgetting as he did that China is already in an era of
  progress and already has an advanced political party, an advanced army and
  an advanced people. Meeting with setbacks, the enemy then increased his forces
  piecemeal from about a dozen to thirty divisions. If he wants to advance,
  he will have to augment his forces still further. But because of Japan's
  antagonism with the Soviet Union and her inherent shortage of manpower and
  finances, there are inevitable limits to the maximum number of men she can
  throw in and to the furthest extent of her advance.
  
  Second, absence of a main direction of attack. Before the Taierhchuang campaign,
  the enemy had divided his forces more or less evenly between northern and
  central China and had again divided them inside each of these areas. In northern
  China, for instance, he divided his forces among the Tientsin-pukow, the
  Peiping-Hankow and the Tatung-Puchow Railways, and along each of these lines
  he suffered some casualties and left some garrisons in the places occupied,
  after which he lacked the forces for further advances. After the Taierhchuang
  defeat, from which he learned a lesson, the enemy concentrated his main forces
  in the direction of Hsuchow, and so temporarily corrected this mistake.
  
  Third, lack of strategic co-ordination. On the whole coordination exists
  within the groups of enemy forces in northern China and in central China,
  but there is glaring lack of coordination between the two. When his forces
  on the southern section of the Tientsin-Pukow Railway attacked Hsiaopengpu,
  those on the northern section made no move, and when his forces on the northern
  section attacked Taierhchuang, those on the southern section made no move.
  After the enemy came to grief at both places, the Japanese minister of war
  arrived on an inspection tour and the chief of general staff turned up to
  take charge, and for the moment, it seemed, there was co-ordination. The
  landlord class, the bourgeoisie and the warlords of Japan have very serious
  internal contradictions, which are growing, and the lack of military
  co-ordination is one of the concrete manifestations of this fact.
  
  Fourth, failure to grasp strategic opportunities. This failure was conspicuously
  shown in the enemy's halt after the occupation of Nanking and Taiyuan, chiefly
  because of his shortage of troops and his lack of a strategic pursuit force.
  
  Fifth, encirclement of large, but annihilation of small, numbers. Before
  the Taierhchuang campaign, in the campaigns of Shanghai, Nanking, Tsangchow,
  Paoting, Nankow, Hsinkou and Linfen, many Chinese troops were routed but
  few were taken prisoner, which shows the stupidity of the enemy command.


These five errors--piecemeal reinforcement, absence of a main direction of
attack, lack of strategic co-ordination, failure to grasp opportunities,
and encirclement of large, but annihilation of small, numbers--were all points
of incompetence in the Japanese command before the Taierhchuang campaign.
Although the enemy has since made some improvements, he cannot possibly avoid
repeating his errors because of his shortage of troops, his internal
contradictions and other factors. In addition, what he gains at one point
he loses at another. For instance, when he concentrated his forces in northern
China on Hsuchow, he left a great vacuum in the occupied areas in northern
China, which gave us full scope for developing guerrilla warfare. These mistakes
were of the enemy's own making and not induced by us. On our part, we can
deliberately make the enemy commit errors, that is, we can mislead him and
manoeuvre him into the desired position by ingenious and effective moves
with the help of a well-organized local population, for example, by "making
a feint to the east but attacking in the west". This possibility has already
been discussed. All the above shows that in the enemy's command, too, we
can find some basis for victory. Of course, we should not take it as an important
basis for our strategic planning; on the contrary, the only reliable course
is to base our planning on the assumption that the enemy will make few mistakes.
Besides, the enemy can exploit our mistakes just as we can exploit his. It
is the duty of our command to allow him the minimum of opportunities for
doing so. Actually, the enemy command has committed errors, will again commit
errors in the future, and can be made to do so through our endeavours. All
these errors we can exploit, and it is the business of our generals in the
War of Resistance to do their utmost to seize upon them. However, although
much of the enemy's strategic and campaign command is incompetent,
there are quite a few excellent points in his battle command, that is, in
his unit and small formation tactics, and here we should learn from him.

THE QUESTION OF DECISIVE ENGAGEMENTS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE
  WAR


106. The question of decisive engagements in the anti-Japanese war should
be approached from three aspects: we should resolutely fight a decisive
engagement in every campaign or battle in which we are sure of victory; we
should avoid a decisive engagement in every campaign or battle in which we
are not sure of victory; and we should absolutely avoid a strategically decisive
engagement on which the fate of the whole nation is staked. The characteristics
differentiating our War of Resistance Against Japan from many other wars
are also revealed in this question of decisive engagements. In the first
and second stages of the war, which are marked by the enemy's strength and
our weakness, the enemy's objective is to have us concentrate our main forces
for a decisive engagement. Our objective is exactly the opposite. We want
to choose conditions favourable to us, concentrate superior forces and fight
decisive campaigns or battles only when we are sure of victory, as in the
battles at Pinghsingkuan, Taierhchuang and other places; we want to avoid
decisive engagements under unfavourable conditions when we are not sure of
victory, this being the policy we adopted in the Changteh and other campaigns.
As for fighting a strategically decisive engagement on which the fate of
the whole nation is staked, we simply must not do so, as witness the recent
withdrawal from Hsuchow. The enemy's plan for a "quick decision" was thus
foiled, and now he cannot help fighting a protracted war with us. These
principles are impracticable in a country with a small territory, and hardly
practicable in a country that is very backward politically. They are practicable
in China because she is a big country and is in an era of progress. If
strategically decisive engagements are avoided, then "as long as the green
mountains are there, one need not worry about firewood", for even though
some of our territory may be lost, we shall still have plenty of room for
manoeuvre and thus be able to promote and await domestic progress, international
support and the internal disintegration of the enemy; that is the best policy
for us in the anti-Japanese war. Unable to endure the arduous trials of a
protracted war and eager for an early triumph, the impetuous theorists of
quick victory clamour for a strategically decisive engagement the moment
the situation takes a slightly favourable turn. To do what they want would
be to inflict incalculable damage on the entire war, spell finis to the
protracted war, and land us in the enemy's deadly trap; actually, it would
be the worst policy. Undoubtedly, if we are to avoid decisive engagements,
we shall have to abandon territory, and we must have the courage to do so
when (and only when) it becomes completely unavoidable. At such times we
should not feel the slightest regret, for this policy of trading space for
time is correct. History tells us how Russia made a courageous retreat to
avoid a decisive engagement and then defeated Napoleon, the terror of his
age. Today China should do likewise.

107. Are we not afraid of being denounced as "non-resisters"? No, we are
not. Not to fight at all but to compromise with the enemy -- that is
non-resistance, which should not only be denounced but must never be tolerated.
We must resolutely fight the War of Resistance, but in order to avoid the
enemy's deadly trap, it is absolutely necessary that we should not allow
our main forces to be finished off at one blow, which would make it difficult
to continue the War of Resistance--in brief, it is absolutely necessary to
avoid national subjugation. To have doubts on this point is to be shortsighted
on the question of the war and is sure to lead one into the ranks of the
subjugationists. We have criticized the desperate recklessness of "only advance,
never retreat" precisely because, if it became the fashion, this doctrine
would make it impossible to continue the War of Resistance and would lead
to the danger of ultimate national subjugation.

108. We are for decisive engagements whenever circumstances are favourable,
whether in battles or in major or minor campaigns, and in this respect we
should never tolerate passivity. Only through such decisive engagements can
we achieve the objective of annihilating or depleting the enemy forces, and
every soldier in the anti-Japanese war should resolutely play his part. For
this purpose considerable partial sacrifices are necessary; to avoid any
sacrifice whatsoever is the attitude of cowards and of those afflicted by
the fear of Japan and must be firmly opposed. The execution of Li Fu-ying,
Han Fu-chu and other Rightists was justified. Within the scope of correct
war planning, encouraging the spirit and practice of heroic self-sacrifice
and dauntless advance in battle is absolutely necessary and inseparable from
the waging of protracted war and the achievement of final victory. We have
strongly condemned the flightism of "only retreat, never advance" and have
supported the strict enforcement of discipline, because it is only through
heroic decisive engagements, fought under a correct plan, that we can vanquish
the powerful enemy; flightism, on the contrary, gives direct support to the
theory of national subjugation.

109. Is it not self-contradictory to fight heroically first and then abandon
territory? Will not our heroic fighters have shed their blood in vain? That
is not at all the way questions should be posed. To eat and then to empty
your bowels--is this not to eat in vain? To sleep and then to get up--is
this not to sleep in vain? Can questions be posed in such a way? I would
suppose not. To keep on eating, to keep on sleeping, to keep on fighting
heroically all the way to the Yalu River without a stop--these are subjectivist
and formalist illusions, not realities of life. As everybody knows, although
in fighting and shedding our blood in order to gain time and prepare the
counter-offensive we have had to abandon some territory, in fact we have
gained time, we have achieved the objective of annihilating and depleting
enemy forces we have acquired experience in fighting, we have aroused hitherto
inactive people and improved our international standing. Has our blood been
shed in vain? Certainly not. Territory has been given up in order to preserve
our military forces and indeed to preserve territory, because if we do not
abandon part of our territory when conditions are unfavourable but blindly
fight decisive engagements without the least assurance of winning, we shall
lose our military forces and then be unable to avoid the loss of all our
territory; to say nothing of recovering territory already lost. A capitalist
must have capital to run his business, and if he loses it all he is no longer
a capitalist. Even a gambler must have money to stake, and if he risks it
all on a single throw and his luck fails, he cannot gamble any more. Events
have their twists and turns and do not follow a straight line, and war is
no exception; only formalists are unable to comprehend this truth.

100. I think the same will also hold true for the decisive engagements in
the stage of strategic counter-offensive. Although by then the enemy will
be in the inferior and we in the superior position, the principle of "fighting
profitable decisive engagements and avoiding unprofitable ones" will still
apply and will continue to apply until we have fought our way to the Yalu
River. This is how we will be able to maintain our initiative from beginning
to end, and as for the enemy's "challenges" and other people's "taunts",
we should imperturbably brush them aside and ignore them. In the War of
Resistance only those generals who show this kind of firmness can be deemed
courageous and wise. This is beyond the ken of those who "jump whenever touched".
Even though we are in a more or less passive position strategically in this
first stage of the war, we should have the initiative in every campaign;
and of course we should have the initiative throughout the later stages.
We are for protracted war and final victory, we are not gamblers who risk
everything on a single throw.

THE ARMY AND THE PEOPLE ARE THE FOUNDATION OF
  VICTORY


111. Japanese imperialism will never relax in its aggression against and
repression of revolutionary China; this is determined by its imperialist
nature. If China did not resist, Japan would easily seize all China without
firing a single shot, as she did the four northeastern provinces. Since China
is resisting, it is an inexorable law that Japan will try to repress this
resistance until the force of her repression is exceeded by the force of
China's resistance. The Japanese landlord class and bourgeoisie are very
ambitious, and in order to drive south to Southeast Asia and north to Siberia,
they have adopted the policy of breaking through in the centre by first attacking
China. Those who think that Japan will know where to stop and be content
with the occupation of northern China and of Kiangsu and Chekiang Provinces
completely fail to perceive that imperialist Japan, which has developed to
a new stage and is approaching extinction, differs from the Japan of the
past. When we say that there is a definite limit both to the number of men
Japan can throw in and to the extent of her advance, we mean that with her
available strength, Japan can only commit part of her forces against China
and only penetrate China as far as their capacity allows, for she also wants
to attack in other directions and has to defend herself against other enemies;
at the same time China has given proof of progress and capacity for stubborn
resistance, and it is inconceivable that there should be fierce attacks by
Japan without inevitable resistance by China. Japan cannot occupy the whole
of China, but she will spare no effort to suppress China's resistance in
all the areas she can reach, and will not stop until internal and external
developments push Japanese imperialism to the brink of the grave. There are
only two possible outcomes to the political situation in Japan. Either the
downfall of her entire ruling class occurs rapidly, political power passes
to the people and war thus comes to an end, which is impossible at the moment;
or her landlord class and bourgeoisie become more and more fascist and maintain
the war until the day of their downfall, which is the very road Japan is
now travelling. There can be no other outcome. Those who hope that the moderates
among the Japanese bourgeoisie will come forward and stop the war are only
harbouring illusions. The reality of Japanese politics for many years has
been that the bourgeois moderates of Japan have fallen captive to the landlords
and the financial magnates. Now that Japan has launched war against China,
so long as she does not suffer a fatal blow from Chinese resistance and still
retains sufficient strength, she is bound to attack Southeast Asia or Siberia,
or even both. She will do so once war breaks out in Europe; in their wishful
calculations' the rulers of Japan have it worked out on a grandiose scale.
Of course, it is possible that Japan will have to drop her original plan
of invading Siberia and adopt a mainly defensive attitude towards the Soviet
Union on account of Soviet strength and of the serious extent to which Japan
herself has been weakened by her war against China. But in that case, so
far from relaxing her aggression against China she will intensify it, because
then the only way left to her will be to gobble up the weak. China's task
of persevering in the War of Resistance, the united front and the protracted
war will then become all the more weighty, and it will be all the more necessary
not to slacken our efforts in the slightest.

112. Under the circumstances the main prerequisites for China's victory over
Japan are nation-wide unity and all-round progress on a scale ten or even
a hundred times greater than in the past. China is already in an era of progress
and has achieved a splendid unity, but her progress and unity are still far
from adequate. That Japan has occupied such an extensive area is due not
only to her strength but also to China's weakness; this weakness is entirely
the cumulative effect of the various historical errors of the last hundred
years, and especially of the last ten years, which have confined progress
to its present bounds. It is impossible to vanquish so strong an enemy without
making an extensive and long-term effort. There are many things we have to
exert ourselves to do; here I will deal only with two fundamental aspects,
the progress of the army and the progress of the people.

113. The reform of our military system requires its modernization and improved
technical equipment, without which we cannot drive the enemy back across
the Yalu River. In our employment of troops we need progressive, flexible
strategy and tactics, without which we likewise cannot win victory. Nevertheless,
soldiers are the foundation of an army; unless they are imbued with a progressive
political spirit, and unless such a spirit is fostered through progressive
political work, it will be impossible to achieve genuine unity between officers
and men, impossible to arouse their enthusiasm for the War of Resistance
to the full, and impossible to provide a sound basis for the most effective
use of all our technical equipment and tactics. When we say that Japan will
finally be defeated despite her technical superiority, we mean that the blows
we deliver through annihilation and attrition, apart from inflicting losses,
will eventually shake the morale of the enemy army whose weapons are not
in the hands of politically conscious soldiers. With us, on the contrary,
officers and men are at one on the political aim of the War of Resistance.
This gives us the foundation for political work among all the anti-Japanese
forces. A proper measure of democracy should be put into effect in the army,
chiefly by abolishing the feudal practice of bullying and beating and by
having officers and men share weal and woe. Once this is done, unity will
be achieved between officers and men, the combat effectiveness of the army
will be greatly increased, and there will be no doubt of our ability to sustain
the long, cruel war.

114. The richest source of power to wage war lies in the masses of the people.
It is mainly because of the unorganized state of the Chinese masses that
Japan dares to bully us. When this defect is remedied, then the Japanese
aggressor, like a mad bull crashing into a ring of flames, will be surrounded
by hundreds of millions of our people standing upright, the mere sound of
their voices will strike terror into him, and he will be burned to death.
China's armies must have an uninterrupted flow of reinforcements, and the
abuses of press-ganging and of buying
substitutes,[33] which now exist at the lower
levels, must immediately be banned and replaced by widespread and enthusiastic
political mobilization, which will make it easy to enlist millions of men.
We now have great difficulties in raising money for the war, but once the
people are mobilized, finances too will cease to be a problem. Why should
a country as large and populous as China suffer from lack of funds? The army
must become one with the people so that they see it as their own army. Such
an army will be invincible, and an imperialist power like Japan will be no
match for it.

115. Many people think that it is wrong methods that make for strained relations
between officers and men and between the army and the people, but I always
tell them that it is a question of basic attitude (or basic principle), of
having respect for the soldiers and the people. It is from this attitude
that the various policies, methods and forms ensue. If we depart from this
attitude, then the policies, methods and forms will certainly be wrong, and
the relations between officers and men and between the army and the people
are bound to be unsatisfactory. Our three major principles for the army's
political work are, first, unity between officers and men; second, unity
between the army and the people; and third, the disintegration of the enemy
forces. To apply these principles effectively, we must start with this basic
attitude of respect for the soldiers and the people, and of respect for the
human dignity of prisoners of war once they have laid down their arms. Those
who take all this as a technical matter and not one of basic attitude are
indeed wrong, and they should correct their view.

116. At this moment when the defence of Wuhan and other places has become
urgent, it is a task of the utmost importance to arouse the initiative and
enthusiasm of the whole army and the whole people to the full in support
of the war. There is no doubt that the task of defending Wuhan and other
places must be seriously posed and seriously performed. But whether we can
be certain of holding them depends not on our subjective desires but on concrete
conditions. Among the most important of these conditions is the political
mobilization of the whole army and people for the struggle. If a strenuous
effort is not made to secure all the necessary conditions, indeed even if
one of these conditions is missing, disasters like the loss of Nanking and
other places are bound to be repeated. China will have her Madrids in places
where the conditions are present. So far China has not had a Madrid, and
from now on we should work hard to create several, but it all depends on
the conditions. The most fundamental of these is extensive political mobilization
of the whole army and people.

117. In all our work we must persevere in the Anti-Japanese National United
Front as the general policy. For only with this policy can we persevere in
the War of Resistance and in protracted warfare, bring about a widespread
and profound improvement in the relations between officers and men and between
the army and the people, arouse to the full the initiative and enthusiasm
of the entire army and the entire people in the fight for the defence of
all the territory still in our hands and for the recovery of what we have
lost, and so win final victory.

118. This question of the political mobilization of the army and the people
is indeed of the greatest importance. We have dwelt on it at the risk of
repetition precisely because victory is impossible without it. There are,
of course, many other conditions indispensable to victory, but political
mobilization is the most fundamental. The Anti-Japanese National United Front
is a united front of the whole army and the whole people, it is certainly
not a united front merely of the headquarters and members of a few political
parties; our basic objective in initiating the Anti-Japanese National United
Front is to mobilize the whole army and the whole people to participate
in it.

CONCLUSIONS


119. What are our conclusions? They are:

  "Under what conditions do you think China can defeat and destroy the forces
  of Japan?" "Three conditions are required first, the establishment of an
  anti-Japanese united front in China second, the formation of an international
  anti-Japanese united front; third, the rise of the revolutionary movement
  of the people in Japan and the Japanese colonies. From the standpoint of
  the Chinese people, the unity of the people of China is the most important
  of the three conditions."
  
  "How long do you think such a war would last?" "That depends on the strength
  of China's anti-Japanese united front and many other conditioning factors
  involving China and Japan."
  
  "If these conditions are not realized quickly, the war will be prolonged.
  But in the end, just the same, Japan will certainly be defeated and China
  will certainly be victorious. Only the sacrifices will be great and there
  will be a very painful period."
  
  "Our strategy should be to employ our main forces to operate over an extended
  and fluid front. To achieve success, the Chinese troops must conduct their
  warfare with a high degree of mobility on extensive battlefields."
  
  "Besides employing trained armies to carry on mobile warfare, we must organize
  great numbers of guerrilla units among the peasants."
  
  "In the course of the war, China will be able to . . . reinforce the equipment
  of her troops gradually. Therefore China will be able to conduct positional
  warfare in the latter period of the war and make positional attacks on the
  Japanese-occupied areas. Thus Japan's economy will crack under the strain
  of China's long resistance and the morale of the Japanese forces will break
  under the trial of innumerable battles. On the Chinese side, however, the
  growing latent power of resistance will be constantly brought into play and
  large numbers of revolutionary people will be pouring into the front lines
  to fight for their freedom. The combination of all these and other factors
  will enable us to make the final and decisive attacks on the fortifications
  and bases in the Japanese occupied areas and drive the Japanese forces of
  aggression out of China." (From an interview with Edgar Snow in July 1936.)
  
  "Thus a new stage has opened in China's political situation.... In the present
  stage the central task is to mobilize all the nation's forces for victory
  in the War of Resistance."
  
  "The key to victory in the war now lies in developing the resistance that
  has already begun into a war of total resistance by the whole nation. Only
  through such a war of total resistance can final victory be won."
  
  "The existence of serious weaknesses in the War of Resistance may lead to
  setbacks, retreats, internal splits, betrayals, temporary and partial compromises
  and other such reverses. Therefore it should be realized that the war will
  be arduous and protracted. But we are confident that, through the efforts
  of our Party and the whole people, the resistance already started will sweep
  aside all obstacles and continue to advance and develop." ("Resolution on
  the Present Situation and the Tasks of the Party", adopted by the Central
  Committee of the Communist Party of China, August 1937.)


These are our conclusions. In the eyes of the subjugationists the enemy are
supermen and we Chinese are worthless, while in the eyes of the theorists
of quick victory we Chinese are supermen and the enemy are worthless. Both
are wrong. We take a different view; the War of Resistance Against Japan
is a protracted war, and the final victory will be China's. These are our
conclusions.

120. My lectures end here. The great War of Resistance Against Japan is
unfolding, and many people are hoping for a summary of experience to facilitate
the winning of complete victory. What I have discussed is simply the general
experience of the past ten months, and it may perhaps serve as a kind of
summary. The problem of protracted war deserves wide attention and discussion;
what I have given is only an outline, which I hope you will examine and discuss,
amend and amplify.

NOTES


1. This theory of national subjugation was the view held
by the Kuomintang. The Kuomintang was unwilling to resist Japan and fought
Japan only under compulsion. After the Lukouchiao Incident (July 7, 1937),
the Chiang Kai-shek clique reluctantly took part in the War of Resistance,
while the Wang Ching-wei clique became the representatives of the theory
of national subjugation, was ready to capitulate to Japan and in fact
subsequently did so. However, the idea of national subjugation not only existed
in the Kuomintang, but also affected certain sections of the middle strata
of society and even certain backward elements among the labouring people.
As the corrupt and impotent Kuomintang government lost one battle after another
and the Japanese troops advanced unchecked to the vicinity of Wuhan in the
first year of the War of Resistance, some backward people became profoundly
pessimistic.

2. These views were to be found within the Communist Party.
During the first six months of the War of Resistance, there was a tendency
to take the enemy lightly among some members of the Party, who held the view
that Japan could be defeated at a single blow. It was not that they felt
our own forces to be so strong, since they well knew that the troops and
the organized people's forces led by the Communist Party were still small,
but that the Kuomintang had begun to resist Japan. In their opinion, the
Kuomintang was quite powerful, and, in co-ordination with the Communist Party,
could deal Japan telling blows. They made this erroneous appraisal because
they saw only one aspect of the Kuomintang, that it was resisting Japan,
but overlooked the other aspect, that it was reactionary and corrupt.

3. Such was the view of Chiang Kai-shek and company. Though
they were compelled to resist Japan, Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang pinned
their hopes solely on prompt foreign aid and had no confidence in their own
strength, much less in the strength of the people.

4. Taierhchuang is a town in southern Shantung where the
Chinese army fought a battle in March 1938 against the Japanese invaders.
By pitting 400,000 men against Japan's 70,000 to 80,000, the Chinese army
defeated the Japanese.

5. This view was put forward in an editorial in the Ta
King Pao, then the organ of the Political Science Group in the Kuomintang.
Indulging in wishful thinking, this clique hoped that a few more victories
of the Taierhchuang type would stop Japan's advance and that there would
be no need to mobilize the people for a protracted war which would threaten
the security of its own class. This wishful thinking then pervaded the Kuomintang
as a whole.

6. For many decades, beginning with the end of the 18th
century, Britain exported an increasing quantity of opium to China. This
traffic not only subjected the Chinese people to drugging but also plundered
China of her silver. It aroused fierce opposition in China. In 1840, under
the pretext of safeguarding its trade with China, Britain launched armed
aggression against her. The Chinese troops led by Lin Tse-hsu put up resistance,
and the people in Canton spontaneously organized the "Quell-the-British Corps",
which dealt serious blows to the British forces of aggression. In 1842, however,
the corrupt Ching regime signed the Treaty of Nanking with Britain. This
treaty provided for the payment of indemnities and the cession of Hongkong
to Britain, and stipulated that Shanghai, Foochow, Amoy, Ningpo and Canton
were to be opened to British trade and that tariff rates for British goods
imported into China were to be jointly fixed by China and Britain.

7. The Taiping Revolution, or the Movement of the Taiping
Heavenly Kingdom, was the mid-19th century revolutionary peasant movement
against the feudal rule and national oppression of the Ching Dynasty. In
January 1851 Hung Hsiu-chuan, Yang Hsiu-ching and other leaders launched
an uprising in Chintien Village in Kueiping County, Kwangsi Province, and
proclaimed the founding of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom. Proceeding northward
from Kwangsi, their peasant army attacked and occupied Hunan and Hupoh in
1852. In 1853 it marched through Kiangsi and Anhwei and captured Nanking.
A section of the forces then continued the drive north and pushed on to the
vicinity of Tientsin. However, the Taiping army failed to build stable base
areas in the places it occupied; moreover, after establishing its capital
in Nanking, its leading group committed many political and military errors.
Therefore it was unable to withstand the combined onslaughts of the
counter-revolutionary forces of the Ching government and the British, U.S.
and French aggressors, and was finally defeated in 1864.

8. The Reform Movement of 1898, whose leading spirits were
Kang Yu-wei, Liang Chi-chao and Tan Szu-tung, represented the interests of
the liberal bourgeoisie and the enlightened landlords. The movement was favoured
and supported by Emperor Kuang Hsu, but had no mass basis. Yuan Shih-kai,
who had an army behind him, betrayed the reformers to Empress Dowager Tzu
Hsi, the leader of the die-hards, who seized power again and had Emperor
Kuang Hsu imprisoned and Tan Szu-tung and five others beheaded. Thus the
movement ended in tragic defeat.

9. The Revolution of 1911 was the bourgeois revolution
which overthrew the autocratic regime of the Ching Dynasty. On October 10
of that year, a section of the Ching Dynasty's New Army who were under
revolutionary influence staged an uprising in Wuchang, Hupeh Province. The
existing bourgeois and petty-bourgeois revolutionary societies and the broad
masses of the workers, peasants and soldiers responded enthusiastically,
and very soon the rule of the Ching Dynasty crumbled. In January 1912, the
Provisional Government of the Republic of China was set up in Nanking, with
Sun Yat-sen as the Provisional President. Thus China's feudal monarchic system
which had lasted for more than two thousand years was brought to an end.
The idea of a democratic republic had entered deep in the hearts of the people.
But the bourgeoisie which led the revolution was strongly conciliationist
in nature. It did not mobilize the peasant masses on an extensive scale to
crush the feudal rule of the landlord class in the countryside, but instead
handed state power over to the Northern warlord Yuan Shih-kai under imperialist
and feudal pressure. As a result, the revolution ended in defeat.

10. The Northern Expedition was the punitive war against
the Northern warlords launched by the revolutionary army which marched north
from Kwangtung Province in May-July 1926. The Northern Expeditionary Army,
with the Communist Party of China taking part in its leadership and under
the Party's influence (the political work in the army was at that time mostly
under the charge of Communist Party members), gained the warm support of
the broad masses of workers and peasants. In the second half of 1926 and
the first half of 1927 it occupied most of the provinces along the Yangtse
and Yellow Rivers and defeated the Northern warlords. In April 1927 this
revolutionary war failed as a result of betrayal by the reactionary clique
under Chiang Kai-shek within the revolutionary army.

11. On January 16, 1938, the Japanese cabinet declared
in a policy statement that Japan would subjugate China by force. At the same
time it tried by threats and blandishments to make the Kuomintang government
capitulate, declaring that if the Kuomintang government "continued to plan
resistance", the Japanese government would foster a new puppet regime in
China and no longer accept the Kuomintang as "the other party" in negotiations.

12. The capitalists referred to here are chiefly those
of the United States.

13. By "their governments" Comrade Mao Tse-tung is here
referring to the governments of the imperialist countries--Britain, the United
States and France.

14. Comrade Mao Tse-tung's prediction that there would
be an upswing in China during the stage of stalemate in the War of Resistance
Against Japan was completely confirmed in the case of the Liberated Areas
under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party. But there was actually
a decline instead of an upswing in the Kuomintang areas, because the ruling
clique headed by ChiangKai-shek was passive in resisting Japan and active
in opposing the Communist Party and the people. This roused opposition among
the broad masses of the people and raised their political consciousness

15. According to the theory that "weapons decide
everything", China which was inferior to Japan in regard to arms was bound
to be defeated in the war. This view was current among all the leaders of
the Kuomintang reaction, Chiang Kai-shek included.

16. See "Problems of Strategy in Guerrilla War Against
Japan", Note 9, p. 112 of this volume.

17. Sun Wu-kung is the monkey king in the Chinese novel
Hsi Yu Chi (Pilgrimage to the West), written in the 16th
century. He could cover 108,000 li by turning a somersault. Yet
once in the palm of the Buddha, he could not escape from it, however many
somersaults he turned. With a flick of his palm Buddha transformed his fingers
into the five-peak Mountain of Five Elements, and buried Sun Wu-kung.

18. "Fascism is unbridled chauvinism and predatory
war," said Comrade Georgi Dimitrov in his report to the Seventh World
Congress of the Communist International in August 1935, entitled "The Fascist
Offensive and the Tasks of the Communist International" (see Selected
Articles and Speeches, Eng. ed., Lawrence & Wishart London, 1951,
p. 44). In July 1937, Comrade Dimitrov published an article entitled
Fascism Is War.

19. V. I. Lenin, Socialism and War, Eng. ed.,
FLPH, Moscow, 1950, p. 19.

20. Sun Tzu, Chapter 3, "The Strategy of Attack".

21. Chengpu, situated in the southwest of the present
Chuancheng County in Shantung Province, was the scene of a great battle between
the states of Tsin and Chu in 632 BC. At the beginning of the battle the
Chu troops got the upper hand. The Tsin troops, after making a retreat of
90 li, chose the right and left flanks of the Chu troops, their
weak spots, and inflicted heavy defeats on them.

22. The ancient town of Chengkeo, in the northwest of
the present Chengkao County, Honan Province, was of great military importance.
It was the scene of battles fought in 203 B.C. between Liu Pang, King of
Han, and Hsiang Yu, King of Chu. At first Hsiang Yu captured Hsingyang and
Chengkao and Liu Pang's troops were almost routed. Liu Pang waited until
the opportune moment when Hsiang Yu's troops were in midstream crossing the
Szeshui River, and then crushed them and recaptured Chengkao.

23. In 204 B.C., Han Hsin, a general of the state of Han,
led his men in a big battle with Chao Hsieh at Chinghsing. Chao Hsieh's army,
said to be 200,000 strong, was several times that of Han. Deploying his troops
with their backs to a river, Han Hsin led them in valiant combat, and at
the same time dispatched some units to attack and occupy the enemy's weakly
garrisoned rear. Caught in a pincer, Chao Hsieh's troops were utterly defeated.

24. The ancient town of Kunyang, in the north of the present
Yehhsien County, Honan Province, was the place where Liu Hsiu, founder of
the Eastern Han Dynasty, defeated the troops of Wang Mang, Emperor of the
Hsin Dynasty, in A.D. 23. There was a huge numerical disparity between the
two sides, Liu Hsiu's forces totalling 8,000 to 9,000 men as against Wang
Mang's 400,000. But taking advantage of the negligence of Wang Mang's generals,
Wang Hsun and Wang Yi, who underestimated the enemy, Liu Hsiu with only three
thousand picked troops put Wang Mang's main forces to rout. He followed up
this victory by crushing the rest of the enemy troops.

25. Kuantu was in the northeast of the present Chungmou
County, Honan Province, and the scene of the battle between the armies of
Tsao Tsao and Yuan Shao in A D 200. Yuan Shao had an army of 100,000, while
Tsao Tsao had only a meagre force and was short of supplies. Taking advantage
of the lack of vigilance on the part of Yuan Shao's troops, who belittled
the enemy, Tsao Tsao dispatched his light-footed soldiers to spring a surprise
attack on them and set their supplies on fire. Yuan Shao's army was thrown
into confusion and its main force wiped out.

26. The state of Wu was ruled by Sun Chuan, and the state
of Wei by Tsao Tsao. Chihpi is situated on the south bank of the Yangtse
River, to the northeast of Chisyu, Hupeh Province. In A.D. 208 Tsao Tsao
led an army of over 500,000 men, which he proclaimed to be 800,000 strong,
to launch an attack on Sun Chuan. The latter, in alliance with Tsao Tsao's
antagonist Liu Pei, mustered a force of 30,000. Knowing that Tsao Tsao's
army was plagued by epidemics and was unaccustomed to action afloat, the
allied forces of Sun Chuan and Liu Pei set fire to Tsao Tsao's fleet and
crushed his army.

27. Yiling, to the east of the present Ichang, Hupeh Province,
was the place where Lu Sun, a general of the state of Wu, defeated the army
of Liu Pei, ruler of Shu, in A D. 222. Liu Pei's troops scored successive
victories at the beginning of the war and penetrated five or six hundred
li into the territory of Wu as far as Yiling. Lu Sun, who was defending
Yiling, avoided battle for over seven months until Liu Pei "was at his wits'
end and his troops were exhausted and demoralized". Then he crushed Liu Pei's
troops by taking advantage of a favourable wind to set fire to their tents.

28. Hsieh Hsuan, a general of Eastern Tsin Dynasty, defeated
Fu Chien, ruler of the state of Chin, in AD 383 at the Feishui River in Anhwei
Province. Fu Chien had an infantry force of more than 600,000, a cavalry
force of 270,000 and a guards corps of more than 30,000, while the land and
river forces of Eastern Tsin numbered only 80,000. When the armies lined
up on opposite banks of the Feishui River, Hsieh Hsuan, taking advantage
of the overconfidence and conceit of the enemy troops, requested Fu Chien
to move his troops back so as to leave room for the Eastern Tsin troops to
cross the river and fight it out. Fu Chien complied, but when he ordered
withdrawal, his troops got into a panic and could not be stopped. Seizing
the opportunity, the Eastern Tsin troops crossed the river, launched an offensive
and crushed the enemy.

29. In A.D. 383, Fu Chien, the ruler of the state of Chin,
belittled the forces of Tsin and attacked them. The Tsin troops defeated
the enemy's advance units at Lochien, Shouyang County, Anhwei Province, and
pushed forward by land and water. Ascending the city wall of Shonyang, Fu
Chien observed the excellent alignment of the Tsin troops and, mistaking
the woods and bushes on Mount Pakung for enemy soldiers, was frightened by
the enemy's apparent strength.

30. Comrade Mao Tse-tung is here referring to the fact
that Chiang Kai-shek and Wang Ching-wei, having betrayed the first national
democratic united front of the Kuomintang and the Communist Party in 1927,
launched a ten-year war against the people, and thus made it impossible for
the Chinese people to be organized on a large scale. For this the Kuomintang
reactionaries headed by Chiang Kai-shek must be held responsible.

31. Duke Hsiang of Sung ruled in the Spring and Autumn
Era. In 638 BC, the state of Sung fought with the powerful state of Chu.
The Sung forces were already deployed in battle positions when the Chu troops
were crossing the river. One of the Sung officers suggested that, as the
Chu troops were numerically stronger, this was the moment for attack. But
the Duke said, "No, a gentleman should never attack one who is unprepared."
When the Chu troops had crossed the river but had not yet completed their
battle alignment, the officer again proposed an immediate aback, and once
again the Duke said, "No, a gentleman should never attack an army which has
not yet completed its battle alignment." The Duke gave the order for attack
on after the Chu troops were fully prepared. As a result, the Sung troops
met with disastrous defeat and the Duke himself was wounded.

32. Han Pu-chu, a Kuomintang warlord, was for several
years governor of Shantun. When the Japanese invaders thrust southward to
Shantung along the Tientsin-Pukow Railway after occupying Peiping and Tientsin
in 1937, Han Fu-chu fled all the was from Shantung to Honan without fighting
a single battle.

33. The Kuomintang expanded its army by press-ganging.
Its military and police seized people everywhere, roping them up and treating
them like convicts. Those who had money would bribe the Kuomintang officials
or pay for substitutes.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Problems of War and Strategy







PROBLEMS OF WAR AND STRATEGY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

PROBLEMS OF WAR AND STRATEGY


November 6, 1938

[This article is part of Comrade Mao Tse-tung's concluding speech at the
Sixth Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee of the Party. In his
"Problems of Strategy in Guerrilla War Against Japan" and "On Protracted
War", Comrade Mao Tse-tung had already settled the question of the Party's
leading role in the War of Resistance Against Japan. But some comrades,
committing Right opportunist errors, denied that the Party must maintain
its independence and initiative in the united front, and so doubted and even
opposed the Party's line on the war and on strategy.

In order to overcome this Right opportunism, bring the whole Party to
a clearer understanding of the prime importance of the problems of war and
strategy in the Chinese revolution and mobilize it for serious work in this
connection, Comrade Mao Tse-tung again stressed the importance of the subject
at this plenary session, approaching it from the viewpoint of the history
of China's political struggles, and analysed the development of the Party's
military work and the specific changes in its strategy The result was unanimity
of thought in the Party leadership and unanimity of action throughout the
Party.] 
  

I. CHINA'S CHARACTERISTICS AND REVOLUTIONARY WAR

The seizure of power by armed force, the settlement of the issue by war,
is the central task and the highest form of revolution. This Marxist-Leninist
principle of revolution holds good universally, for China and for all other
countries.

But while the principle remains the same, its application by the party of
the proletariat finds expression in varying ways according to the varying
conditions. Internally, capitalist countries practice bourgeois democracy
(not feudalism) when they are not fascist or not at war; in their external
relations, they are not oppressed by, but themselves oppress, other nations.
Because of these characteristics, it is the task of the party of the proletariat
in the capitalist countries to educate the workers and build up strength
through a long period of legal struggle, and thus prepare for the final overthrow
of capitalism. In these countries, the question is one of a long legal struggle,
of utilizing parliament as a platform, of economic and political strikes,
of organizing trade unions and educating the workers. There the form of
organization is legal and the form of struggle bloodless (non-military).
On the issue of war, the Communist Parties in the capitalist countries oppose
the imperialist wars waged by their own countries; if such wars occur, the
policy of these Parties is to bring about the defeat of the reactionary
governments of their own countries. The one war they want to fight is the
civil war for which they are preparing.[1] But
this insurrection and war should not be launched until the bourgeoisie becomes
really helpless, until the majority of the proletariat are determined to
rise in arms and fight, and until the rural masses are giving willing help
to the proletariat. And when the time comes to launch such an insurrection
and war, the first step will be to seize the cities, and then advance into
the countryside' and not the other way about. All this has been done by Communist
Parties in capitalist countries, and it has been proved correct by the October
Revolution in Russia.

China is different however. The characteristics of China are that she is
not independent and democratic but semi-colonial and semi-feudal, that internally
she has no democracy but is under feudal oppression and that in her external
relations she has no national independence but is oppressed by imperialism.
It follows that we have no parliament to make use of and no legal right to
organize the workers to strike. Basically, the task of the Communist Party
here is not to go through a long period of legal struggle before launching
insurrection and war, and not to seize the big cities first and then occupy
the countryside, but the reverse.

When imperialism is not making armed attacks on our country, the Chinese
Communist Party either wages civil war jointly with the bourgeoisie against
the warlords (lackeys of imperialism), as in 1924-27 in the wars in Kwangtung
Province [2] and the Northern Expedition, or unites
with the peasants and the urban petty bourgeoisie to wage civil war against
the landlord class and the comprador bourgeoisie (also lackeys of imperialism),
as in the War of Agrarian Revolution of 1927-36. When imperialism launches
armed attacks on China, the Party unites all classes and strata in the country
opposing the foreign aggressors to wage a national war against the foreign
enemy, as it is doing in the present War of Resistance Against Japan.

All this shows the difference between China and the capitalist countries.
In China war is the main form of struggle and the army is the main form of
organization. Other forms such as mass organization and mass struggle are
also extremely important and indeed indispensable and in no circumstances
to be overlooked, but their purpose is to serve the war. Before the outbreak
of a war all organization and struggle are in preparation for the war, as
in the period from the May 4th Movement of 1919 to the May 30th Movement
of 1925. After war breaks out, all organization and struggle are coordinated
with the war either directly or indirectly, as, for instance, in the period
of the Northern Expedition when all organization and struggle in the rear
areas of the revolutionary army were co-ordinated with the war directly,
and those in the Northern warlord areas were co-ordinated with the war
indirectly. Again in the period of the War of Agrarian Revolution all
organization and struggle inside the Red areas were co-ordinated with the
war directly, and outside the Red areas indirectly. Yet again in the present
period, the War of Resistance, all organization and struggle in the rear
areas of the anti-Japanese forces and in the areas occupied by the enemy
are directly or indirectly co-ordinated with the war.

"In China the armed revolution is fighting the armed counterrevolution. That
is one of the specific features and one of the advantages of the Chinese
revolution."[3] This thesis of Comrade Stalin's
is perfectly correct and is equally valid for the Northern Expedition, the
War of Agrarian Revolution, and the present War of Resistance Against Japan.
They are all revolutionary wars; all directed against counter-revolutionaries
and all waged mainly by the revolutionary people, differing only in the sense
that a civil war differs from a national war, and that a war conducted by
the Communist Party differs from a war it conducts jointly with the Kuomintang.
Of course, these differences are important. They indicate the breadth of
the main forces in the war (an alliance of the workers and peasants, or of
the workers, peasants and bourgeoisie) and whether our antagonist in the
war is internal or external (whether the war is against domestic or foreign
foes, and, if domestic, whether against the Northern warlords or against
the Kuomintang); they also indicate that the content of China's revolutionary
war differs at different stages of its history. But all these wars are instances
of armed revolution fighting armed counterrevolution, they are all revolutionary
wars, and all exhibit the specific features and advantages of the Chinese
revolution. The thesis that revolutionary war "is one of the specific features
and one of the advantages of the Chinese revolution" fits China's conditions
perfectly. The main task of the party of the Chinese proletariat, a task
confronting it almost from its very inception, has been to unite with as
many allies as possible and, according to the circumstances, to organize
armed struggles for national and social liberation against armed
counterrevolution, whether internal or external. Without armed struggle the
proletariat and the Communist Party would have no standing at all in China,
and it would be impossible to accomplish any revolutionary task.

Our Party did not grasp this point fully during the first five or six years
after it was founded, that is, from 1921 to its participation in the Northern
Expedition in 1926. It did not then understand the supreme importance of
armed struggle in China, or seriously prepare for war and organize armed
forces, or apply itself to the study of military strategy and tactics. During
the Northern Expedition it neglected to win over the army but laid one-sided
stress on the mass movement, with the result that the whole mass movement
collapsed the moment the Kuomintang turned reactionary. For a long time after
1927 many comrades continued to make it the Party's central task to prepare
for insurrections in the cities and to work in the White areas. It was only
after our victory in repelling the enemy's third "encirclement and suppression"
campaign in 1931 that some comrades fundamentally changed their attitude
on this question. But this was not true of the whole Party, and there were
other comrades who did not think along the lines presented here.

Experience tells us that China's problems cannot be settled without armed
force. An understanding of this point will help us in successfully waging
the War of Resistance Against Japan from now on. The fact that the whole
nation is rising in armed resistance in the war against Japan should inculcate
a better understanding of the importance of this question in the whole Party,
and every Party member should be prepared to take up arms and go to the front
at any moment. Moreover, our present session has clearly defined the direction
for our efforts by deciding that the Party's main fields of work are in the
battle zones and in the enemy's rear. This is also an excellent antidote
against the tendency of some Party members to be willing only to work in
Party organizations and in the mass movement but to be unwilling to study
or participate in warfare, and against the failure of some schools to encourage
students to go to the front, and other such phenomena. In most of China,
Party organizational work and mass work are directly linked with armed struggle;
there is not and cannot be, any Party work or mass work that is isolated
and stands by itself. Even in rear areas remote from the battle zones (like
Yunnan, Kweichow and Szechuan) and in enemy-occupied areas (like Peiping,
Tientsin, Nanking and Shanghai), Party organizational work and mass work
are co-ordinated with the war, and should and must exclusively serve the
needs of the front. In a word, the whole Party must pay great attention to
war, study military matters and prepare itself for fighting. 


II. THE WAR HISTORY OF THE KUOMINTANG 

It will be useful for us to look at the history of the Kuomintang and see
what attention it pays to war.

From the start, when he organized a small revolutionary group, Sun Yat-sen
staged armed insurrections against the Ching
Dynasty.[4] The period of Tung Meng Hui (the
Chinese Revolutionary League) was replete with armed
insurrections,[5] right up to the armed overthrow
of the Ching Dynasty by the Revolution of 1911. Then, during the period of
the Chinese Revolutionary Party, he carried out a military campaign against
Yuan Shih-kai.[6] Subsequent events such as the
southern movement of the naval units,[7] the northern
expedition from Kweilin [8] and the founding of
the Whampoa Military Academy [9] were also among
Sun Yat-sen's military undertakings.

After Sun Yat-sen came Chiang Kai-shek, who brought the Kuomintang's military
power to its zenith. He values the army as his very life and has had the
experience of three wars, namely, the Northern Expedition, the Civil War
and the War of Resistance Against Japan. For the last ten years Chiang Kai-shek
has been a counter-revolutionary. He has created a huge "Central Army" for
counter-revolutionary purposes. He has held firmly to the vital point that
whoever has an army has power and that war decides everything. In this respect
we ought to learn from him. In this respect both Sun Yat-sen and Chiang Kai-shek
are our teachers.

Since the Revolution of 1911, all the warlords have clung to their armies
for dear life, setting great store by the principle, "Whoever has an army
has power."

Tan Yen-kai,[10] a clever bureaucrat who had a
chequered career in Hunan, was never a civil governor pure and simple but
always insisted on being both the military governor and the civil governor.
Even when he became President of the National Government first in Canton
and then in Wuhan, he was concurrently the commander of the Second Army.
There are many such warlords who understand this peculiarity of China's.

There have also been parties in China, notably the Progressive
Party,[11] which did not want to have an army;
yet even this party recognized that it could not get government positions
without some warlord backing. Among its successive patrons have been Yuan
Shih-kai,[12] Tuan
Chi-jui[13] and Chiang Kai-shek (to whom the Political
Science Group,[14] formed out of a section of
the Progressive Party, has attached itself).

A few small political parties with a short history, e.g., the Youth
Party,[15] have no army, and so have not been
able to get anywhere.

In other countries there is no need for each of the bourgeois parties to
have an armed force under its direct command. But things are different in
China, where, because of the feudal division of the country, those landlord
or bourgeois groupings or parties which have guns have power, and those which
have more guns have more power. Placed in such an environment, the party
of the proletariat should see clearly to the heart of the matter.

Communists do not fight for personal military power (they must in no
circumstances do that, and let no one ever again follow the example of Chang
Kuo-tao), but they must fight for military power for the Party, for military
power for the people. As a national war of resistance is going on, we must
also fight for military power for the nation. Where there is naivety on the
question of military power, nothing whatsoever can be achieved. It is very
difficult for the labouring people, who have been deceived and intimidated
by the reactionary ruling classes for thousands of years, to awaken to the
importance of having guns in their own hands. Now that Japanese imperialist
oppression and the nation-wide resistance to it have pushed our labouring
people into the arena of war, Communists should prove themselves the most
politically conscious leaders in this war. Every Communist must grasp the
truth, "Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun." Our principle
is that the Party commands the gun, and the gun must never be allowed to
command the Party. Yet, having guns, we can create Party organizations, as
witness the powerful Party organizations which the Eighth Route Army has
created in northern China. We can also create cadres, create schools, create
culture, create mass movements. Everything in Yenan has been created by having
guns. All things grow out of the barrel of a gun. According to the Marxist
theory of the state, the army is the chief component of state power. Whoever
wants to seize and retain state power must have a strong army. Some people
ridicule us as advocates of the "omnipotence of war". Yes, we are advocates
of the omnipotence of revolutionary war; that is good, not bad, it is Marxist.
The guns of the Russian Communist Party created socialism. We shall create
a democratic republic. Experience in the class struggle in the era of imperialism
teaches us that it is only by the power of the gun that the working class
and the labouring masses can defeat the armed bourgeoisie and landlords;
in this sense we may say that only with guns can the whole world be transformed.
We are advocates of the abolition of war, we do not want war; but war can
only be abolished through war, and in order to get rid of the gun it is necessary
to take up the gun.

III. THE WAR HISTORY OF THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY 


Our Party failed to grasp the importance of engaging itself directly in
preparations for war and in the organization of armed forces for a period
of three or four years, that is; from 1921 (when the Chinese Communist Party
was founded) to 1924 (when the First National Congress of the Kuomintang
was held), and it still lacked adequate understanding of this issue in the
1924-27 period and even later; nevertheless, after 1924, when it began to
participate in the Whampoa Military Academy, it entered a new stage and began
to see the importance of military affairs. Through helping the Kuomintang
in the wars in Kwangtung Province and participating in the Northern Expedition,
the Party gained leadership over some armed
forces.[16] Then, having learned a bitter lesson
from the failure of the revolution, the Party organized the Nanchang
Uprising, [17] the Autumn Harvest Uprising
[18] and the Canton Uprising, and entered on a
new period, the founding of the Red Army. That was the crucial period in
which our Party arrived at a thorough understanding of the importance of
the army. Had there been no Red Army and no war fought by the Red Army in
this period, that is, had the Communist Party adopted Chen Tu-hsiu's
liquidationism, the present War of Resistance would have been inconceivable
or could not have been sustained for long.

At its emergency meeting held on August 7, 1927, the Central Committee of
the Party combated Right opportunism in the political sphere, thus enabling
the Party to take a big stride forward. At its fourth plenary session in
January 1931, the Sixth Central Committee nominally combated "Left" opportunism
in the political sphere, but in fact itself committed the error of "Left"
opportunism anew. The two meetings differed in their content and historical
role, but neither of them dealt seriously with the problems of war and strategy,
a fact which showed that war had not yet been made the centre of gravity
in the Party's work. After the central leadership of the Party moved into
the Red areas in 1933, this situation underwent a radical change, but mistakes
in principle were again committed on the problem of war (and all other major
problems), bringing serious losses to the revolutionary war. The Tsunyi Meeting
of 1935, on the other hand, was mainly a fight against opportunism in the
military sphere and gave top priority to the question of war, and this was
a reflection of the war conditions of the time. Today we can say with confidence
that in the struggles of the past seventeen years the Chinese Communist Party
has forged not only a firm Marxist political line but also a firm Marxist
military line. We have been able to apply Marxism in solving not only political
but also military problems; we have trained not only a large core of cadres
capable of running the Party and the state, but also a large core of cadres
capable of running the army. These achievements are the flower of the revolution,
watered by the blood of countless martyrs, a glory that belongs not only
to the Chinese Communist Party and the Chinese people, but also to the Communist
Parties and the peoples of the whole world. There are only three armies in
the whole world which belong to the proletariat and the labouring people,
the armies led by the Communist Parties of the Soviet Union, of China and
of Spain, and as yet Communist Parties in other countries have had no military
experience; hence our army and our military experience are all the more precious.

In order to carry the present War of Resistance Against Japan to victory,
it is extremely important to expand and consolidate the Eighth Route Army,
the New Fourth Army and all the guerrilla forces led by our Party. Acting
on this principle, the Party should dispatch a sufficient number of its best
members and cadres to the front. Everything must serve victory at the front,
and the organizational task must be subordinated to the political task.

IV. CHANGES IN THE PARTY'S MILITARY STRATEGY IN THE CIVIL
  WAR AND THE NATIONAL WAR


The changes in our Party's military strategy are worth studying. Let us deal
separately with the two processes, the civil war and the national war.

The civil war can be roughly divided into two strategic periods. Guerrilla
warfare was primary in the first period and regular warfare in the second.
But this regular warfare was of the Chinese type, regular only in its
concentration of forces for mobile warfare and in a certain degree of
centralization and planning in command and organization; in other respects
it retained a guerrilla character and, as regular warfare, was on a low level
and not comparable with the regular warfare of foreign armies or, in some
ways, even with that of the Kuomintang army. Thus, in a sense, this type
of regular warfare was only guerrilla warfare raised to a higher level.

The War of Resistance Against Japan can also be roughly divided into two
strategic periods, so far as our Party's military tasks are concerned. In
the first period (comprising the stages of the strategic defensive and strategic
stalemate) it is guerrilla warfare which is primary, while in the second
(the stage of the strategic counteroffensive) it is regular warfare which
will be primary. However, the guerrilla warfare of the first period of the
War of Resistance differs considerably in content from that of the first
period of the civil war, because the dispersed guerrilla tasks are being
carried out by the regular (i.e., regular to a certain degree) Eighth
Route Army. Likewise, the regular warfare of the second period of the War
of Resistance will be different from that of the second period of the civil
war because we can assume that, given up-to-date equipment, a great change
will take place both in the army and in its operations. Our army will then
attain a high degree of centralization and organization, and its operations
will lose much of their guerrilla character and attain a high degree of
regularity; what is now on a low level will then be raised to a higher level,
and the Chinese type of regular warfare will change into the general type.
That will be our task in the stage of the strategic counter-offensive.

Thus we see that the two processes, the civil war and the War of Resistance
Against Japan, and their four strategic periods, contain three changes in
strategy. The first was the change from guerrilla warfare to regular warfare
in the civil war. The second was the change from regular warfare in the civil
war to guerrilla warfare in the War of Resistance. And the third will be
the change from guerrilla warfare to regular warfare in the War of Resistance.

The first of the three changes encountered great difficulties. It involved
a twofold task. On the one hand, we had to combat the Right tendency of localism
and guerrilla-ism, which consisted in clinging to guerrilla habits and refusing
to make the turn to regularization, a tendency which arose because our cadres
underestimated the changes in the enemy's situation and our own tasks. In
the Central Red Area it was only after much painstaking education that this
tendency was gradually corrected. On the other hand, we also had to combat
the "Left" tendency of over-centralization and adventurism which put undue
stress on regularization, a tendency which arose because some of the leading
cadres overestimated the enemy, set the tasks too high and mechanically applied
foreign experience regardless of the actual conditions. For three long years
(before the Tsunyi Meeting) this tendency imposed enormous sacrifices on
the Central Red Area, and it was corrected only after we had learned lessons
for which we paid in blood. Its correction was the achievement of the Tsunyi
Meeting.

The second change in strategy took place in the autumn of 1937 (after the
Lukouchiao Incident), at the juncture of the two different wars. We faced
a new enemy, Japanese imperialism, and had as our ally our former enemy,
the Kuomintang (which was still hostile to us), and the theatre of war was
the vast expanse of northern China (which was temporarily our army's front
but would soon be the enemy's rear and would remain so for a long time).
In this special situation, our change in strategy was an extremely serious
one. In this special situation we had to transform the regular army of the
past into a guerrilla army (in respect to its dispersed operations, and not
to its sense of organization or to its discipline), and transform the mobile
warfare of the past into guerrilla warfare, so that we could adapt ourselves
to the kind of enemy facing us and to the tasks before us. But this change
was, to all appearances, a step backward and therefore necessarily very
difficult. Both underestimation and morbid fear of Japan, tendencies likely
to occur at such a time, did actually occur among the Kuomintang. When the
Kuomintang changed over from civil war to national war, it suffered many
needless losses mainly because of its underestimation of the enemy, but also
because of its morbid fear of Japan (as exemplified by Han Fu-chu and Liu
Chih [19]). On the other hand, we have effected
the change fairly smoothly and, instead of suffering losses, have won big
victories. The reason is that the great majority of our cadres accepted the
correct guidance of the Central Committee in good time and skilfully sized
up the actual situation; even though there were serious arguments between
the Central Committee and some of the army cadres. The extreme importance
of this change for persevering in, developing and winning the War of Resistance
as a whole, as well as for the future of the Communist Party of China, can
be seen immediately if we think of the historic significance of anti-Japanese
guerrilla warfare in determining the fate of the national liberation struggle
in China. In its extraordinary breadth and protractedness, China's anti-Japanese
guerrilla war is without precedent, not only in the East but perhaps in the
whole history of mankind.

The third change, from guerrilla to regular warfare against Japan, belongs
to the future development of the war, which will presumably give rise to
new circumstances and new difficulties. We need not discuss it now.

V. THE STRATEGIC ROLE OF GUERRILLA WARFARE AGAINST
  JAPAN


In the anti-Japanese war as a whole, regular warfare is primary and guerrilla
warfare supplementary, for only regular warfare can decide the final outcome
of the war. Of the three strategic stages (the defensive, the stalemate and
the counter-offensive) in the entire process of the war in the country as
a whole, the first and last are stages in which regular warfare is
primary and guerrilla warfare supplementary. In the intermediate stage guerrilla
warfare will become primary and regular warfare supplementary, because the
enemy will be holding on to the areas he has occupied and we will be preparing
for the counter-offensive but will not yet be ready to launch it. Though
this stage will possibly be the longest, it is still only one of the three
stages in the entire war. If we take the war as a whole, therefore, regular
warfare is primary and guerrilla warfare supplementary. Unless we understand
this, unless we recognize that regular warfare will decide the final outcome
of the war, and unless we pay attention to building a regular army and to
studying and directing regular warfare, we shall be unable to defeat Japan.
This is one aspect of the matter.

All the same, guerrilla warfare has its important strategic place throughout
the war. Without guerrilla warfare and without due attention to building
guerrilla units and guerrilla armies and to studying and directing guerrilla
warfare, we shall likewise be unable to defeat Japan. The reason is that,
since the greater part of China will be converted into the enemy's rear,
in the absence of the most extensive and persistent guerrilla warfare the
enemy will entrench himself securely without any fear of attacks from behind,
will inflict heavy losses on our main forces fighting at the front and will
launch increasingly fierce offensives; thus it will be difficult for us to
bring about a stalemate, and the very continuation of the War of Resistance
may be jeopardized. But even if things do not turn out that way, other
unfavourable circumstances will ensue, such as the inadequate building up
of strength for our counter-offensive, the absence of supporting actions
during the counter-offensive, and the possibility that the enemy will be
able to replace his losses. If these circumstances arise and are not overcome
by the timely development of extensive and persistent guerrilla warfare,
it will likewise be impossible to defeat Japan. Hence, though guerrilla warfare
occupies a supplementary place in the war as a whole, it does have an extremely
important place in strategy. In waging the War of Resistance Against Japan
it is undoubtedly a grave error to neglect guerrilla warfare. This is the
other aspect of the matter.

Given a big country, guerrilla warfare is possible; hence there was guerrilla
warfare in the past too. But guerrilla warfare can be persevered in only
when led by the Communist Party. That is why guerrilla warfare generally
failed in the past and why it can be victorious only in modern times and
only in big countries in which Communist Parties have emerged, as in the
Soviet Union during its civil war and in China at present. Considering the
present circumstances and the general situation with respect to the war,
the division of labour between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party in
the anti-Japanese war, in which the former carries on frontal regular warfare
and the latter carries on guerrilla warfare behind the enemy lines, is both
necessary and proper, and is a matter of mutual need, mutual co-ordination
and mutual assistance.

It can thus be understood how important and necessary it was for our Party
to change its military strategy from the regular warfare of the latter period
of the civil war to the guerrilla warfare of the first period of the War
of Resistance. The favourable effects of this change can be summed up in
the following eighteen points:

  (1) reduction of the areas occupied by the enemy forces;
  
  (2) expansion of the base areas of our own forces;
  
  (3) in the stage of the defensive, co-ordination with operations at the regular
  front, so as to pin down the enemy;
  
  (4) in the stage of stalemate, maintenance of a firm hold on the base areas
  behind the enemy lines, so as to facilitate the training and reorganization
  of troops at the regular front;
  
  (5) in the stage of the counter-offensive, co-ordination with the regular
  front in recovering lost territory;
  
  (6) the quickest and most effective expansion of our forces;
  
  (7) the widest expansion of the Communist Party, so that a Party branch may
  be organized in every village;
  
  (8) the broadest development of the mass movements, so that all the people
  behind the enemy lines, except for those in his strongholds, may be organized;
  
  (9) the most extensive establishment of organs of anti-Japanese democratic
  political power;
  
  (10) the widest development of anti-Japanese cultural and educational work;
  
  (11) the most extensive improvement of the people's livelihood;
  
  (12) the most effective disintegration of the enemy troops;
  
  (13) the most extensive and enduring impact on popular feeling and stimulation
  of morale throughout the country;
  
  (14) the most extensive impetus to progress in the friendly armies and parties;
  
  (15) adaptation to the situation in which the enemy is strong and we are
  weak, so that we suffer fewer losses and win more victories;
  
  (16) adaptation to the fact that China is large and Japan small, so as to
  make the enemy suffer more losses and win fewer victories;
  
  (17) the quickest and most effective training of large numbers of cadres
  for leadership; and
  
  (18) the most effective solution of the problem of provisions.


It is also beyond doubt that in the long course of struggle the guerrilla
units and guerrilla warfare will not remain as they are but will develop
to a higher stage and evolve gradually into regular units and regular warfare.
Through guerrilla warfare, we shall build up our strength and turn ourselves
into a decisive element in the crushing of Japanese imperialism.

VI. PAY GREAT ATTENTION TO THE STUDY OF MILITARY
  MATTERS


All the issues between two hostile armies depend on war for their solution,
and China's survival or extinction depends on her victory or defeat in the
present war. Hence our study of military theory, of strategy and tactics
and of army political work brooks not a moment's delay. Though our study
of tactics is still inadequate, our comrades who are engaged in military
work have achieved a great deal in the last ten years and, on the
basis of Chinese conditions, have brought forth much that is new; the shortcoming
here is that there has been no general summing-up. But so far only a few
people have taken up the study of the problems of strategy and the theory
of war. First-rate results have been achieved in the study of our political
work, which, in wealth of experience and in the number and quality of its
innovations, ranks second only to that of the Soviet Union; here too the
shortcoming is insufficient synthesis and systematization. The popularization
of military knowledge is an urgent task for the Party and the whole
country. We must now pay great attention to all these things, but most of
all to the theory of war and strategy. I deem it imperative that we arouse
interest in the study of military theory and direct the attention of the
whole membership to the study of military matters.

NOTES



1. See V. I. Lenin, "The War and Russian Social-Democracy"
(Collected Works, Eng. ed., Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1964, Vol.
XXI, pp. 27-34), "The Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. Groups Abroad" (ibid.,
pp. 158-64), "The Defeat of One's own Government in the Imperialist
War" (ibid., pp. 275-80), "The Defeat of Russia and the Revolutionary
Crisis" (ibid., pp. 378-82). These articles, written in 1914-15,
deal Specifically with the imperialist war of that time. See also History
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks), Short Course,
Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1951, pp. 258-67.

2. In 1924, Dr. Sun Yat-sen, in alliance with the Communist
Party and the revolutionary workers and peasants, defeated the "Merchants'
Corps", an armed force of the compradors and landlords which engaged in
counter-revolutionary activities in Canton in collaboration with the British
imperialists. The revolutionary army, which had been founded on the basis
of co-operation between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party, set out from
Canton early in 1925, fought the Eastern Campaign and, with the support of
the peasants, defeated the troops of the warlord Chen Chiung-ming. It then
returned to Canton and overthrew the Yunnan and Kwangsi warlords who had
entrenched themselves there. That autumn it conducted the Second Eastern
Campaign and finally wiped out Chen Chiung-ming's forces. These campaigns,
in which members of the Communist Party and the Communist Youth League fought
heroically in the van, brought about the political unification of Kwangtung
Province and paved the way for the Northern Expedition.

3. J. V. Stalin, "The Prospects of the Revolution in China",
Works, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1954, Vol. VIII, p. 379.

4. In 1894, Dr. Sun Yat-sen formed a small revolutionary
organization in Honolulu called the Hsing Chung Hui (Society for
China's Regeneration). With the support of the secret societies among the
people, he staged two armed insurrections in Kwangtung Province against the
Ching government after its defeat in the Sino-Japanese war in 1895, one at
Canton in 1895 and the other at Huichow in 1900.

5. Tang Meng Hui, or the Chinese Revolutionary
League (a united front organization of the bourgeoisie, the petty bourgeoisie
and a section of the landed gentry opposed to the Ching government), was
formed in 1905 through the merging of the Hsing Chung Hui (see note
above) and two other groups, the Hua Hsing Hui (Society for China's
Regeneration) and the Kuang Fu Hui (Society for Breaking the Foreign
Yoke). It put forward a programme of bourgeois revolution advocating "the
expulsion of the Tartars (Manchus), the recovery of China, the establishment
of a republic and the equalization of landownership". In the period of the
Chinese Revolutionary League, Dr. Sun Yat-sen, allying himself with the secret
societies and a part of the New Army of the Ching government, launched a
number of armed insurrections against the Ching regime, notably those at
Pinghsiang (Kiangsi Province), Liuyang and Liling (Hunan Province) in 1906,
at Huangkang, Chaochow and Chinchow (Kwangtung Province), and at Chennankuan
(Kwangsi Province) in 1907, at Hokou (Yunnan Province) in 1908 and at Canton
in 1911. The last was followed in the same year by the Wuchang Uprising which
resulted in the overthrow of the Ching Dynasty.

6. In 1912, the Chinese Revolutionary League was reorganized
into the Kuomintang and made a compromise with the Northern warlord regime
headed by Yuan Shih-kai. In 1913 Yuan's troops marched southward to suppress
the forces which had emerged in the provinces of Kiangsi, Anhwei and Kwangtung
in the course of the 1911 revolution. Armed resistance was organized by Dr.
Sun Yat-sen but it was soon crushed. In 1914, realizing the error of the
Kuomintang's policy of compromise, Dr. Sun formed the Chung Hua Ke Ming
Tang (Chinese Revolutionary Party) in Tokyo, Japan, in order to distinguish
his organization from the Kuomintang of the time. The new Party was actually
an alliance of the political representatives of a section of the petty
bourgeoisie and a section of the bourgeoisie against Yuan Shih-kai. Through
this alliance, Dr. Sun Yat-sen staged a minor insurrection in Shanghai in
1914. In 1915 when Yuan Shih-kai proclaimed himself emperor, Tsai Ngo and
others set out from Yunnan to take action against him, and Dr. Sun was also
very active in advocating and promoting armed opposition to Yuan Shih-kai.

7. In 1917 Dr. Sun Yat-sen went from Shanghai to Canton
at the head of a naval force which was under his influence. Using Kwangtung
as a base and co-operating with the Southwestern warlords who were opposed
to the Northern warlord Tuan Chi-jui, he set up a military government opposed
to Tuan Chi-jui.

8. In 1921 Dr. Sun Yat-sen planned a northern expedition
from Kweilin, Kwangsi Province. But his plan was frustrated by the mutiny
of his subordinate, Chen Chiung ming, who was in league with the Northern
warlords.

9. The Whampoa Military Academy, located at Whampoa near
Canton, was established by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in 1924 after the reorganization
of the Kuomintang with the help of the Chinese Communist Party and the Soviet
Union. Before Chiang Kai-shek's betrayal of the revolution in 1927, the academy
was run jointly by the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. Comrades Chou
En-lai, Yeh Chien-ying, Yun Tai-ying, Hsiao Chu-nu and others held responsible
posts in the academy at one time or another. Many of the cadets were members
of the Communist Party or the Communist Youth League, and they formed the
revolutionary core of the academy.

10. Tan Yen-kai was a native of Hunan who had been a
Henlin, a member of the highest official scholastic body under the
Ching Dynasty. He was a careerist who first advocated a constitutional monarchy
and then took part in the Revolution of 1911. His later adherence to the
Kuomintang reflected the contradiction between the Hunan landlords and the
Northern warlords.

11. The Progressive Party was organized by Liang Chi-chao
and others under the aegis of Yuan Shih-kai during the first years of the
Republic.

12. Yuan Shih-kai was the head of the Northern warlords
in the last years of the Ching Dynasty. After the Ching Dynasty was overthrown
by the Revolution of 1911, he usurped the presidency of the Republic and
organized the first government of the Northern warlords, which represented
the big landlord and big comprador classes. He did this by relying on
counter-revolutionary armed force and on the support of the imperialists
and by taking advantage of the conciliationist character of the bourgeoisie,
which was then leading the revolution. In 1915 he wanted to make himself
emperor and, to gain the support of the Japanese imperialists, accepted the
Twenty-one Demands with which Japan aimed at obtaining exclusive control
of all China. In December of the same year an uprising against his assumption
of the throne took place in Yunnan Province and promptly won nation-wide
response and support. Yuan Shih-kai died in Peking in June 1916.

13. Tuan Chi-jui was an old subordinate of Yuan Shih-kai
and head of the Anhwei clique of Northern warlords. After Yuan's death he
more than once controlled the Peking government.

14. The extremely right-wing Political Science Group was
formed in 1916 by a section of the Progressive Party and a section of the
Kuomintang. It gambled now on the Southern, now on the Northern, warlords
in order to grab government posts. During the Northern Expedition of 1926-27,
its pro-Japanese members, such as Huang Fu, Chang Chun and Yang Yung-tai,
began to collaborate with Chiang Kai-shek and, using their reactionary political
experience, helped him build up a counter revolutionary regime.

15. The Youth Party, also called the Chinese Youth Party
or the Etatiste Party, was formed by a handful of unscrupulous fascist
politicians. They made counter-revolutionary careers for themselves by opposing
the Communist Party and the Soviet Union and received subsidies from the
various groups of reactionaries in power and from the imperialists.

16. Comrade Mao Tse-tung is here referring mainly to the
independent regiment commanded by General Yeh Ting, a Communist, during the
Northern Expedition. See "The Struggle in the Chingkang Mountains", Note
14 Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Eng. ed., PLP, Peking, 1965,
Vol. I, p. 104.

17. Nanchang, capital of Kiangsi Province, was the scene
of the famous uprising on August 1, 1927 led by the Communist Party of China
in order to combat the counterrevolution of Chiang Kai-shek and Wang Ching-wei
and to continue the revolution of 1924-27. More than thirty thousand troops
took part in the uprising which was led by Comrades Chou En-lai, Chu Teh,
Ho Lung and Yeh Ting. The insurrectionary army withdrew from Nanchang on
August I as planned, but suffered a defeat when approaching Chaochow and
Swatow in Kwangtung Province. Led by Comrades Chu Teh and Chen Yi, part of
the troops later fought their way to the Chingkang Mountains and joined forces
with the First Division of the First Workers' and Peasants' Revolutionary
Army under Comrade Mao Tse-tung.

18. The famous Autumn Harvest Uprising under the leadership
of Comrade Mao Tse-tung was launched in September 1927 by the people's armed
forces of Hsiushui Pinghsiang, Pingkiang and Liuyang Counties on the
Hunan-Kiangsi border, who formed the First Division of the First Workers'
and Peasants' Revolutionary Army. Comrade Mao Tse-tung led this force to
the Chingkang Mountains where a revolutionary base was established.

19. Han Fu-chu was a Kuomintang warlord in Shantung Province.
Liu Chih another warlord, who commanded Chiang Kai-shek's personal troops
in Honan Province, was responsible for the defence of the Paoting area in
Hopei after the outbreak of the War of Resistance Against Japan. Both of
them fled before the Japanese without firing a shot.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## Conclusions on the Repulse of the Second Anti-Communist Onslaught








CONCLUSIONS ON THE REPULSE OF THE SECOND ANTI-COMMUNIST ONSLAUGHT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

CONCLUSIONS ON THE REPULSE OF THE SECOND ANTI-COMMUNIST ONSLAUGHT


May 8, 1941

[This inner-Party directive was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.]
  

As the Central Committee's directive of March 18, 1941, has stated, the second
anti-Communist onslaught has come to an end. What has followed since is the
continuance of the War of Resistance Against Japan in new circumstances,
international as well as domestic. The additional factors in these new
circumstances are the spread of the imperialist war, the upsurge of the
international revolutionary movement, the neutrality pact between the Soviet
Union and Japan,[1] the defeat of the Kuomintang's
second anti-Communist onslaught and the consequent decline in the political
standing of the Kuomintang and rise in that of the Communist Party, and,
furthermore, the latest preparations by Japan for a new large-scale offensive
against China. It is absolutely necessary for us to study and learn the lessons
of our Party's heroic and victorious struggle against the recent anti-Communist
onslaught, for the purpose of uniting the people throughout the country to
persevere in the War of Resistance and for the purpose of continuing effectively
to overcome the danger of capitulation and the anti-Communist counter-current
of the big landlords and the big bourgeoisie.

1. Of China's two major contradictions, the national contradiction between
China and Japan is still primary and the internal class contradiction in
China is still subordinate. The fact that a national enemy has penetrated
deep into our country is all-decisive. As long as the contradiction between
China and Japan remains acute, even if the entire big landlord class and
big bourgeoisie turn traitor and surrender, they can never bring about another
1927 situation, with a repetition of the April 12th
[2] and the May 21st Incidents
[3] of that year. The first anti-Communist onslaught
[4] was appraised as another May 21st Incident
by some comrades, and the second onslaught as a repetition of the April 12th
and the May 21st Incidents, but objective facts have proved these appraisals
wrong. The mistake of these comrades lies in forgetting that the national
contradiction is the primary one.

2. In the circumstances, the pro-British and pro-American big landlords and
big bourgeoisie, who direct all Kuomintang government policy, remain classes
with a dual character. On the one hand they are opposed to Japan, and on
the other they are opposed to the Communist Party and the broad masses of
the people represented by the Party. And both their resistance to Japan and
their anti-communism bear a dual character. With regard to their resistance
to Japan, while they are opposed to Japan, they are not actively waging war
or actively opposing Wang Ching-wei and the other traitors, and sometimes
they even flirt with Japan's peace emissaries. With regard to their
anti-communism, they are opposed to the Communist Party, having gone so far
as to create the Southern Anhwei Incident and to issue the Order of January
17, but at the same time they do not want a final split and still maintain
their stick-and-carrot policy. These facts have been confirmed once again
in the recent anti-Communist onslaught. Chinese politics, which are extremely
complex, demand our comrades' deepest attention. Since the pro-British and
pro-American big landlords and big bourgeoisie are still resisting Japan
and are still using the stick and carrot in dealing with our Party, the policy
of our Party is to "do unto them as they do unto
Us",[5] stick for stick and carrot for carrot.
Such is the revolutionary dual policy. So long as the big landlords and the
big bourgeoisie do not completely turn traitor, this policy of ours will
not change.

3. A whole range of tactics is needed to combat the Kuomintang's anti-Communist
policy, and there must be absolutely no carelessness or negligence. The enmity
and brutality of the big landlords and the big bourgeoisie represented by
Chiang Kai-shek towards the people's revolutionary forces were not only
demonstrated by the ten years of anti-Communist war, but they have been fully
demonstrated in the midst of the war against Japan by two anti-Communist
onslaughts, and particularly by the Southern Anhwei Incident during the second
anti-Communist onslaught. If a people's revolutionary force is to avoid
extermination by Chiang Kai-shek and to compel him to acknowledge its existence,
it has no alternative but to wage a tit-for-tat struggle against his
counter-revolutionary policies. The defeat resulting from Comrade Hsiang
Ying's opportunism during the recent anti-Communist onslaught should serve
as a grave warning to the whole Party. But the struggle must be waged on
just grounds, to our advantage, and with restraint; if any of the three is
lacking, we shall suffer setbacks.

4. In the struggle against the Kuomintang die-hards, the big comprador
bourgeoisie must be distinguished from the national bourgeoisie, which has
little or no comprador character, and the most reactionary big landlords
must be distinguished from the enlightened gentry and the general run of
landlords. This is the theoretical basis of our Party's endeavour to win
over the intermediate sections and establish organs of political power on
the "three thirds system", and it has been repeatedly stressed by the Central
Committee since March last year. Its correctness was proved afresh during
the recent anti-Communist onslaught. The stand we took before the Southern
Anhwei Incident, as expressed in our November 9
telegram,[6] was entirely necessary for our shift
to the political counter-attack after the incident, otherwise we could not
have won over the intermediate sections. For unless they had been taught
time and again by experience, the intermediate sections would have been unable
to understand why our Party must wage resolute struggles against the Kuomintang
die-hards, why unity can be gained only through struggle and why there can
be no unity whatsoever if struggle is abandoned. Although the leading elements
in the regional power groups belong to the big landlord class and the big
bourgeoisie, generally they should also be regarded and treated as intermediate
sections, since there are contradictions between them and the big landlords
and big bourgeois who control the central government. Yen Hsi-shan who was
most active in the first anti-Communist onslaught took a middle stand in
the second, and although the Kwangsi clique which took a middle stand in
the first onslaught came in on the anti-Communist side in the second, it
is still in contradiction with the Chiang Kai-shek clique and not to be
identified with it. This applies with still greater force to other regional
power groups. Many of our comrades, however, still lump the different landlord
and bourgeois groups together, as though the entire landlord class and
bourgeoisie had turned traitor after the Southern Anhwei Incident, this is
an over-simplification of China's complex politics. Were we to adopt this
view and identify all the landlords and the bourgeoisie with the Kuomintang
die-hards, we would isolate ourselves. It must be realized that Chinese society
is big in the middle and small at both ends [7]
and that the Communist Party cannot solve China's problems unless it wins
over the masses of the intermediate classes and unless it enables them to
play their proper role according to their circumstances.

5. Because some comrades have wavered on the point that the contradiction
between China and Japan is the primary one and hence have wrongly appraised
class relations in China, they have at times wavered on the policy of the
Party. Proceeding from their appraisal of the Southern Antwei Incident as
another April 12th or May 21st Incident, these comrades
now seem to think that the Central Committee's policy directive of December
25 last year is no longer applicable, or at least not altogether applicable.
They believe that we no longer need the kind of state power that includes
all who stand for resistance and democracy but need a so-called state power
of the workers, peasants and urban petty bourgeoisie, and that we no longer
need the united front policy of the period of the War of Resistance but need
a policy of agrarian revolution as during the ten years' civil war. The Party's
correct policy has become blurred in the minds of these comrades, at any
rate for the time being.

6. When these comrades were instructed by the Central Committee of our Party
to be prepared against a possible split by the Kuomintang, that is, against
the worst possible development, they forgot the other possibilities. They
do not understand that while it is absolutely necessary to prepare for the
worst possibility, this does not mean ignoring the favourable possibilities;
on the contrary, such preparation for the worst is precisely a condition
for creating favourable possibilities and turning them into reality. On this
occasion, we were fully prepared against a split by the Kuomintang, and so
the Kuomintang dared not bring about a split lightly.

7. There are even more comrades who fail to understand the unity of the national
struggle and the class struggle, and who fail to understand united front
policy and class policy, and consequently the unity of united front education
and class education. They hold that after the Southern Anhwei Incident special
emphasis should be placed on class education as distinct from united front
education. Even now they do not understand that for the whole period of the
anti-Japanese war the Party has a single integral policy--the national united
front policy (a dual policy) which integrates the two aspects, unity and
struggle--towards all those in the upper and middle strata who are still
resisting Japan, whether they belong to the big landlord class and big
bourgeoisie or the intermediate classes. This dual policy should be applied
even to the puppet troops, the traitors and the pro-Japanese elements, except
for those who are absolutely unrepentant, whom we must resolutely crush.
The education which our Party conducts among its own members and the people
in general likewise embraces both these aspects, that is, it teaches the
proletariat and the peasantry and other sections of the petty bourgeoisie
how to unite, in different ways, with the different strata of the bourgeoisie
and the landlord class for resistance to Japan, and at the same time how
to conduct struggles against them in varying degrees according to the varying
degrees in which they compromise, vacillate and are anti-Communist. United
front policy is class policy and the two are inseparable; whoever is unclear
on this will be unclear on many other problems.

8. Other comrades do not understand that the social character of the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the anti-Japanese base areas in northern
and central China is already new-democratic. The main criterion in judging
whether an area is new-democratic in character is whether representatives
of the broad masses of the people participate in the political power there
and whether this political power is led by the Communist Party. Therefore,
united front political power under Communist leadership is the chief mark
of a new-democratic society. Some people think that New Democracy can be
considered as accomplished only if there is an agrarian revolution like that
of the ten years' civil war, but they are wrong. At present the political
system in the base areas is a political system of the united front of all
the people who are for resistance and democracy, the economy is one from
which the elements of semi-colonialism and semi-feudalism have been basically
eliminated, and the culture is an anti-imperialist and anti-feudal culture
of the broad masses of the people. Therefore, whether viewed politically,
economically or culturally, both the anti-Japanese base areas which have
only enforced the reduction of rent and interest and the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region which has gone through a thorough agrarian revolution are
new-democratic in character. When the example of the anti-Japanese base areas
is extended throughout the country, then the whole of China will become a
new-democratic republic.

NOTES


1. The neutrality pact between the Soviet Union and Japan,
concluded on April , 1941, ensured peace on the eastern border of the Soviet
Union, thus crushing the plot for a joint German, Italian and Japanese attack
on the Soviet Union. It marked a major victory for the Soviet Union's peaceful
foreign policy.

2. The April 12th Incident was the counter-revolutionary
coup d'etat staged by Chiang Kai-shek in Shanghai on April 12, 1927, during
which a great number of Communists and revolutionary workers, peasants and
students and intellectuals were massacred.

3. Instigated by Chiang Kai-shek and Wang Ching-wei, the
counter-revolutionary Kuomintang army commanders in Hunan, including Hsu
Keh-hsiang and Ho Chien, ordered a raid on the provincial headquarters of
the trade unions, the peasant associations and other revolutionary organizations
in Changsha on May 21, 1927, Communists and revolutionary workers and peasants
were arrested and killed en masse. This signalized the open collaboration
of the two counter-revolutionary Kuomintang cliques, the Wuhan clique headed
by Wang Ching-wei and the Nanking clique headed by Chiang Kai-shek.

4. The first anti-Communist onslaught during the anti-Japanese
war was conducted by Chiang Kai-shek in the winter of 1939 and the spring
of 1940.

5. The quotation is from the commentary by Chu Hsi
(1130--1200), a philosopher of the Sung Dynasty, on the Confucian
Doctrine of the Mean, Chapter 13.

6. The telegram of November 9, 1940 was sent by Chu Teh
and Peng Teh-huai, Commander-in-Chief and Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the
Eighteenth Group Army (Eighth Route Army), and Yeh Ting and Hsiang Ying,
Commander and Deputy Commander of the New Fourth Army, in reply to the telegram
of the Kuomintang generals Ho Ying-chin and Pai Chung-hsi, dated October
19, 1940. Exposing the plot by the Kuomintang reactionaries to attack the
Communist Party and capitulate to Japan, they denounced Ho Ying-chin's and
Pai Chung-hsi's absurd proposal that the New Fourth Army and the Eighth Route
Army should shift from the south to the north of the Yellow River. However,
in a spirit of conciliation and compromise for the sake of maintaining unity
against Japan, they agreed to shift their forces from the south to the north
of the Yangtse River, while demanding the solution of a number of major
outstanding issues between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. The telegram
won the sympathy of the intermediate sections and served to isolate Chiang
Kai-shek.

7. Comrade Mao Tse-tung's remark about Chinese society
means that the Chinese industrial proletariat which led the revolution formed
only a minority of China's population, as did also the reactionary big landlords
and big bourgeoisie.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## The Turning Point in World War II







THE TURNING POINT IN WORLD WAR II 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE TURNING POINT IN WORLD WAR II

October 12, 1942

[This editorial was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Liberation
Daily.]
  

The Battle of Stalingrad has been compared by the British and American press
to the Battle of Verdun, and the "Red Verdun" is now famous all over the
world. This comparison is not altogether appropriate. The Battle of Stalingrad
is different in nature from the Battle of Verdun in World War I. But they
have this in common-- now, as then, many people are misled by the German
offensive into thinking that Germany can still win the war. In 1916 the German
forces launched several attacks on the French fortress of Verdun, two years
before World War I ended in the winter of 1918. The commander-in-chief at
Verdun was the German Crown Prince and the forces thrown into the battle
were the cream of the German army. The battle was of decisive significance.
After the ferocious German assaults failed, the entire
German-Austrian-Turkish-Bulgarian bloc had no future, and from then on its
difficulties mounted, it was deserted by its followers, it disintegrated,
and finally collapsed. But at the time, the Anglo-American-French bloc did
not grasp this situation, believing that the German army was still very powerful,
and they were unaware of their own approaching victory. Historically, all
reactionary forces on the verge of extinction invariably conduct a last desperate
struggle against the revolutionary forces, and some revolutionaries are apt
to be deluded for a time by this phenomenon of outward strength but inner
weakness, failing to grasp the essential fact that the enemy is nearing
extinction while they themselves are approaching victory. The rise of the
forces of fascism and the war of aggression they have been conducting for
some years are precisely the expression of such a last desperate struggle;
and in this present war the attack on Stalingrad is the expression of the
last desperate struggle of fascism itself. At this turning point in history,
too, many people in the world anti-fascist front have been deluded by the
ferocious appearance of fascism and have failed to discern its essence. For
forty-eight days there raged an unprecedentedly bitter battle, unparalleled
in the history of mankind--from August 23, when the entire German force crossed
the bend of the River Don and began the all-out attack on Stalingrad, through
September 15, when some German units broke into the industrial district in
the northwestern section of the city, and right up to October 9, when the
Soviet Information Bureau announced that the Red Army had breached the German
line of encirclement in that district. Ultimately this battle was won by
the Soviet forces. During those forty-eight days, the news of each setback
or triumph from that city gripped the hearts of countless millions of people,
now bringing them anxiety, now stirring them to elation. This battle is not
only the turning point of the Soviet-German war, or even of the present
anti-fascist world war, it is the turning point in the history of all mankind.
Throughout these forty-eight days, the people of the world watched Stalingrad
with even greater concern than they watched Moscow last October.

Until his victory on the western front, Hitler seems to have been cautious.
When he attacked Poland, when he attacked Norway, when he attacked Holland,
Belgium, and France, and when he attacked the Balkans, he concentrated all
his strength on one objective at a time, not daring to disperse his attention.
After his victory on the western front, he became dizzy with success and
attempted to defeat the Soviet Union in three months. He launched an offensive
against this huge and powerful socialist country along the whole front stretching
from Murmansk in the north to the Crimea in the south, and in so doing dispersed
his forces. The failure of his Moscow campaign last October marked the end
of the first stage of the Soviet-German war, and Hitler's first strategic
plan failed. The Red Army halted the German offensive last year and launched
a counteroffensive on all fronts in the winter, which constituted the second
stage of the Soviet-German war, with Hitler turning to retreat and the defensive.
In this period, after dismissing Brauchitsch, his commander-in-chief, and
taking over the command himself, he decided to abandon the plan for an all-out
offensive, combed Europe for all available forces and prepared a final offensive
which, though limited to the southern front, would, he imagined, strike at
the vitals of the Soviet Union. Because it was in the nature of a final offensive
on which the fate of fascism hung, Hitler concentrated the greatest possible
forces and even moved in part of his aircraft and tanks from the North African
battle front. With the German attack on Kerch and Sevastopol in May this
year, the war entered its third stage. Massing an army of over 1,500,000,
which was supported by the bulk of his air and tank forces, Hitler launched
an offensive of unprecedented fury on Stalingrad and the Caucasus. He endeavoured
to capture these two objectives at great speed for the twofold purpose of
cutting the Volga and seizing Baku, intending subsequently to drive against
Moscow to the north and break through to the Persian Gulf in the south; at
the same time he directed the Japanese fascists to mass their troops in Manchuria
in preparation for an attack on Siberia after the fall of Stalingrad. Hitler
vainly hoped to weaken the Soviet Union to such an extent that he would be
able to release the main forces of the German army from the Soviet theatre
of war for dealing with an Anglo-American attack on the western front, and
for seizing the resources of the Near East and effecting a junction with
the Japanese; at the same time this would allow the main forces of the Japanese
to be released from the north and, with their rear secure, to move west against
China and south against Britain and the United States. That was how Hitler
reckoned on winning victory for the fascist camp. But how did things turn
out in this stage? Hitler came up against the Soviet tactics which sealed
his fate. The Soviet Union adopted the policy of first luring the enemy in
deep and then putting up a stubborn resistance. In five months of fighting
the German army has failed either to penetrate to the Caucasian oil-fields
or to seize Stalingrad, so that Hitler has been forced to halt his troops
before high mountains and outside an impregnable city, unable to advance
and unable to retreat, suffering immense losses and getting into an impasse.
October is already here and winter is approaching; soon the third stage of
the war will end and the fourth stage will begin. Not one of Hitler's strategic
plans of attack against the Soviet Union has succeeded. In this period, bearing
in mind his failure in the summer of last year when his forces were divided,
Hitler concentrated his strength on the southern front. But as he still wanted
to achieve the twofold purpose of cutting the Volga in the east and seizing
the Caucasus in the south at a single stroke, he again divided his forces.
He did not recognize that his strength did not match his ambitions, and he
is now doomed--"when the carrying pole is not secured at both ends, the loads
slip off". As for the Soviet Union, the more she fights the stronger she
grows. Stalin's brilliant strategic direction has completely gained the
initiative and is everywhere drawing Hitler towards destruction. The fourth
stage of the war, beginning this winter, will mark the approach of Hitler's
doom.

Comparing Hitler's position in the first and third stages of the war, we
can see that he is on the threshold of final defeat. Both at Stalingrad and
in the Caucasus the Red Army has now in fact stopped the German offensive;
Hitler is now nearing exhaustion, having failed in his attacks on Stalingrad
and the Caucasus. The forces which he managed to assemble throughout the
winter, from last December to May of this year, have already been used up.
In less than a month winter will set in on the Soviet-German front, and Hitler
will have to turn hastily to the defensive. The whole belt west and south
of the Don is his most vulnerable area, and the Red Army will go over to
the counter-offensive there. This winter, goaded on by the fear of his impending
doom, Hitler will once again reorganize his forces. To meet the dangers on
both the eastern and western fronts, he may perhaps be able to scrape together
the remnants of his forces, equip them and form them into a few new divisions
and, in addition, he will turn for help to his three fascist partners, Italy,
Rumania and Hungary, and extort some more cannon-fodder from them. However,
he will have to face the enormous losses of a winter campaign in the east
and be ready to deal with the second front in the west, while Italy, Rumania
and Hungary, becoming pessimistic as they see that it is all up with Hitler,
will increasingly fall away from him. In short, after October 9 there is
only one road open to Hitler, the road to extinction.

The Red Army's defence of Stalingrad in these forty-eight days has a certain
similarity to the defence of Moscow last year. That is to say, Hitler's plan
for this year has been foiled just as was his plan for last year. The difference,
however, is that, although the Soviet people followed up their defence of
Moscow with a winter counter-offensive, they had yet to face the summer offensive
of the German army this year, partly because Germany and her European accomplices
still had some fight left in them and partly because Britain and the United
States delayed the opening of the second front. But now, following the battle
for the defence of Stalingrad, the situation will be totally different from
that of last year. On the one hand, the Soviet Union will launch a second
winter counteroffensive on a vast scale, Britain and the United States will
no longer be able to delay the opening of the second front (though the exact
date cannot yet be foretold), and the people of Europe will be ready to rise
up in response. On the other hand, Germany and her European accomplices no
longer have the strength to mount large-scale offensives, and Hitler will
have no alternative but to change his whole line of policy to the strategic
defensive. Once Hitler is compelled to go over to the strategic defensive,
the fate of fascism is as good as sealed. From its birth, a fascist state
like Hitler's builds its political and military life on taking the offensive,
and once its offensive stops its very life stops too. The Battle of Stalingrad
will stop the offensive of fascism and is therefore a decisive battle. It
is decisive for the whole world war.

There are three powerful foes confronting Hitler, the Soviet Union, Britain
and the United States, and the people in the German-occupied territories.
On the eastern front stands the Red Army, firm as a rock, whose
counter-offensives will continue through the whole of the second winter and
beyond; it is this force which will decide the outcome of the whole war and
the destiny of mankind. On the western front, even if Britain and the United
States continue their policy of looking on and stalling, the second front
will eventually be opened, when the time comes to belabour the slain tiger.
Then there is the internal front against Hitler, the great uprising of the
people which is brewing in Germany, in France and in other parts of Europe;
they will respond with a third front the moment the Soviet Union launches
an all-out counter-offensive and the guns roar on the second front. Thus,
an attack from three fronts will converge on Hitler--such is the great historical
process that will follow the Battle of Stalingrad.

Napoleon's political life ended at Waterloo, but the decisive turning point
was his defeat at Moscow. Hitler today is treading Napoleon's road, and it
is the Battle of Stalingrad that has sealed his doom.

These developments will have a direct impact on the Far East. The coming
year will not be propitious for Japanese fascism either. As time goes on
its headaches will grow, until it descends into its grave.

All those who take a pessimistic view of the world situation should change
their point of view.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Coalition Government







ON COALITION GOVERNMENT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON COALITION GOVERNMENT

April 24, 1945

[This was the political report made by Comrade Mao Tse-tung to the Seventh
National Congress of the Communist Party of China.]
  

I. THE FUNDAMENTAL DEMANDS OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE


Our congress is being held in the following circumstances. A new situation
has emerged after nearly eight years of resolute, heroic and indomitable
struggle waged by the Chinese people with countless sacrifices and amid untold
hardships against the Japanese aggressors; in the world as a whole, decisive
victory has been gained in the just and sacred war against the fascist aggressors
and the moment is near when the Japanese aggressors will be defeated by the
Chinese people in co-ordination with the allied countries. But China remains
disunited and is still confronted with a grave crisis. In these circumstances,
what ought we to do? Beyond all doubt, the urgent need is to unite
representatives of all political parties and groups and of people without
any party affiliation and establish a provisional democratic coalition government
for the purpose of instituting democratic reforms, surmounting the present
crisis, mobilizing and unifying all the anti-Japanese forces in the country
to fight in effective co-ordination with the allied countries for the defeat
of the Japanese aggressors, and thus enabling the Chinese people to liberate
themselves from the latter's clutches. After that it will be necessary to
convene a national assembly on a broad democratic basis and set up a formally
constituted democratic government, which will also be in the nature of a
coalition and will have a still wider representation of people from all parties
and groups or without any party affiliation, and which will lead the liberated
people of the whole country in building an independent, free, democratic,
united, prosperous and powerful new China. In short, we must take the line
of unity and democracy, defeat the aggressors and build a new China.

We believe that this alone can give expression to the fundamental demands
of the Chinese people. Therefore, my report will deal mainly with these demands.
Whether or not a democratic coalition government should be set up has become
a matter of deep concern for the Chinese people and for democratic public
opinion in the allied countries. My report will therefore lay particular
stress on elucidating this question.

In the eight years of the War of Resistance Against Japan, the Communist
Party of China has overcome many difficulties and achieved great successes,
but as things stand serious difficulties still confront our Party and people.
The present situation demands that our Party should work still more solidly
and intensively and that it should continue to overcome the difficulties
and strive to fulfil the fundamental demands of the Chinese people.

II. THE INTERNATIONAL AND THE DOMESTIC SITUATION


Can the Chinese people translate these basic demands into reality? This will
depend on the level of their political consciousness, their unity and their
efforts. At the same time, the present international and domestic situation
offers extremely favourable opportunities. If the Chinese people can make
good use of these opportunities and continue to fight on staunchly, vigorously
and persistently, they will undoubtedly defeat the aggressors and build a
new China. They must redouble their efforts in their struggle to accomplish
their sacred tasks.

What is the present international situation?

The present military situation is that the Soviet Army is attacking Berlin,
and the allied forces of Britain, the United States and France are attacking
the Hitlerite remnants in co-ordination with this offensive, while the Italian
people are launching uprisings. All this will eliminate Hitler once and for
all. After Hitler is wiped out, the defeat of the Japanese aggressors will
not be far distant. Contrary to the predictions of the Chinese and foreign
reactionaries, the forces of fascist aggression will undoubtedly be overthrown
and the people's democratic forces will undoubtedly triumph. The world will
unquestionably take the road of progress and not the road of reaction. Of
course, we must remain very much on the alert and reckon with the possibility
of certain temporary or perhaps even serious twists and turns in the course
of events; in many countries there are still strong reactionary forces which
begrudge the people at home and abroad their unity, progress and liberation.
Anyone who loses sight of this possibility will make political mistakes.
The general trend of history, however, is already clearly decided and will
not change. This is bad only for the fascists and for the reactionaries of
all countries who are in fact their helpers, but it is a blessing for the
people and for the organized democratic forces in all countries. The people,
and the people alone, are the motive force of world history. The Soviet-people
have built up great strength and become the main force in the defeat of fascism.
It is their efforts, plus those of the people in the other anti-fascist allied
countries, which are making the destruction of fascism possible. War has
educated the people ant it is the people who will win the war, win the peace
and win progress.

This new situation is very different from that in World War I. The Soviet
Union was not yet in existence then and the people were not politically awakened
as they are in many countries today. The two world wars represent two entirely
different epochs.

This does not mean that there will be no more struggles after the defeat
of the fascist aggressor countries, the end of World War II and the establishment
of international peace. The remnant forces of fascism which are still widespread
will certainly continue to make trouble, while within the camp now fighting
fascist aggression there are forces which oppose democracy and oppress other
nations, and they will continue to oppress the people in various countries
and in the colonies and semi-colonies. Therefore, after international peace
is established, there will still be numerous struggles over the greater part
of the world--between the anti-fascist masses and the remnants of fascism,
between democracy and anti-democracy, between national liberation and national
oppression. The people will achieve the most extensive victory only through
long and sustained efforts, when the remaining forces of fascism, the
anti-demactatic forces and all the imperialist forces are overcome. To be
sure, that day will not come very quickly or easily, but come it surely will.
Victory in the anti-fascist Second World War will pave the way for the victory
of the people in their post-war struggles. A stable and lasting peace will
be ensured only when victory is won in these struggles.

What is the present domestic situation?

China's protracted war has exacted and will continue to exact great sacrifices
from the Chinese people, but at the same time this very war has tempered
them. It has awakened and united the Chinese people to a greater degree than
all their great struggles in the last hundred years. The Chinese people face
not only a formidable national enemy but also powerful domestic reactionary
forces which are in fact helping the enemy; this is one side of the picture.
But the other side is that the Chinese people are not only more politically
conscious than ever before but have built powerful Liberated Areas and a
nation-wide democratic movement that is growing day by day. These constitute
favourable domestic conditions. If the defeats and setbacks in the Chinese
people's struggles of the last hundred years were due to the absence of certain
necessary international and domestic conditions, then today the situation
is different--all the necessary conditions are present. There is every
possibility of avoiding defeat and winning victory. We shall be victorious
if we can unite the whole people in resolute struggle and give them proper
leadership.

The Chinese people now have much greater confidence that they can unite to
defeat the aggressors and build a new China. The time has come for them to
conquer all difficulties and achieve their fundamental demands, their great
historic aspirations. Is there any doubt about it? I think not.

Such is the general international and domestic situation today. 

III. TWO LINES IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


THE KEY TO CHINA'S PROBLEMS


In speaking of the domestic situation, we have also to make a specific analysis
of China's War of Resistance.

China is one of the five biggest countries taking part in the war against
fascism and it is the principal country fighting the Japanese aggressors
on the continent of Asia. Not only have the Chinese people played a very
great role in the war against Japan, but they will also play a very great
role in safeguarding peace in the post-war world and the decisive one in
safeguarding peace in the East. China has made very great efforts to liberate
herself and to help the allied countries during the eight years of the War
of Resistance Against Japan. These efforts have been made primarily by the
people of China. Vast numbers of officers and men in China's armies have
fought and shed their blood at the front; the workers, peasants, intellectuals
and industrialists of China have worked hard in the rear; the Chinese overseas
have made donations to support the war; and all the anti-Japanese political
parties, except for such of their members as are opposed to the people, have
played their part in the war. In short, with their blood and sweat, the Chinese
people have heroically fought the Japanese aggressors for eight long years.
But for a number of years the Chinese reactionaries have been spreading rumours
and misleading public opinion in order to prevent the world from knowing
the truth about the role played by the Chinese people in the war. Besides,
there has as yet been no comprehensive summing-up of the varied experience
gained by China during those eight years of war. Therefore, this congress
should make a proper summing-up of all this experience in order to educate
the people and provide our Party with a basis for the formulation of policy.

When it comes to such summing up, it is plain to all that there are two different
guiding lines in China. One leads to the defeat of the Japanese aggressors,
while the other not only makes their defeat impossible but in some respects
actually helps them and undermines our War of Resistance.

The Kuomintang government's policy of passive resistance to Japan and its
reactionary domestic policy of active repression of the people have resulted
in military setbacks, enormous territorial losses, financial and economic
crisis, oppression and hardship for the people and the disruption of national
unity. This reactionary policy has been an obstruction to mobilizing and
uniting all the anti-Japanese forces of the Chinese people for the effective
prosecution of the war, and has hindered the awakening and unity of the people.
Yet this political awakening and this unity have never ceased to develop,
but have moved forward along a tortuous course, under the twofold repression
of the Japanese aggressors and the Kuomintang government. Clearly, there
have been two lines in China for a long time, the Kuomintang government's
line of oppression of the people and of passive resistance, and the Chinese
people's line of enhancing their own consciousness and unity for the waging
of a people's war. Herein lies the key to all China's problems.

HISTORY FOLLOWS A TORTUOUS COURSE


To help people understand why this question of the two lines is the key to
all of China's problems, it is necessary to trace the history of our War
of Resistance Against Japan.

The Chinese people's War of Resistance has followed a tortuous course. It
began as far back as 1931. On September 18 of that year, the Japanese aggressors
occupied Shenyang, and within a few months they seized the three northeastern
provinces. The Kuomintang government adopted a policy of non-resistance.
But against the will of the Kuomintang government and led or assisted by
the Chinese Communist Party, the people and a patriotic section of the troops
of these provinces organized the Anti-Japanese Volunteers and the Anti-Japanese
United Army and engaged in heroic guerrilla warfare. At one time this heroic
guerrilla warfare grew to great dimensions and, despite many difficulties
and setbacks, it has never been put down by the enemy. When the Japanese
aggressors attacked Shanghai in 1932, a group of patriots in the Kuomintang
once again defied the will of the Kuomintang government and led the 19th
Route Army in resisting the Japanese aggressors. In 1933 the Japanese aggressors
invaded Jehol and Chahar Provinces, and for the third time a group of patriots
in the Kuomintang defied the will of the Kuomintang government and co-operated
with the Communist Party in organizing the Anti-Japanese Allied Army to resist
the enemy. But in all this fighting against Japan support came entirely from
the Chinese people, the Chinese Communist Party, other democratic groups
and the patriotic Chinese overseas, while the Kuomintang government with
its policy of non-resistance contributed nothing. On the contrary, the
anti-Japanese actions in Shanghai and Chahar were both wrecked by the Kuomintang
government itself. In 1933 it also destroyed the people's government which
had been established in Fukien by the 19th Route Army.

Why did the Kuomintang government of that day adopt a policy of non-resistance?
The main reason was that it had wrecked Kuomintang-Communist co-operation
and the unity of the Chinese people in 1927.

In 1924 Dr. Sun Yat-sen, accepting the proposals of the Chinese Communist
Party, called the First National Congress of the Kuomintang in which Communists
took part, adopted the Three Great Policies of alliance with Russia, co-operation
with the Communist Party and assistance to the peasants and workers, established
the Whampoa Military Academy and formed the national united front of the
Kuomintang, the Communist Party and all sections of the people. As a result,
the reactionary forces in Kwangtung Province were destroyed in 1924-25, the
triumphant Northern Expedition was carried out during 1926-27, most of the
areas along the Yangtse and Yellow Rivers were taken over, the Northern warlord
government was defeated, and the people's struggle for liberation was unfolded
on a scale never before seen in Chinese history. But at a critical moment
in the progress of the Northern Expedition, in the late spring and early
summer of 1927, the treacherous and reactionary policies of "party purge"
and massacre adopted by the Kuomintang authorities wrecked this national
united front--the united front of the Kuomintang, the Communist Party and
all sections of the people, which embodied the Chinese people's cause of
liberation--and all its revolutionary policies. Yesterday's allies, the Chinese
Communist Party and the Chinese people, were now regarded as enemies, and
yesterday's enemies, the imperialists and feudalists, were now regarded as
allies. So it came about that a sudden attack was perfidiously launched against
the Chinese Communist Party and the people, and the great, dynamic and vigorous
revolution was crushed. Thereupon unity was replaced by civil war, democracy
by dictatorship, and a China full of brightness by a China covered in darkness.
But the Chinese Communist Party and the Chinese people were neither cowed
nor conquered nor exterminated. They picked themselves up, wiped off the
blood, buried their fallen comrades and went into battle again. Holding high
the great standard of revolution, they rose in armed resistance and over
a vast territory in China they set up people's governments, carried out land
reform, built up a people's army--the Chinese Red Army-- and preserved and
expanded the revolutionary forces of the Chinese people. Dr. Sun Yat-sen's
revolutionary Three People's Principles, which the Kuomintang reactionaries
had discarded, were carried forward by the people, the Communist Party and
other democrats.

After the invasion of the three northeastern provinces by the Japanese
aggressors, the Chinese Communist Party in 1933, proposed to all the Kuomintang
forces then attacking the revolutionary base areas and the Red Army that
an armistice agreement be concluded to facilitate united resistance to Japan;
this proposal was made with three conditions--that the attacks should stop,
that the people should be granted democratic rights, and that the people
should be armed. But the Kuomintang authorities rejected it.

From then on the Kuomintang government's policy of civil war became increasingly
vicious, while the voice of the Chinese people grow increasingly powerful
in its demand for an end to civil war and for united resistance to Japan.
All kinds of popular patriotic organizations were formed in Shanghai and
many other places. Between 1934 and 1936, under the leadership of the Central
Committee of our Party, the main forces of the Red Army north and south of
the Yangtse River went through untold hardships and moved to northwestern
China, joining forces with the Red Army units there. It was in those two
years that the Chinese Communist Party decided on, and carried out, a new
and comprehensive political line in keeping with the new situation--the line
of the National United Front Against Japan, with united resistance to Japan
and the establishment of a new-democratic republic as the goal of struggle.
On December 9,1935, the student masses in Peiping launched a heroic patriotic
movement under our Party's leadership; they formed the Chinese National
Liberation Vanguard Corps [1] and spread this movement
to all the big cities in China. On December 12, 1936, two patriotic Kuomintang
groups which favoured resistance to Japan, the Northeastern Army and the
17th Route Army, together staged the famous Sian Incident in courageous
opposition to the reactionary Kuomintang policy of compromising with Japan
and massacring the people at home. Other patriots in the Kuomintang were
likewise dissatisfied with the policy of the Kuomintang authorities at the
time. These were the circumstances in which the Kuomintang authorities were
forced to abandon their policy of civil war and to acknowledge the demands
of the people. The peaceful settlement of the Sian Incident became the turning
point; under the new circumstances internal co-operation took shape and the
nationwide War of Resistance Against Japan began. In May 1937, shortly before
the Lukouchiao Incident, [2] our Party called the
historic national conference at which the new political line followed by
the Central Committee of the Party since 1935 was endorsed.

From the Lukouchiao Incident of July 7, 1937 to the fall of Wuhan in October
1938, the Kuomintang government was relatively active in the war against
Japan. During that period the large-scale Japanese attacks and the mounting
patriotic indignation of the whole people compelled the Kuomintang government
to make resistance to the Japanese aggressors the centre of gravity of its
policy, which made it easier to bring about an upsurge in the struggle of
the whole army and people against Japan, and for a time there was a new and
dynamic atmosphere. All the people, including the Communists and other democrats,
earnestly hoped that the Kuomintang government would seize the opportunity,
at a time when the nation was in peril and the people were filled with
enthusiasm, to institute democratic reforms and put Dr. Sun Yat-sen's
revolutionary Three People's Principles into practice. But their hopes came
to nought. Even in those two years of relatively active resistance, the
Kuomintang authorities continued to oppose the mobilization of the masses
for a people's war and to place restrictions on the people's spontaneous
efforts to unite for anti-Japanese and democratic action. While the Kuomintang
government had somewhat changed its previous attitude to the Chinese Communist
Party and the other anti-Japanese parties, it continued to deny them equal
status and restrict their activities in many ways. Patriotic political prisoners
were still kept in jail in large numbers. Above all, the Kuomintang government
still maintained the oligarchic dictatorship it had established after launching
the civil war in 1927, so that it was impossible to set up a democratic coalition
government representing the unanimous will of the nation.

At the very beginning of this period we Communists pointed out that there
were two alternative lines for China's war of Resistance Against Japan, an
all-embracing people's war leading to victory, or a partial war in which
the people remained oppressed, leading to defeat. We also pointed out that
the war would be protracted and would inevitably involve many obstacles and
hardships, but that by their exertions the Chinese people were sure to win
the final victory.
THE PEOPLE'S WAR


During the same period the main forces of the Communist-led Red Army, which
had moved to northwestern China, were redesignated as the Eighth Route Army
of the Chinese National Revolutionary Army, while the Chinese Red Army's
guerrilla units, which had remained in various places on both sides of the
Yangtse River, were redesignated as the New Fourth Army of the Chinese National
Revolutionary Army. The former went to fight on the northern China front
and the latter on the central China front. During the civil war period, the
Chinese Red Army, which had preserved and developed the democratic tradition
of the Whampoa Military Academy and of the National Revolutionary Army of
the Northern Expedition days, had at one time grown to several hundred thousand
men. But by the beginning of the War of Resistance Against Japan it had been
reduced to a few tens of thousands as a result of the ruthless destruction
wrought in our southern base areas by the Kuomintang government, our losses
during the Long March, and other causes. Consequently there were some who
looked down on this army and thought that the main reliance for resistance
to Japan should be placed on the Kuomintang. But the people are the best
judges. The people knew that despite their small number at the time, the
Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies were of high quality, that they alone
could wage a real people's war and that boundless prospects would open up
before them once they reached the anti-Japanese fronts and joined with the
broad masses there. And the people were right. By now, as I make this report,
our army has already expanded to 910,000 men, and the number of our rural
militia, who are not withdrawn from normal productive work, has grown to
more than 2,200,000. Despite the fact that our regular army is still numerically
much smaller than that of the Kuomintang (counting the Kuomintang units under
local as well as central control), it has already become the main force in
China's War of Resistance, judging by the number of Japanese and puppet forces
it is engaging and the extent of its battle fronts, by its combat effectiveness,
by the mass support it enjoys in its operations, and by its political quality,
cohesion and unity.

This army is powerful because all its members have a discipline based on
political consciousness; they have come together and they fight not for the
private interests of a few individuals or a narrow clique, but for the interests
of the broad masses and of the whole nation. The sole purpose of this army
is to stand firmly with the Chinese people and to serve them whole-heartedly.

Guided by this purpose, this army has an indomitable spirit and is determined
to vanquish all enemies and never to yield. No matter what the difficulties
and hardships, so long as a single man remains, he will fight on.

Guided by this purpose, this army has achieved remarkable unity in its own
ranks and with those outside its ranks. Internally, there is unity between
officers and men, between the higher and lower ranks, and between military
work, political work and rear service work, and externally, there is unity
between the army and the people, between the army and government organizations,
and between our army and the friendly armies. It is imperative to overcome
anything that impairs this unity.

Guided by this purpose, this army has a correct policy for winning over enemy
officers and men and for dealing with prisoners of war. Without exception
all members of the enemy forces who surrender, who come over to our side
or who, after laying down their arms, wish to join in fighting the common
foe, are welcomed and given proper education. It is forbidden to kill, maltreat
or insult any prisoner of war.

Guided by this purpose, this army has built up a system of strategy and tactics
which is essential for the people's war. It is skilled in flexible guerrilla
warfare conducted in accordance with the changing concrete conditions and
is also skilled in mobile warfare.

Guided by this purpose, this army has built up a system of political work
which is essential for the people's war and is aimed at promoting unity in
its own ranks, unity with the friendly armies and unity with the people,
and at disintegrating the enemy forces and ensuring victory in battle.

Guided by this purpose, the entire army, operating under conditions of guerrilla
warfare, is able to utilize, and has in fact utilized, the intervals between
battles and between training periods to produce grain and other necessities,
thus becoming wholly, half or at least partly self-supporting, so that economic
difficulties are overcome, living conditions improved and the burden on the
people lightened. Every possibility has been exploited to establish a number
of small-scale armament works in various military base areas.

Furthermore, this army is powerful because it has the people's self-defence
corps and the militia--the vast armed organizations of the masses--fighting
in co-ordination with it. In the Liberated Areas of China all men and women,
from youth to middle age, are organized in the people's anti-Japanese
self-defence corps on a voluntary and democratic basis and without giving
up their work in production. The cream of the self-defence corps, except
for those who join the army or the guerrilla units, is brought into the militia.
Without the cooperation of these armed forces of the masses it would be
impossible to defeat the enemy.

Finally, this army is powerful because of its division into two parts, the
main forces and the regional forces, with the former available for operations
in any region whenever necessary and the latter concentrating on defending
their own localities and attacking the enemy there in co-operation with the
local militia and the self-defence corps. This division of labour has won
the whole-hearted support of the people. Without this correct division of
labour--if, for example, attention were paid only to the role of the main
forces while that of the regional forces were neglected--it would likewise
be impossible to defeat the enemy in the conditions obtaining in China's
Liberated Areas. Under the regional forces, numerous armed working teams
have been organized, which are well trained and hence better qualified for
military, political and mass work; they penetrate into the rearmost areas
behind the enemy lines, strike at the enemy and arouse the masses to
anti-Japanese struggle, thus giving support to the frontal military operations
of the various Liberated Areas. In all this they have achieved great success.

Under the leadership of their democratic governments, all the anti-Japanese
people in the Liberated Areas of China are called upon to join organizations
of workers, peasants, youth and women, and cultural, professional and other
organizations, which will wholeheartedly perform various tasks in support
of the armed forces. Those tasks are not limited to rallying the people to
join the army, transporting grain for it, caring for soldiers' families and
helping the troops in meeting their material needs. They also include mobilizing
the guerrilla units, militia and self-defence corps to make widespread raids
and lay land mines against the enemy, gather intelligence about him, comb
out traitors and spies, transport and protect the wounded and take direct
part in the army's operations. At the same time, the people in all the Liberated
Areas are enthusiastically taking up various kinds of political, economic,
cultural and health work. The most important thing in this connection is
to mobilize everybody for the production of grain and other necessities and
to ensure that all government institutions and schools, except in special
cases, devote their free time to production for their own support in order
to supplement the self-suffidency production campaigns of the army and the
people and thus help to create a great upsurge of production to sustain the
protracted War of Resistance. In China's Liberated Areas, the enemy has wrought
great havoc, and floods, droughts and damage by insect pests have been frequent.
However, the democratic governments there have been leading the people in
overcoming these difficulties in an organized way, and unprecedented results
have been achieved by the great mass campaigns for pest extermination, flood
control and disaster relief, thus making it possible to persevere in the
protracted War of Resistance. In a word, everything for the front, everything
for the defeat of the Japanese aggressors and for the liberation of the Chinese
people--this is the general slogan, the general policy for the whole army
and the whole people in the Liberated Areas of China.

Such is a real people's war. Only by waging such a people's war can we defeat
the national enemy. The Kuomintang has failed precisely because of its desperate
opposition to a people's war.

Once it is equipped with modern weapons, the army of China's Liberated Areas
will become still more powerful and will be able to accomplish the final
defeat of the Japanese aggressors.
TWO BATTLE FRONTS


From the very beginning there have been two fronts in China's War of Resistance,
the Kuomintang front and the front of the Liberated Areas.

After the fall of Wuhan in October 1938, the Japanese aggressors stopped
their strategic offensive against the Kuomintang front and gradually shifted
their main forces to the front of the Liberated Areas; at the same time,
taking advantage of the defeatist sentiments of the Kuomintang government,
they declared their willingness to arrive at a compromise peace with it,
and, adopting a policy designed to deceive the Chinese nation, they induced
the traitor Wang Ching-wei to leave Chungking and establish a puppet government
in Nanking. The Kuomintang government then began to change its policy, gradually
shifting the emphasis from resistance to Japan to opposition to the Communist
Party and the people. This shift first made itself apparent in the military
sphere. To conserve its own military strength, the Kuomintang government
adopted the policy of passive resistance to Japan; it threw the burden of
fighting onto the front of the Liberated Areas by letting the Japanese invaders
attack the Liberated Areas in force, while itself "sitting on top of the
mountain to watch the tigers fight".

In 1939, the Kuomintang government adopted the reactionary "Measures for
Restricting the Activities of Alien Parties" and completely deprived the
people and the anti-Japanese parties of whatever rights they had won during
the early period of the War of Resistance. From then on, in the Kuomintang
areas, all the democratic parties, and first and foremost the Communist Party
of China, have been driven underground by the Kuomintang government. In every
province in those areas the prisons and concentration camps are packed with
Communists, young patriots and other fighters for democracy. In the five
years from 1939 to the autumn of 1943, the Kuomintang government launched
three anti-Communist onslaughts [3] to split national
unity, and thus created serious danger of civil war. It was in this period
that the "disbanding" of the New Fourth Army was ordered and more than nine
thousand of its troops in southern Anhwei were annihilated--an event which
shocked the world. To this very moment the attacks by Kuomintang troops on
the forces of the Liberated Areas have not ceased, nor is there any sign
that they will. At the same time, the Kuomintang reactionaries have been
pouring out slanders and calumnies of all sorts. It is they who have fabricated
such labels and expressions as "traitor party", "traitor army", "traitor
areas", and "sabotaging the War of Resistance and endangering the state",
for the purpose of maligning the Communist Party, the Eighth Route and New
Fourth Armies and the Liberated Areas. To meet the crisis, on July 7, 1939
the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party issued a manifesto setting
forth the following slogans, "Persist in resistance and oppose capitulation!
Persist in unity and oppose a split! Persist in progress and oppose
retrogressions!" In those five years, our Party, acting on these timely slogans,
vigorously repulsed the three reactionary and anti-popular anti-Communist
onslaughts and overcame the crisis on each occasion.

There was actually no serious fighting on the Kuomintang front during those
years. The sword-edge of Japanese aggression was mainly directed against
the Liberated Areas. By 1943, the army and the people of the Liberated Areas
were pinning down 64 per cent of the Japanese forces invading China and 95
per cent of the puppet troops, while the Kuomintang front faced only 36 per
cent of the former and 5 per cent of the latter.

In 1944 the Japanese aggressors launched operations to force China's north-south
trunk railways open for through traffic;[4]
panic-stricken, the Kuomintang forces were totally incapable of offering
resistance. Within a few months extensive areas in Honan, Hunan, Kwangsi
and Kwangtung Provinces had fallen into the enemy's hands. It was not until
then that some change took place in the proportion of enemy forces engaged
on the two fronts. Even so, at the moment of making this report, of the 40
divisions comprising 580,000 Japanese soldiers in China (not counting those
in the three northeastern provinces), 22 1/2 divisions, comprising 320,000
men or 56 per cent of the total forces, are engaged on the front of the Liberated
Areas, and no more than 17 1/2 divisions, comprising 260,000 men or 44 per
cent, are engaged on the Kuomintang front. As for the puppet troops engaged
on the two fronts, the ratio has not changed at all.

It should also be pointed out that the puppet troops, numbering more than
800,000 men (in both the regular and the local forces), are chiefly composed
either of units that surrendered under their Kuomintang commanders or of
units organized by the Kuomintang officers after their surrender. The Kuomintang
reactionaries have furnished these puppet troops in advance with a false
and traitorous theory, namely, "saving the nation by a devious path", and
have given them moral and organizational support since their surrender, directing
them to attack the Chinese people's Liberated Areas in co-ordination with
the Japanese aggressors. These reactionaries have also mustered large forces,
totalling no less than 797,000 men, to blockade and attack the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and other Liberated Areas. This grave
situation is being kept from the knowledge of many Chinese and foreigners
by the Kuomintang government's policy of suppressing news.
CHINA'S LIBERATED AREAS


China's Liberated Areas, led by the Communist Party, now have a population
of 95,500,000. They exist from Inner Mongolia in the north to Hainan Island
in the south; almost everywhere the enemy goes, he finds the Eighth Route
Army, the New Fourth Army or some other people's forces in operation. This
vast liberated territory consists of nineteen major Liberated Areas, covering
greater or lesser parts of the provinces of Liaoning, Jehol, Chahar, Suiyuan,
Shensi, Kansu, Ningsia, Shansi, Hopei, Honan, Shantung, Kiangsu, Chekiang,
Anhwei, Kiangsi, Hupeh, Hunan, Kwangtung and Fukien. Yenan is the centre
from which guidance is given to all those Liberated Areas. The
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region west of the Yellow River, with a population
of only 1,500,000, is but one of the nineteen areas forming this vast liberated
part of China and, indeed, the smallest in population except for one in eastern
Chekiang Province and another on Hainan Island. Unaware of this, some people
think China's liberated territory consists chiefly of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region. This misconception arises from the Kuomintang government's
blockade. In every one of the Liberated Areas, all the requisite policies
of the Anti-Japanese National United Front have been put into practice, and
popularly elected governments, that is, local coalition governments, have
been or are being set up, in which Communists and representative personalities
of other anti-Japanese parties or without any party affiliation are co-operating.
The entire strength of the people has been mobilized in the Liberated Areas.
As a result, despite the formidable pressure of the enemy, the Kuomintang's
military blockade and attacks and the complete absence of outside help, China's
Liberated Areas have stood firm and have grown steadily, reducing the territory
occupied by the enemy and extending their own; they have become the model
for a democratic China and the main force driving out the Japanese aggressors
and liberating the Chinese people in military co-operation with the allied
countries. The armed forces of China's Liberated Areas, the Eighth Route
Army, the New Fourth Army and the other armed forces of the people, have
not only set a heroic example in fighting Japan, but have also set an example
in carrying out the democratic policies of the Anti-Japanese National United
Front. The declaration issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of China on September 22, 1937 affirming that "Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Three People's
Principles being what China needs today, our Party is ready to fight for
their complete realization", has been completely carried into effect in China's
Liberated Areas.
THE KUOMINTANG AREAS


Persisting in its dictatorial rule, the chief ruling clique of the Kuomintang
has followed a policy of passive resistance to Japan and a domestic policy
directed against the people. In consequence, its armed forces have shrunk
to less than half their original size and most of them have virtually lost
their combat effectiveness; there is a profound rift between this clique
and the broad masses and a grave crisis of mass impoverishment, seething
discontent and widespread revolt; not only has its role in the war been sharply
reduced, but it has also become an obstacle to the mobilization and unity
of all the anti-Japanese forces of the Chinese people.

Why has such a grave situation arisen under the leadership of the Kuomintang's
chief ruling clique? It has arisen because that clique represents the interests
of China's big landlords, big bankers and big compradors. The handful of
people forming this reactionary stratum monopolize all the important military,
political, economic and cultural organizations under the Kuomintang government.
They place the safeguarding of their own interests above resistance to Japan.
They too say "the nation above all", but their actions do not accord with
the demands of the great majority of the nation. They too say "the state
above all", but what they mean is the feudal-fascist dictatorship of the
big landlords, big bankers and big compradors, and not a democratic state
of the people. Therefore they are afraid of the rise of the people, afraid
of the democratic movement and afraid of full mass mobilization for war against
Japan. Herein lies the root cause of their policy of passive resistance to
Japan and their reactionary domestic policy against the people, democracy
and the Communist Party. They have a double-faced policy in everything. For
instance, on the one hand they are resisting Japan but on the other they
are pursuing a passive war policy, and moreover they are the constant target
of Japanese inducements to surrender. They talk about developing China's
economy, but in fact they build up their own bureaucrat-capital, i.e., the
capital of the big landlords, bankers and compradors, and monopolize the
lifelines of China's economy, ruthlessly oppressing the peasants, the workers,
the petty bourgeoisie and the non-monopoly bourgeoisie. They talk about putting
"democracy" into practice and "handing state power back to the people", yet
they ruthlessly suppress the people's movement for democracy and refuse to
introduce the mildest democratic reform. They say that "the Communist problem
is a political one and should be solved politically", yet they ruthlessly
suppress the Chinese Communist Party militarily, politically and economically,
regarding it as "enemy No. 1" and the Japanese aggressors as only "enemy
No. 2", and day in and day out they busy themselves with preparations for
a civil war and plots to annihilate the Communist Party. They say they will
establish a "modern state", yet they work desperately to maintain the
feudal-fascist dictatorship of the big landlords, bankers and compradors.
While maintaining formal diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, they
are in fact hostile to it. They chant "Asia before Europe" in chorus with
the U.S. isolationists in order to prolong the life of fascist Germany, which
amounts to prolonging the life of fascists everywhere, including their own
fascist rule over the Chinese people, yet at the same time they indulge in
diplomatic manoeuvres, masquerading as anti-fascist heroes. If you look for
the root of these contradictory double-faced policies, you will find they
all stem from the social stratum of the big landlords, bankers and compradors.

Nevertheless, the Kuomintang is not a homogeneous political party. Though
it is controlled and led by the reactionary clique representing the stratum
of the big landlords, bankers and compradors, it must not be entirely identified
with this clique. Some Kuomintang leaders do not belong to this clique by
which they are even slighted, pushed aside or attacked. Many of its cadres
and rank and file and many members of the Three People's Principles Youth
League are dissatisfied with the leadership of this clique, and some even
oppose it. The same is true of all the Kuomintang armies, government organs
and economic and cultural institutions which this reactionary clique controls.
There are quite a number of democratic elements in all of them. Moreover,
the reactionary clique itself, divided as it is into several contending factions,
is not a close-knit body. Undoubtedly it is wrong to regard the Kuomintang
as a homogeneous body of reactionaries.
A CONTRAST


The Chinese people have come to see the sharp contrast between the Liberated
Areas and the Kuomintang areas.

Are not the facts clear enough? Here are two lines, the line of a people's
war and the line of passive resistance, which is against a people's war;
one leads to victory even in the difficult conditions in China's Liberated
Areas with their total lack of outside aid, and the other leads to defeat
even in the extremely favourable conditions in the Kuomintang areas with
foreign aid available.

The Kuomintang government attributes its failures to lack of arms.

Yet one may ask, which of the two are short of arms, the Kuomintang troops
or the troops of the Liberated Areas? Of all China's forces, those of the
Liberated Areas lack arms most acutely, their only weapons being those they
capture from the enemy or manufacture under the most adverse conditions.

Is it not true that the forces directly under the Kuomintang central government
are far better armed than the provincial troops? Yet in combat effectiveness
most of the central forces are inferior to the provincial troops.

The Kuomintang commands vast reserves of manpower, yet its wrong recruiting
policy makes manpower replenishment very difficult. Though cut off from each
other by the enemy and engaged in constant fighting, China's Liberated Areas
are able to mobilize inexhaustible manpower because the militia and self-defence
corps system, which is well-adapted to the needs of the people, is applied
everywhere, and because misuse and waste of manpower are avoided.

Although the Kuomintang controls vast areas abounding in grain and the people
supply it with 70-100 million tan annually, its army is always short
of food and its soldiers are emaciated because the greater part of the grain
is embezzled by those through whose hands it passes. But although most of
China's Liberated Areas, which are located in the enemy rear, have been
devastated by the enemy's policy of "burn all, kill all, loot all", and although
some regions like northern Shensi are very arid, we have successfully solved
the grain problem through our own efforts by increasing agricultural production.

The Kuomintang areas are facing a very grave economic crisis; most industries
are bankrupt, and even such necessities as cloth have to be imported from
the United States. But China's Liberated Areas are able to meet their own
needs in cloth and other necessities through the development of industry.

In the Kuomintang areas, the workers, peasants, shop assistants, government
employees, intellectuals and cultural workers live in extreme misery. In
the Liberated Areas all the people have food, clothing and work.

It is characteristic of the Kuomintang areas that, exploiting the national
crisis for profiteering purposes, officials have concurrently become traders
and habitual grafters without any sense of shame or decency. It is characteristic
of China's Liberated Areas that, setting an example of plain living and hard
work, the cadres take part in production in addition to their regular duties;
honesty is held in high esteem while graft is strictly prohibited.

In the Kuomintang areas the people have no freedom at all. In China's Liberated
Areas the people have full freedom.

Who is to blame for all the anomalies which confront the Kuomintang rulers?
Are others to blame, or they themselves? Are foreign countries to blame for
not giving them enough aid, or are the Kuomintang government's dictatorial
rule, corruption and incompetence to blame? Isn't the answer obvious?
WHO IS "SABOTAGING THE WAR OF RESISTANCE AND ENDANGERING THE
  STATE"?


In the light of the indisputable evidence, is it not the Kuomintang government
itself that has been sabotaging the Chinese people's War of Resistance and
endangering our country? For fully ten years that government devoted itself
wholly to civil war, turning the edge of its sword against the people while
utterly neglecting national defence, and by its policy of non-resistance
it gave away the four northeastern provinces. When the Japanese aggressors
drove south of the Great Wall, it put up a flurry of resistance and then
retreated from Lukouchiao all the way to the province of Kweichow. Yet the
Kuomintang alleges that "the Communist Party is sabotaging the War of Resistance
and endangering the state" (see resolutions of the Eleventh Plenary Session
of the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang, held in September 1943).
Its only evidence is that the Communist Party has united with all sections
of the people to create the Liberated Areas which are heroically resisting
Japan. The logic of the Kuomintang is so different from that of the Chinese
people that the failure to arrive at a common language on many problems is
not to be wondered at.

Here are two questions.

First, what exactly has made the Kuomintang government abandon so vast and
so well populated a territory, stretching from Heilungkiang Province to
Lukouchiao and from Lukonchiao to Kweichow? Can it be anything other than
its policy first of non-resistance and then of passive resistance to Japan,
and its domestic policy of opposing the people?

Second, what exactly has enabled China's Liberated Areas to smash the ruthless
and prolonged attacks of the Japanese and puppet forces, to recover such
vast territories and liberate such an immense population from the grip of
the national enemy? Can it be anything other than our correct line, the line
of a people's war?
"DISOBEDIENCE TO GOVERNMENTAL AND MILITARY ORDERS"


The Kuomintang government also constantly accuses the Chinese Communist Party
of "disobedience to governmental and military orders". All we need say is
that fortunately the Chinese Communists, sharing the common sense of the
Chinese people, have not obeyed such "governmental and military orders" as
in fact would have meant handing over to the Japanese aggressors the Liberated
Areas which the Chinese people had recaptured from them amid great difficulties
and hardships. Some examples are the "Measures for Restricting the Activities
of Alien Parties" in 1939, the orders for the "disbandment of the New Fourth
Army" and for its "withdrawal north of the old course of the Yellow River"
in 1941, the order for the "dissolution of the Communist Party of China"
in 1943, the order for us to "disband all the troops except for ten divisions
within a definite time limit" in 1944, and the proposal which the Kuomintang
government called "a concession" in the recent talks with us and which would
require us to hand over our armed forces and local governments in exchange
for a few posts in its dictatorial government, but without the formation
of a coalition government. Fortunately we have not submitted to this sort
of thing and have thus preserved an undefiled stretch of soil and a heroic
anti-Japanese army for the Chinese people. Should not the Chinese people
congratulate themselves on such "disobedience"? Does not the Kuomintang
government feel it has done enough after presenting the Japanese aggressors
with the vast populated area from Heilungklang to Kweichow through its own
fascist government decrees and defeatist military orders? The Japanese aggressors
and the reactionaries welcome these "governmental and military orders", but
can such things be welcomed by any upright Chinese patriot? Unless there
is a coalition government, not in form but in fact, not a fascist dictatorship
but a democratic government, is it conceivable that the Chinese people would
permit the Chinese Communists to hand over the Liberated Areas where the
people have won freedom as well as the people's armies that have performed
signal service in the War of Resistance to the present Kuomintang government,
which is defeatist, fascist and dictatorial? Without the Liberated Areas
and the people's army, could the anti-Japanese cause of the Chinese people
be what it is today? And can one possibly conceive what the future of the
Chinese nation would be?
THE DANGER OF CIVIL WAR


To this day the chief ruling clique in the Kuomintang is persisting in its
reactionary policy of dictatorship and civil war. There are many signs that
it has long been making, and is now stepping up, preparations to unleash
civil war as soon as the forces of a certain allied country have cleared
a considerable part of the Chinese mainland of the Japanese aggressors. It
also hopes that the generals of certain allied countries will do the same
job in China as the British General Scobie [5]
has been doing in Greece. It applauds the butchery perpetrated by Scobie
and the reactionary Greek government. It is planning to plunge China once
again into the maelstrom of civil war, as in 1927-37. Behind the smokescreen
of "convening the national assembly" and "political settlement", it is secretly
preparing civil war. If our fellow-countrymen fail to take note, fail to
expose its schemes and put a stop to these preparations, then one fine morning
they will hear the cannonade of civil war.
NEGOTIATIONS


After obtaining the consent of other democratic parties, the Communist Party
of China put forward the demand at the People's Political Council in September
1944 that the Kuomintang one-party dictatorship be abolished immediately
and a democratic coalition government be formed for the purpose of defeating
the Japanese aggressors, building a new China and preventing civil war. This
was undoubtedly a timely demand, and in the space of a few months it has
won the warm response of the broad masses.

We have had many rounds of negotiations with the Kuomintang government on
the question of abolishing the one-party dictatorship, forming a coalition
government and instituting essential democratic reforms, but it has rejected
all our proposals. Not only is the Kuomintang unwilling to abolish the one-party
dictatorship and form a coalition government, it is unwilling to introduce
a single one of the urgently needed democratic reforms, such as the abolition
of the secret police, the annulment of the reactionary laws and decrees that
suppress the people's freedom, the release of political prisoners, recognition
of the legal status of the political parties, recognition of the Liberated
Areas and the withdrawal of the armies blockading and attacking them.
Consequently political relations in China have become very strained.
TWO PROSPECTS


In the light of the situation as a whole and of the above analysis of the
actual international and domestic state of affairs, I would ask everyone
here to be on the alert and not to expect that our cause will proceed smoothly
and easily. No, it will not. Actually there are two possibilities, two prospects,
one good and one bad. One possibility or prospect is that the fascist
dictatorship will continue and democratic reforms will not be allowed, that
the stress will be on opposing the people instead of the Japanese aggressors,
and even that civil war may break out after the Japanese aggressors are defeated,
dragging China back into her old miserable state, without independence, freedom,
democracy, unity, prosperity or strength. This possibility or prospect is
still there, and it has not ceased to exist or has not automatically vanished
simply because of the favourable international situation and the increased
political consciousness and organized strength of our people. Those who hope
that this possibility or prospect will become a reality in China are the
reactionary clique within the Kuomintang at home and the imperialist-minded
reactionaries abroad. This is one aspect which must be taken into account.

But there is another aspect and, again in the light of the situation as a
whole and the foregoing analysis of the international and domestic state
of affairs, we can gain added confidence and courage in striving for the
second possibility or prospect. It is that of overcoming all difficulties,
uniting the whole people, abolishing the Kuomintang's fascist dictatorship,
carrying out democratic reforms, consolidating and expanding the anti-Japanese
forces, thoroughly defeating the Japanese aggressors and building an independent,
free, democratic, united, prosperous and powerful new China. Those who hope
that this possibility or prospect will become a reality in China are the
masses, the Communist Party and the other democratic parties at home, and
all the nations that treat us as equals and the progressives and the masses
abroad.

We know full well that we Communists together with the whole Chinese people
still face great difficulties and many obstacles and have a long and tortuous
road to travel. But we know equally well that, together with the whole Chinese
people, we shall overcome all the difficulties and obstacles and accomplish
the task which history has entrusted China. The great task for us and for
the whole people is to avert the first possibility or prospect and work for
the second with every ounce of our energy. Essentially the international
and domestic situation favours us Communists together with the Chinese people
as a whole. This I have already made quite clear. We hope that the Kuomintang
authorities will have the courage to change their present wrong policies
in view of the general world trend and the popular feeling in China, so that
the war can be won, the sufferings of the Chinese people can be reduced and
a new China can soon be brought into being. It must be understood that, however
tortuous the road, the Chinese people will certainly accomplish the task
of achieving independence and liberation, and that the time has come for
them to do so. It falls to our generation to fulfil the great aspirations
cherished by countless martyrs in the past century, and any attempt to stop
us will undoubtedly end in failure.

IV. THE POLICY OF THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY


I have analysed the two lines in China's War of Resistance. Such an analysis
is absolutely necessary. For up to this very moment many Chinese people still
do not know what is really going on in this war. Many people in the Kuomintang
areas and in foreign countries are being kept in the dark by the Kuomintang
government's policy of blockade. They knew practically nothing about China's
Liberated Areas until a group of Chinese and foreign correspondents came
here in 1944 on a tour of observation. As soon as this group returned, the
Kuomintang government, which was very much afraid of the true situation in
the Liberated Areas becoming known outside, bolted the door and refused to
let any other correspondent come here. Similarly it has suppressed the truth
about the Kuomintang areas. Therefore I feel that we have the duty to give
the public as much of the true picture of "the two areas" as possible. Only
when people see the whole situation in China clearly will they understand
why there is such a difference in policy between the Communist Party and
the Kuomintang, the two biggest political parties in China, and why there
is such a struggle between the two lines. Only then will people understand
that the dispute between the two parties is not an unnecessary or unimportant
or merely captious dispute, as some have alleged, but is one of principle
on which the lives of hundreds of millions of people depend.

In China's present grave situation, the people, the democrats and democratic
parties at home and the people in other countries who are concerned about
the Chinese situation all hope that unity will replace disunity and that
democratic reforms will be introduced, and they all want to know what the
policy of the Chinese Communist Party is for solving the many vital problems
of today. The members of our Party, of course, have a still deeper interest
in these matters.

Our policies of the Anti-Japanese National United Front in the war have always
been clear and definite, and they have been tested in the eight years of
war. Our congress should draw conclusions from them as a guide for our future
struggles.

Here I shall explain a number of the definite conclusions arrived at by our
Party concerning the major policies for solving China's problems.
OUR GENERAL PROGRAMME


An agreed common programme is urgently needed by the Chinese people, the
Chinese Communist Party and all the anti-Japanese democratic parties for
the purpose of mobilizing and uniting all the anti-Japanese forces of the
Chinese people, completely wiping out the Japanese aggressors and building
a new China that is independent, free, democratic, united, prosperous and
powerful.

Such a common programme may be divided into two parts, the general and the
specific. Let us consider first the general and then the specific programme.

On the major premise that the Japanese aggressors must be completely destroyed
and a new China must be built, we Communists and the overwhelming majority
of the population are agreed on the following fundamental propositions at
the present stage of China's development. First, China should not have a
feudal, fascist and anti-popular state system under the dictatorship of the
big landlords and big bourgeoisie, because eighteen years of government by
the chief ruling clique of the Kuomintang have already proved its complete
bankruptcy. Second, China cannot possibly establish the old type of democratic
dictatorship--a purely national-bourgeois state--and therefore should not
attempt to do so, because on the one hand the Chinese national bourgeoisie
has proved itself very flabby economically and politically, and on the other,
for a long time now a new factor has been present, namely, the awakened Chinese
proletariat with its leader, the Chinese Communist Party, which has demonstrated
great capacity in the political arena and assumed leadership of the peasant
masses, the urban petty bourgeoisie, the intelligentsia and other democratic
forces. Third, it is likewise impossible for the Chinese people to institute
a socialist state system at the present stage when it is still their task
to fight foreign and feudal oppression and the necessary social and economic
conditions for a socialist state are still lacking.

What then do we propose? We propose the establishment, after the thorough
defeat of the Japanese aggressors, of a state system which we call New Democracy,
namely, a united-front democratic alliance based on the overwhelming majority
of the people, under the leadership of the working class.

It is this kind of state system that truly meets the demands of the overwhelming
majority of the Chinese population, because it can win and indeed has been
winning the approval, first, of millions of industrial workers and tens of
millions of handicraftsmen and farm labourers, second, of the peasantry,
which constitutes 80 per cent of China's population, i.e., 360 million out
of a population of 450 million, and third, of the large numbers of the urban
petty bourgeoisie as well as the national bourgeoisie, the enlightened gentry
and other patriots.

Of course, there are still contradictions among those classes, notably the
contradiction between labour and capital, and consequently each has its own
particular demands. It would be hypocritical and wrong to deny the existence
of these contradictions and differing demands. But throughout the stage of
New Democracy, these contradictions, these differing demands, will not grow
and transcend the demands which all have in common and should not be allowed
to do so; they can be adjusted. Given such adjustment, these classes can
together accomplish the political, economic and cultural tasks of the
new-democratic state.

The politics of New Democracy which we advocate consists in the overthrow
of external oppression and of internal feudal and fascist oppression, and
then the setting up not of the old type of democracy but of a political system
which is a united front of all the democratic classes. These views of ours
are completely in accord with the revolutionary views of Dr. Sun Yat-sen.
In the Manifesto of the First National Congress of the Kuomintang, Dr. Sun
wrote:

  The so-called democratic system in modern states is usually monopolized by
  the bourgeoisie and has become simply an instrument for oppressing the common
  people. On the other hand, the Kuomintang's Principle of Democracy means
  a democratic system shared by all the common people and not privately owned
  by the few.


This is a great political injunction of Dr. Sun's. The Chinese people, the
Chinese Communist Party and all other democrats must respect it, firmly put
it into practice and wage a determined fight against all individuals and
groups that violate or oppose it, and so defend and develop this perfectly
correct political principle of New Democracy.

The organizational principle of the new-democratic state should be democratic
centralism, with the people's congresses determining the major policies and
electing the governments at the various levels. It is at once democratic
and centralized, that is, centralized on the basis of democracy and democratic
under centralized guidance. This is the only system that can give full expression
to democracy with full powers vested in the people's congresses at all levels
and, at the same time, guarantee centralized administration with the governments
at each level exercising centralized management of all the affairs entrusted
to them by the people's congresses at the corresponding level and safeguarding
whatever is essential to the democratic life of the people.

The army and the other armed forces constitute an important part of the apparatus
of the new-democratic state power, without which the state cannot be defended.
As with all other organs of power, the armed forces of the new-democratic
state belong to the people and protect the people; they have nothing in common
with the army, police, etc. of the old type which belong to the few and oppress
the people.

The economy of New Democracy which we advocate is likewise in accord with
Dr. Sun's principles. On the land question, Dr. Sun championed "land to the
tiller". On the question of industry and commerce, Dr. Sun stated in the
Manifesto quoted above:

  Enterprises, such as banks, railways and airlines, whether Chinese-owned
  or foreign-owned, which are either monopolistic in character or too big for
  private management, shall be operated and administered by the state, so that
  private capital cannot dominate the livelihood of the people: this is the
  main principle of the regulation of capital.


In the present stage, we fully agree with these views of Dr. Sun's on economic
questions.

Some people suspect that the Chinese Communists are opposed to the development
of individual initiative, the growth of private capital and the protection
of private property, but they are mistaken. It is foreign oppression and
feudal oppression that cruelly fetter the development of the individual
initiative of the Chinese people, hamper the growth of private capital and
destroy the property of the people. It is the very task of the New Democracy
we advocate to remove these fetters and stop this destruction, to guarantee
that the people can freely develop their individuality within the framework
of society and freely develop such private capitalist economy as will benefit
and not "dominate the livelihood of the people", and to protect all appropriate
forms of private property.

In accordance with Dr. Sun's principles and the experience of the Chinese
revolution, China's national economy at the present stage should be composed
of the state sector, the private sector and the co-operative sector. But
the state here must certainly not be one "privately owned by the few", but
a new-democratic state "shared by all the common people" under the leadership
of the proletariat.

The culture of New Democracy should likewise be "shared by all the common
people", that is, it should be a national, scientific and mass culture, and
must under no circumstances be a culture "privately owned by the few".

Such is the general or fundamental programme which we Communists advocate
for the present stage, the entire stage of the bourgeois-democratic revolution.
This is our minimum programme as against our future or maximum programme
of socialism and communism. Its realization will carry the Chinese state
and Chinese society a step forward, from a colonial, semi-colonial and
semi-feudal to a new-democratic state and society.

The political leadership of the proletariat and the proletarian-led state
and co-operative sectors of the economy required by our programme are socialist
factors. Yet the fulfilment of this programme will not turn China into a
socialist society.

We Communists do not conceal our political views. Definitely and beyond all
doubt, our future or maximum programme is to carry China forward to socialism
and communism. Both the name of our Party and our Marxist world outlook
unequivocally point to this supreme ideal of the future, a future of incomparable
brightness and splendour. On joining the Party, every Communist has two
clearly-defined objectives at heart, the new-democratic revolution now and
socialism and communism in the future, and for these he will fight despite
the animosity of the enemies of communism and their vulgar and ignorant calumny,
abuse and ridicule, which we must firmly combat. As for the well-meaning
sceptics, we should explain things to them with goodwill and patience and
not attack them. All this is very clear, definite and unequivocal.

But all Communists and sympathizers with communism in China must struggle
to achieve the objective of the present stage; they must struggle against
foreign and feudal oppression to deliver the Chinese people from their miserable
colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal plight and establish a proletarian-led
new-democratic China whose main task is the liberation of the peasantry,
a China of the revolutionary Three People's Principles of Dr. Sun Yat-sen,
a China which is independent, free, democratic, united, prosperous and powerful.
This is what we have actually been doing. Together with the masses of the
Chinese people, we Communists have been fighting heroically for this objective
for the past twenty-four years.

If any Communist or Communist sympathizer talks about socialism and communism
but fails to fight for this objective, if he belittles this bourgeois-democratic
revolution, relaxes or slows down ever so slightly and shows the least disloyalty
and coolness or is reluctant to shed his blood or give his life for it, then
wittingly or unwittingly, such a person is betraying socialism and communism
to a greater or lesser extent and is certainly not a politically conscious
and staunch fighter for communism. It is a law of Marxism that socialism
can be attained only via the stage of democracy. And in China the fight for
democracy is a protracted one. It would be a sheer illusion to try to build
a socialist society on the ruins of the colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal
order without a united new-democtatic state, without the development of the
state sector of the new-democratic economy, of the private capitalist and
the co-operative sectors, and of a national, scientific and mass culture,
i.e., a new-democratic culture, and without the liberation and the development
of the individuality of hundreds of millions of people--in short, without
a thoroughgoing bourgeois-democratic revolution of a new type led by the
Communist Party.

Some people fail to understand why, so far from fearing capitalism, Communists
should advocate its development in certain given conditions. Our answer is
simple. The substitution of a certain degree of capitalist development for
the oppression of foreign imperialism and domestic feudalism is not only
an advance but an unavoidable process. It benefits the proletariat as well
as the bourgeoisie, and the former perhaps more. It is not domestic capitalism
but foreign imperialism and domestic feudalism which are superfluous in China
today; indeed, we have too little of capitalism. Strangely enough, some spokesmen
of the Chinese bourgeoisie fight shy of openly advocating the development
of capitalism, but refer to it obliquely. There are other people who flatly
deny that China should permit a necessary degree of capitalist development
and who talk about reaching socialism in one stride and "accomplishing at
one stroke" the tasks of the Three People's Principles and socialism. Obviously,
these opinions either reflect the weakness of the Chinese national bourgeoisie
or are a demagogic trick on the part of the big landlords and the big
bourgeoisie. From our knowledge of the Marxist laws of social development,
we Communists clearly understand that under the state system of New Democracy
in China it will be necessary in the interests of social progress to facilitate
the development of the private capitalist sector of the economy (provided
it does not dominate the livelihood of the people) besides the development
of the state sector and of the individual and co-operative sectors run by
the labouring people. We Communists will not let empty talk or deceitful
tricks befuddle us.

There are some people who doubt whether we Communists are sincere when we
declare that "the Three People's Principles being what China needs today,
our Party is ready to fight for their complete realization". This is the
result of their failure to understand that the basic tenets of the Three
People's Principles, which Dr. Sun Yat-sen enunciated in the Manifesto of
the First National Congress of the Kuomintang in 1924 and which we have accepted,
coincide with certain basic tenets of our Party's programme for the present
stage, that is, of our minimum programme. It should be pointed out that these
Three People's Principles of Dr. Sun Yat-sen coincide with our Party's programme
for the present stage only in certain basic tenets and not in everything.
Our Party's programme of New Democracy is of course much more comprehensive
than Dr. Sun's principles, particularly as our Party's theory, programme
and practice of New Democracy have greatly developed with the development
of the Chinese revolution in the twenty years since Dr. Sun's death, and
will develop still further. In essence, however, these Three People's Principles
are a programme of New Democracy, as distinguished from the previous, old
Three People's Principles; naturally they are "what China needs today" and
naturally "our Party is ready to fight for their complete realization". To
us Chinese Communists, the struggle for our Party's minimum programme and
the struggle for Dr. Sun's revolutionary, or new, Three People's Principles
are basically (though not in every respect) one and the same thing. Therefore,
as in the past and the present, the Chinese Communists will prove to be the
most sincere and thoroughgoing executors of the revolutionary Three People's
Principles in the future as well.

Some people are suspicious and think that once in power, the Communist Party
will follow Russia's example and establish the dictatorship of the proletariat
and a one-party system. Our answer is that a new-democratic state based on
an alliance of the democratic classes is different in principle from a socialist
state under the dictatorship of the proletariat. Beyond all doubt, our system
of New Democracy will be built under the leadership of the proletariat and
of the Communist Party, but throughout the stage of New Democracy China cannot
possibly have a one-class dictatorship and one-party government and therefore
should not attempt it. We have no reason for refusing to co-operate with
all political parties, social groups and individuals, provided their attitude
to the Communist Party is cooperative and not hostile. The Russian system
has been shaped by Russian history; in Russia the exploitation of man by
man has been abolished as a social system, the political, economic and cultural
system of the newest type of democracy, i.e. socialism, has been put into
effect, and the people support the Bolshevik Party alone, having discarded
all the anti-socialist parties. All this has shaped the Russian system, which
is perfectly necessary and reasonable there. But even in Russia, where the
Bolshevik Party is the sole political party, the system practised in the
organs of state power is still one of an alliance of workers, peasants and
intellectuals and an alliance of Party members and non-Party people, and
not a system in which the working class and the Bolsheviks alone may work
in the organs of government. The Chinese system for the present stage is
being shaped by the present stage of Chinese history, and for a long time
to come there will exist a special form of state and political power, a form
that is distinguished from the Russian system but is perfectly necessary
and reasonable for us, namely, the new-democratic form of state and political
power based on the alliance of the democratic classes.
OUR SPECIFIC PROGRAMME


Our Party must also have a specific programme for each period based on this
general programme. Our general programme of New Democracy will remain unchanged
throughout the stage of the bourgeois-democratic revolution, that is, for
several decades. But from phase to phase during this stage, conditions have
changed or are changing and it is only natural that we have to change our
specific programme accordingly. For example, our general programme of New
Democracy has remained the same throughout the periods of the Northern
Expedition, the Agrarian Revolutionary War and the War of Resistance Against
Japan, but there have been changes in our specific programme, because our
friends and enemies have not remained the same in the three periods.

The Chinese people now find themselves in the following situation:

  (1) the Japanese aggressors have not yet been defeated;


  (2) the Chinese people urgently need to work together for a democratic change
  in order to achieve national unity, rapidly mobilize and unite all anti-Japanese
  forces, and defeat the Japanese aggressors in co-operation with the allies;
  and


  (3) the Kuomintang government is disrupting national unity and obstructing
  such a democratic change.


What is our specific programme in the circumstances or, in other words, what
are the immediate demands of the people?

We consider the following to be appropriate and minimum demands:

  Mobilize all available forces for the thorough defeat of the Japanese aggressors
  and the establishment of international peace in co-operation with the allies;


  Abolish the Kuomintang one-party dictatorship and establish a democratic
  coalition government and a joint supreme command;


  Punish the pro-Japanese elements, fascists and defeatists who are opposing
  the people and disrupting national unity, and so help to build national unity;


  Punish the reactionaries who are creating the danger of civil war, and so
  help to ensure internal peace;


  Punish the traitors, take punitive action against officers who surrender
  to the enemy, and punish the agents of the Japanese;


  Liquidate the reactionary secret service and all its repressive activities
  and abolish the concentration camps;


  Revoke all reactionary laws and decrees aimed at suppressing the people's
  freedom of speech, press, assembly, association, political conviction and
  religious belief and freedom of the person, and guarantee full civil rights
  to the people;


  Recognize the legal status of all democratic parties and groups;


  Release all patriotic political prisoners;


  Withdraw all troops encircling and attacking China's Liberated Areas and
  dispatch them to the anti-Japanese front;


  Recognize the anti-Japanese armed forces and popularly elected governments
  of China's Liberated Areas;


  Consolidate and expand the Liberated Areas and their armed forces, and recover
  all lost territory;


  Help the people in the Japanese-occupied areas to organize underground armed
  forces for armed uprisings;


  Allow the Chinese people to arm themselves and defend their homes and their
  country;


  Bring about the political and military transformation of those armies directly
  under the Kuomintang supreme command, which constantly lose battles, oppress
  the people and discriminate against armies not directly under it, and punish
  the commanders who are responsible for disastrous defeats;


  Improve the recruiting system and the living conditions of the officers and
  men;


  Give preferential treatment to the families of the soldiers fighting in the
  anti-Japanese war, so that the officers and men at the front are free from
  domestic worries;


  Provide preferential treatment for disabled soldiers and for the families
  of the soldiers who give their lives for the country, and help demobilized
  soldiers to settle down and earn a living;


  Develop war industries to facilitate the prosecution of the war;


  Distribute the military and financial aid received from the allies impartially
  to all the armies fighting in the War of Resistance;


  Punish corrupt officials and institute clean government;


  Improve the pay of the middle and lower grade government employees;


  Give the Chinese people democratic rights;


  Abolish the oppressive pao-chia system;
  [6]


  Provide the war refugees and the victims of natural disasters with relief;


  Appropriate substantial funds after the recovery of China's lost territory
  for the extensive relief of people who have suffered under enemy occupation;


  Abolish exorbitant taxes and miscellaneous levies and establish a consolidated
  progressive tax;


  Introduce rural reforms, reduce rent and interest, provide suitable safeguards
  for the rights of tenants, grant low-interest loans to impoverished peasants
  and help the peasants to organize, in order to facilitate the expansion of
  agricultural production;


  Outlaw bureaucrat-capital;


  Abolish the present policy of economic controls;


  Check the unbridled inflation and rocketing prices;


  Assist private industry and provide it with facilities for obtaining loans,
  purchasing raw materials and marketing its products;


  Improve the livelihood of the workers, provide relief for the unemployed
  and help the workers to organize, in order to facilitate the expansion of
  industrial production;


  Abolish Kuomintang indoctrination in education and promote a national, scientific
  and mass culture and education;


  Guarantee the livelihood of the teachers and other staff members of educational
  institutions and guarantee academic freedom; protect the interests of the
  youth, women and children--provide assistance to young student refugees,
  help the youth and women to organize in order to participate on an equal
  footing in all work useful to the war effort and to social progress, ensure
  freedom of marriage and equality as between men and women, and give young
  people and children a useful education;


  Give the minority nationalities in China better and grant them autonomous
  rights;


  Protect the interests of the overseas Chinese and assist those who have returned
  to the motherland;


  Protect foreign nationals who have fled to China from the Japanese oppression
  and support their struggle against the Japanese aggressors;


  Improve Sino-Soviet relations.


To achieve these demands, the most important thing is the immediate abolition
of the Kuomintang one-party dictatorship and the establishment of a democratic
provisional central government, a coalition government enjoying nation-wide
support and including representatives of all the anti-Japanese parties and
people without party affiliation. Without this prerequisite it is impossible
to make any genuine change in the Kuomintang areas, and therefore in the
country as a whole.

These demands voice the desires of the Chinese masses and also of broad sections
of democratic public opinion in the allied countries.

A minimum specific programme which is agreed upon by all the anti-Japanese
democratic parties is absolutely indispensable, and we are prepared to consult
with them on the basis of the programme outlined above. Different parties
may have different demands, but all should reach agreement on a common programme.

As far as the Kuomintang areas are concerned, such a programme is still at
the stage of being a demand of the people; as far as the Japanese-occupied
areas are concerned, it is a programme whose fulfilment must await their
recovery, except for the item on the organization of underground forces for
armed uprisings; as far as the Liberated Areas are concerned, it is a programme
which has already been, is being and should continue to be, put into practice.

The immediate demands or specific programme of the Chinese people outlined
above involve many vital war-time and post-war problems which require further
elucidation. In explaining these problems below we shall criticize some of
the wrong viewpoints held by the chief ruling clique of the Kuomintang and
at the same time answer some questions raised by other people.
1. Destroy the Japanese Aggressors Completely, Allow No Compromise
  Halfway


The Cairo conference [7] rightly decided that the
Japanese aggressors mast be made to surrender unconditionally. But the Japanese
aggressors are now working behind the scenes for a compromise peace, while
the pro-Japanese elements in the Kuomintang government are hitching up with
Japan's secret emissaries through the Nanking puppet government, and no stop
has been put to this. Hence the danger of a halfway compromise is not yet
entirely over. The Cairo conference made another good decision, namely, that
the four northeastern provinces, Taiwan and the Penghu Islands should be
returned to China. But, given its present policies, the Kuomintang government
cannot possibly be relied upon to fight all the way to the Yalu River and
recover all our lost territory. What should the Chinese people do in these
circumstances? They should demand that the Kuomintang government should destroy
the Japanese aggressors completely and allow no compromise halfway. All intrigues
for a compromise must immediately be stopped. The Chinese people should demand
that the Kuomintang government should change its present policy of passive
resistance and employ all its military strength in active warfare against
Japan. They should expand their own armed forces--the Eighth Route Army,
the New Fourth Army and the other armed units of the people--and on their
own initiative develop anti-Japanese armed forces on an extensive scale wherever
the enemy has reached, and they should prepare to recover all the lost territory
by fighting in direct co-operation with the allies; under no circumstances
must they place their reliance solely on the Kuomintang. It is the sacred
right of the Chinese people to defeat the Japanese aggressors. If the
reactionaries try to deprive them of this right, suppress their anti-Japanese
activities or undermine their strength, then the Chinese people should firmly
strike back in self-defence if persuasion proves unavailing. For such acts
of national treachery on the part of the Chinese reactionaries only aid and
abet the Japanese aggressors.
2. Abolish the Kuomintang One-Party Dictatorship, Establish
  a Democratic Coalition Government


To wipe out the Japanese aggressors it is necessary to effect democratic
reforms throughout the country. Yet this will be impossible unless the one-party
dictatorship of the Kuomintang is abolished and a democratic coalition government
is established.

The one-party dictatorship of the Kuomintang is in reality the dictatorship
of the anti-popular clique within the Kuomintang, and this dictatorship is
the disrupter of China's national unity, the author of the defeats on the
Kuomintang front in the war, and the basic obstacle to the mobilization and
unification of the anti-Japanese forces of the Chinese people. The Chinese
people have become fully aware of the evils of this dictatorship through
eight years of bitter experience in the War of Resistance, and they naturally
demand its immediate abolition. This reactionary dictatorship is also the
breeder of civil war and, unless it is immediately abolished, it will again
bring the calamity of civil war upon them.

So widespread and resounding is the outcry of the Chinese people for the
abolition of the anti-popular dictatorship that the Kuomintang authorities
themselves have been forced to agree publicly to the "earlier termination
of political tutelage", which shows how far this "political tutelage" or
one-party dictatorship has forfeited popular support and prestige. There
is not a single person in China who still dares to assert that "political
tutelage" or one-party dictatorship is any good or that it should not be
abolished or "terminated", and that marks a great change in the situation.

It is definite and beyond all doubt that it should be "terminated". But opinions
differ as to how to do it. Some say, terminate it at once and establish a
provisional democratic coalition government. Others say, wait a bit, convene
the "national assembly", and "hand state power back to the people" and not
to a coalition government.

What does this mean?

It means there are two ways of doing things, the honest way and the dishonest
way.

First, the honest way. The honest way is immediately to proclaim the abolition
of the Kuomintang one-party dictatorship, to establish a provisional central
government composed of representatives of the Kuomintang, the Communist Party,
the Democratic League and people with no party affiliation, and to promulgate
a democratic programme of political action such as the immediate demands
of the Chinese people which we have set forth above, with the aim of restoring
national unity and defeating the Japanese aggressors. A roundtable conference
of the representatives of the various parties and people with no party
affiliation should be convened to discuss and reach agreement on these matters,
and action should then be taken accordingly. This is the road of unity, which
the Chinese people will firmly support.

Second, the dishonest way. The dishonest way is to disregard the demands
of the masses and of all the democratic parties and to insist on convening
a so-called national assembly stage-managed by the anti-popular clique in
the Kuomintang and have it adopt a "constitution" which in practice will
be anti-democratic and will buttress the dictatorship of this clique, for
the purpose of providing a cloak of legality for an illegal "National
Government"--a government formed privately through the appointment of a few
dozen Kuomintang members, imposed on the people and utterly devoid of any
foundation in the popular will--thus making a pretence of "handing state
power back to the people" while actually "handing it back" to the selfsame
reactionary clique within the Kuomintang. Whoever disapproves will be accused
of sabotaging "democracy" and "unity", which will then be a "reason" for
ordering punitive action against him. This is the road of disruption, which
the Chinese people will firmly oppose.

The steps our reactionary heroes are preparing to take in line with this
splitting policy will probably lead them to destruction. They are putting
a noose round their own necks and fastening it there, and this noose is the
"national assembly". Their intention is to use the "national assembly" as
a magic weapon, first, to prevent the formation of a coalition government,
second, to maintain their dictatorship, and third, to prepare a justification
of civil war. However, the logic of history runs counter to their wishes,
and they will be "lifting a rock only to drop it on their own toes". For
it is now obvious to all that the people in the Kuomintang areas have no
freedom and the people in the Japanese-occupied areas cannot take part in
elections, while the Liberated Areas which have freedom are not recognized
by the Kuomintang government. Such being the case, how can there be national
delegates? How can there be a "national assembly"? The national assembly
they are clamouring for is the one the Kuomintang dictatorship rigged up
in every detail eight years ago during the civil war period. If such an assembly
is convened, the whole nation will inevitably rise up against it, and how,
it may be asked, will our reactionary heroes get out of that predicament?
All in all, the convening of the bogus national assembly will only lead them
to destruction.

We Communists propose two steps for the termination of the Kuomintang one-party
dictatorship. First, at the present stage, to establish a provisional coalition
government through common agreement among representatives of all parties
and people with no party affiliation. Second, in the next stage, to convene
a national assembly after free and unrestricted elections and form a regular
coalition government. In both cases there will be a coalition government
in which the representatives of all classes and political parties willing
to take part are united on a democratic common programme in the fight against
Japan today and for national construction tomorrow.

This is the only course China can take, whatever the intentions of the Kuomintang
or other parties, groups or individuals, whether they like it or not, and
whether or not they are conscious of it. This is a historical law, an inexorable
trend which no force can reverse.

On this and all other problems of democratic reform, we Communists declare
that although the Kuomintang authorities are still stubbornly persisting
in their wrong policies and using negotiations to play for time and allay
public opinion, we are ready to resume negotiations with them the moment
they show willingness to renounce their present wrong policies and agree
to democratic reforms. But the negotiations must be based on the general
principle of resistance, unity and democracy, and we will not agree to any
so-called measures, plans or empty pronouncements that depart from this general
principle, however pleasing they may sound.
3. Freedom for the People


At present the Chinese people's struggle for freedom is primarily directed
against the Japanese aggressors. But the Kuomintang government is preventing
them from fighting the Japanese aggressors by depriving them of their freedom
and binding them hand and foot. Unless this problem is solved, it will be
impossible to mobilize and unify all the anti-Japanese forces of the nation.
It is precisely to untie the people's bonds so that they can have the freedom
to resist Japan, to unite and to win democracy that our programme puts forward
such demands as the abolition of the one-party dictatorship; the establishment
of a coalition government; the liquidation of the secret police; the revocation
of repressive laws and decrees; the punishment of traitors, spies, pro-Japanese
elements, fascists and corrupt officials; the release of political prisoners;
the recognition of the legal status of all the democratic parties; the withdrawal
of troops encircling or attacking the Liberated Areas; the recognition of
the Liberated Areas the abolition of the pao-chia system; and the
many other demands relating to the economy, culture and the mass movement.

Freedom is won by the people through struggle, it is not bestowed by anyone
as a favour. The people in China's Liberated Areas have already won freedom,
and the people can and must win freedom in the other areas too. The greater
the freedom of the Chinese people and the stronger their organized democratic
forces, the greater the possibility of forming a provisional and unified
coalition government. Once formed, this coalition government will in its
turn provide full freedom for the people and so consolidate its own foundations.
Only then will it be possible to hold free and unrestricted elections throughout
the land after the overthrow of the Japanese aggressors, to create a democratic
national assembly and to establish a regular and unified coalition government.
Unless the people have freedom, there can be no national assembly or government
genuinely elected by the people. Is this not clear enough?

Freedom of speech, press, assembly, association, political conviction and
religious belief and freedom of the person are the people's most important
freedoms. In China only the Liberated Areas have given full effect to these
freedoms.

In 1925 Dr. Sun Yat-sen declared in his deathbed Testament:

  For forty years I have devoted myself to the cause of the national revolution
  with the aim of winning freedom and equality for China. My experience during
  these forty years has firmly convinced me that to achieve this aim we must
  arouse the masses of the people and unite in a common fight with those nations
  of the world who treat us as equals.


The unworthy successors of Dr. Sun, who have betrayed him, oppress the masses
of the people instead of arousing them, and deprive them of all their freedom
of speech, press, assembly, association, political conviction and religious
belief and freedom of the person. They attach the labels "traitor party",
"traitor army", and "traitor areas" to the Communist Party, the Eighth Route
and New Fourth Armies and the Liberated Areas, which are all genuinely arousing
the masses of the people and protecting their freedoms and rights. We hope
that there will soon be an end to this reversal of right and wrong. If it
lasts much longer, the Chinese people will lose all patience.
4. Unity of the People


It is imperative to turn a divided China into a united China in order to
destroy the Japanese aggressors, prevent civil war and build a new China;
such is the historical task of the Chinese people.

But how is China to be united? Through autocratic unification by a dictator
or democratic unification by the people? From the time of Yuan Shih-kai
[8] the Northern warlords concentrated on autocratic
unification. But what was the result? Contrary to their desires, what they
obtained was not unification but division, and finally they tumbled from
power. Following in Yuan Shih-kai's footsteps, the anti-popular clique of
the Kuomintang sought autocratic unification and waged civil war for fully
ten years, only to let in the Japanese aggressors while they themselves withdrew
to Mount Omei. [9] And now from their mountain
top they are again shouting about their theory of autocratic unification.
To whom are they shouting? Will any upright patriotic Chinese listen to them?
Having lived through sixteen years of Northern warlord rule and eighteen
years of dictatorial Kuomintang rule, the people have acquired ample experience
and discerning eyes. They want democratic unification by the masses and not
autocratic unification by a dictator. As early as 1935, we Communists put
forward the policy of the Anti-Japanese National United Front, and we have
fought for it ever since. In 1939, when the Kuomintang was enforcing its
reactionary "Measures for Restricting the Activities of Alien Parties", thus
creating the imminent danger of capitulation, split and retrogression, and
when it was shouting about its theory of autocratic unification, we again
declared: There must be unification based on resistance and not on capitulation,
on unity and not on splitting, on progress and not on retrogression. Only
unification based on resistance, unity and progress is genuine and any other
kind would be a sham. Six years have passed, but the issue remains the same.

Can there be unity if the people have no freedom or democracy? There will
be unity as soon as they have both. The Chinese people's movement for freedom,
democracy and a coalition government is at the same time a movement for unity.
When we put forward many demands for freedom, democracy and a coalition
government in our specific programme, we are at the same time aiming at unity.
It is plain common sense that unless the dictatorship of the anti-popular
Kuomintang clique is abolished and a democratic coalition government is formed,
not only will it be impossible to carry out any democratic reform in the
Kuomintang areas or to mobilize the armies and the people there for the defeat
of the Japanese aggressors, but the calamity of civil war will ensue. Why
do so many democrats, with and without party affiliation, including many
in the Kuomintang, unanimously demand a coalition government? Because they
are clearly aware of the present crisis and realize that there is no other
way to overcome it and achieve both unity against the enemy and unity for
national construction.
5. The People's Army


Without an army standing on the people's side, it is impossible for the Chinese
people to win freedom and unification, establish a coalition government,
thoroughly defeat the Japanese aggressors and build a new China. At present
the only armed forces that stand wholly on the people's side are the Liberated
Areas' Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies, which are not very large; they
are far from sufficient. Yet the Kuomintang group which opposes the people
is ceaselessly intriguing to undermine and destroy the armies of the Liberated
Areas. In 1944 the Kuomintang government presented a so-called memorandum
demanding that the Communist Party should "disband, within a definite time
limit", four-fifths of the armed forces of the Liberated Areas. In 1945,
during the most recent negotiations, it has further demanded the handing
over of all the armed forces of the Liberated Areas by the Communist Party,
after which it would grant the Communist Party "legal status".

These people tell the Communists, "Hand over your troops and we will grant
you freedom." According to their theory, a political party that does not
have any army should enjoy freedom. Yet whatever freedom the Chinese Communist
Party enjoyed during 1924-27, when it had only a small armed force, vanished
with the Kuomintang government's policies of "party purge" and massacre.
And today, the China Democratic League and the democrats within the Kuomintang,
who have no armed forces, have no freedom either. Let us take the workers,
peasants and students and the progressively inclined people in cultural,
educational and industrial circles under the Kuomintang regime--for the last
eighteen years none of them have had any armed forces, and none of them have
had any freedom. Can it be that all these democratic parties and people have
been denied freedom because they organized armies, perpetrated "feudal
separatism", created "traitor areas" and violated "governmental and military
orders"? Not in the least. On the contrary, they have been denied freedom
precisely because they have done none of these things.

"The army belongs to the state"--that is perfectly true, and there is not
an army in the world that does not belong to a state. But what kind of state?
A state under the feudal and fascist dictatorship of the big landlords, big
bankers and big compradors, or a new-democratic state of the broad masses
of the people? The only kind of state for China to establish is a new-democratic
state and, on this basis, she should establish a new-democratic coalition
government; all the armed forces of China must belong to such a government
of such a state so that they may safeguard the people's freedom and effectively
fight foreign aggressors. The moment a new-democratic coalition government
comes into being in China, the Liberated Areas of China will hand their armed
forces over to it. But all the Kuomintang armed forces will have to be handed
over to it at the same time.

In 1924 Dr. Sun Yat-sen said, "Today should mark the beginning of a new epoch
in the national revolution.... The first step is to unite the armed forces
with the people, and the next step is to turn them into the armed forces
of the people." [10] It is because they have applied
this policy that the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies have become "the
armed forces of the people", that is, the people's army, and have been able
to win victories. During the earlier period of the Northern Expedition, the
Kuomintang armies took Dr. Sun's "first step", and hence won victories. In
the latter period of the Northern Expedition they abandoned even the "first
step", took a stand against the people, and hence from that time right down
to the present they have become more and more corrupt and degenerate; in
their element when fighting internal war, they cannot but be out of their
element when it comes to fighting external war. Every patriotic officer in
the Kuomintang army who has a conscience should set about reviving the Sun
Yat-sen spirit and transforming his troops.

In the work of transforming the old armies, a suitable education should be
given to all officers who are capable of being reeducated to help them to
get rid of their obsolete outlook and acquire a correct outlook, so that
they can remain and serve in the people's army.

It is the duty of the whole nation to struggle for the creation of the army
of the Chinese people. Without a people's army the people have nothing. On
this question there must be no empty theorizing whatsoever.

We Communists are ready to give our support to the task of transforming the
Chinese army. All those military forces which are willing to unite with the
people and to oppose the Japanese aggressors instead of opposing the armed
forces of the Chinese Liberated Areas should be regarded as friendly troops
and be given proper assistance by the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies.
6. The Land Problem


To wipe out the Japanese aggressors and build a new China, it is imperative
to reform the land system and emancipate the peasants. Dr. Sun Yat-sen's
thesis of "land to the tiller" is correct for the present period of our
revolution, which is bourgeois-democratic in nature.

Why do we say our revolution in the present period is bourgeois-democratic
in nature? We mean that the target of this revolution is not the bourgeoisie
in general but national and feudal oppression, that the measures taken in
this revolution are in general directed not at abolishing but at protecting
private property, and that as a result of this revolution the working class
will be able to build up the strength to lead China in the direction of
socialism, though capitalism will still be enabled to grow to an appropriate
extent for a fairly long period. "Land to the tiller" means transferring
the land from the feudal exploiters to the peasants, turning the private
property of the feudal landlords into the private property of the peasants
and emancipating them from feudal agrarian relations, thereby making possible
the transformation of an agricultural country into an industrial country.
Thus, "land to the tiller" is in the nature of a bourgeois-democratic and
not a proletarian-socialist demand; it is the demand of all revolutionary
democrats and not the demand of us Communists alone. The difference is that,
in China's circumstances, we Communists alone treat this demand with special
seriousness, and do not just talk about it but put it into practice. Who
are the revolutionary democrats? Apart from the proletariat who are the most
thoroughgoing of the revolutionary democrats, the peasants form by far the
largest group. The overwhelming majority of the peasants, that is, all except
the rich peasants who have a feudal tail, actively demand "land to the tiller".
The urban petty bourgeoisie are also revolutionary democrats and "land to
the tiller" will prove to be to their advantage as well, for it will help
to develop the productive forces in agriculture. The national bourgeoisie
are a vacillating class--they also approve of "land to the tiller" because
they need markets, but many of them are afraid of it because for the most
part they have ties with landed property. Dr. Sun Yat-sen was the earliest
revolutionary democrat in China. Representing the revolutionary section of
the national bourgeoisie as well as the urban petty bourgeoisie and the peasants,
he carried out an armed revolution and put forward his thesis of "equalization
of landownership" and "land to the tiller". But unfortunately he did not
take the initiative and reform the land system when he was in power. And
when the anti-popular clique of the Kuomintang took power, it completely
betrayed what he stood for. It is this clique that is now stubbornly opposing
"land to the tiller" because it represents the stratum of big landlords,
bankers and compradors. As China has no political party exclusively representing
the peasants and the political parties of the national bourgeoisie have no
thoroughgoing land programme, the Chinese Communist Party has become the
leader of the peasants and all the other revolutionary democrats, being the
only party that has formulated and carried out a thoroughgoing land programme,
fought earnestly for the peasants' interests and therefore won the overwhelming
majority of the peasants as its great ally.

From 1927 to 1936, the Chinese Communist Party adopted various measures for
the thorough reform of the land system and put Dr. Sun's "land to the tiller"
into effect. It was precisely the reactionary clique of the Kuomintang, that
gang of unworthy followers of Dr. Sun Yat-sen, who bared their teeth, showed
their claws and fought against "land to the tiller" in ten years of war against
the people.

The Communist Party has made a major concession in the anti-Japanese war
period by changing the policy of "land to the tiller" to one of reducing
rent and interest. This concession is a correct one, for it helped to bring
the Kuomintang into the war against Japan and lessened the resistance of
the landlords in the Liberated Areas to our mobilization of the peasants
for the war. If no special obstacle arises, we are prepared to continue this
policy after the war, first extending rent and interest reduction to the
whole country and then taking proper measures for the gradual achievement
of "land to the tiller".

However, those who have betrayed Dr. Sun oppose the reduction of rent and
interest, let alone "land to the tiller". The Kuomintang government has not
carried out the decree for a "25 per cent reduction in rent" and similar
decrees which it has promulgated itself; only we in the Liberated Areas have
enforced them, and for this crime the Liberated Areas have been labelled
"traitor areas".

In the course of the anti-Japanese war a so-called theory of two stages,
a stage of "national revolution" and a stage of "revolution for democracy
and the people's livelihood", has made its appearance. This theory is wrong.

"Faced with a formidable enemy, we should not raise the question of democratic
reforms or the people's livelihood; better wait until the Japanese are
gone"--such is the absurd theory put forward by the reactionary clique of
the Kuomintang for the purpose of preventing complete victory in the war.
Yet there are people who have been echoing this theory and have become its
servile adherents.

"Faced with a formidable enemy, it is impossible for us to build up bases
against the Japanese and resist their attacks unless we settle the question
of democracy and the people's livelihood"--this is what the Chinese Communist
Party has been advocating and, moreover, has already put into practice with
excellent results.

In the period of the anti-Japanese war, reduction of rent and interest and
the other democratic reforms all serve the war. In order to lessen the landlords'
resistance to the war effort we have abstained from abolishing their ownership
of land and have only reduced rent and interest; at the same time, we have
encouraged them to transfer their assets to industry and given the enlightened
gentry the opportunity to take part in public activities for the war and
in the work of government alongside other representatives of the people.
As for the rich peasants, we have encouraged them to develop production.
All this is part of the resolute line of democratic reforms in the rural
areas and is absolutely necessary.

There are two lines. Either stubbornly oppose the Chinese peasants' endeavour
to settle the problem of democracy and the people's livelihood, and become
corrupt, ineffectual and utterly incapable of fighting Japan; or firmly support
the Chinese peasants in their endeavour, and gain the greatest of allies,
constituting 80 per cent of the population, thereby forging tremendous fighting
strength. The former is the line of the Kuomintang government, the latter
is the line of China's Liberated Areas.

The line of the opportunists is to vacillate between the two, to profess
support for the peasants and yet lack the resolve to reduce rent and interest,
arm the peasants or establish democratic political power in the rural areas.

Using all the forces at its command, the anti-popular clique of the Kuomintang
has directed every kind of vicious attack, open and secret, military and
political, both with bloodshed and without, against the Chinese Communist
Party. Taken in its social setting, the dispute between the two parties is
essentially over this issue of agrarian relations. Where exactly did we give
offence to the Kuomintang reactionary clique? Is it not on this score? Has
it not been precisely by rendering the Japanese aggressors great help on
this score that this clique has won favour and encouragement from them? Have
not all the charges against the Chinese Communist Party--"sabotaging the
War of Resistance and endangering the state", "traitor party", "traitor army",
"traitor areas", and "disobedience to governmental and military orders"--been
levelled precisely because it has done conscientious work in the true interests
of the nation in this sphere?

It is the peasants who are the source of China's industrial workers. In the
future, additional tens of millions of peasants will go to the cities and
enter factories. If China is to build up powerful national industries and
many large modern cities, there will have to be a long process of transformation
of rural into urban inhabitants.

It is the peasants who constitute the main market for China's industry. Only
they can supply foodstuffs and raw materials in great abundance and absorb
manufactured goods in great quantities.

It is the peasants who are the source of the Chinese army. The soldiers are
peasants in military uniform, the mortal enemies of the Japanese aggressors.

It is the peasants who are the main political force for democracy in China
at the present stage. Chinese democrats will achieve nothing unless they
rely on the support of the 360 million peasants.

It is the peasants who are the chief concern of China's cultural movement
at the present stage. If the 360 million peasants are left out, do not the
"elimination of illiteracy", "popularization of education", "literature and
art for the masses" and "public health" become largely empty talk?

In saying this, I am of course not ignoring the political, economic and cultural
importance of the rest of the people numbering about 90 million, and in
particular am not ignoring the working class, which is politically the most
conscious and therefore qualified to lead the whole revolutionary movement.
Let there be no misunderstanding.

It is absolutely necessary not only for Communists but for every democrat
in China to grasp these points.

When there is reform of the land system--even such an elementary reform as
reduction of rent and interest--the peasants become more interested in
production. Then as the peasants are helped to organize farming and other
co-operatives step by step on a voluntary basis, the productive forces will
grow. The farming co-operatives at present can only be collective, mutual-aid
labour organizations based on an individual peasant economy (i.e., on private
ownership by the peasants), such as labour-exchange teams, mutual-aid teams
and work-exchange groups; even so the increase in labour productivity and
output is already astonishing. Such organizations have been widely developed
in China's Liberated Areas and from now on should be spread as much as possible.

It might be mentioned that co-operative organization of the labour-exchange
team type has existed among the peasants for a long time, but in the past
it was only a means by which they tried to alleviate their wretchedness.
Today the labour-exchange teams in China's Liberated Areas are different
both in form and in content; they have become a means by which the peasant
masses increase production and strive for a better life.

In the last analysis, the impact, good or bad, great or small, of the policy
and the practice of any Chinese political party upon the people depends on
whether and how much it helps to develop their productive forces, and on
whether it fetters or liberates these forces. The social productive forces
of China can be liberated only by destroying the Japanese aggressors, carrying
out land reform, emancipating the peasants, developing modern industry and
establishing an independent, free, democratic, united, prosperous and powerful
new China--and this will win the approbation of the Chinese people.

It should be pointed out further that it is not easy for city intellectuals
who come to work in the countryside to understand the characteristics of
the rural areas, i.e., that they are still based on a scattered and backward,
individual economy, and that, moreover, the Liberated Areas are temporarily
cut off from one another by the enemy and involved in a guerrilla war. Failing
to understand these characteristics, they often inappropriately approach
and handle rural problems and rural work from the viewpoint of life and work
in the cities, and so divorce themselves from the realities of the countryside
and fail to identify themselves with the peasants. It is necessary to overcome
this by education.

China's numerous revolutionary intellectuals must awaken to the necessity
of becoming one with the peasants. The peasants need them and await their
help. They should go to the countryside enthusiastically, doff their student
garb and put on rough clothing, and willingly start with any work however
trivial; they should learn what the peasants want and help to arouse and
organize them in the struggle to accomplish the democratic revolution in
the countryside, which is one of the most important tasks in China's democratic
revolution.

After the Japanese aggressors are wiped out, we should confiscate the land
usurped by them and the chief traitors and distribute it among those peasants
who have little or no land.
7. The Problem of Industry


In order to defeat the Japanese aggressors and build a new China it is necessary
to develop industry. But under the Kuomintang government there is dependence
on foreign countries for everything, and its financial and economic policy
is ruining the entire economic life of the people. A few small industrial
enterprises are all that is to be found in the Kuomintang areas, and in most
cases they have been unable to avoid bankruptcy. In the absence of political
reforms all the productive forces are being ruined, and this is true both
of agriculture and of industry.

By and large, it will be impossible to develop industry unless China is
independent, free, democratic and united. To wipe out the Japanese aggressors
is to seek independence. To abolish the Kuomintang's one-party dictatorship,
establish a democratic and united coalition government, transform all China's
troops into a people's armed force, carry out land reform and emancipate
the peasants is to seek freedom, democracy and unity. Without independence,
freedom, democracy and unity it is impossible to build industry on a really
large scale. Without industry there can be no solid national defence, no
well-being for the people, no prosperity or strength for the nation. The
history of the 105 years since the Opium War of 1840,
[11] and especially of the eighteen years since
the Kuomintang came to power, has brought this important point home to the
Chinese people. A China that is not poor and weak but prosperous and strong
implies a China that is not colonial or semi-colonial but independent, not
semi-feudal but free and democratic, not divided but united. In semi-colonial,
semi-feudal and divided China, many people have for years dreamed of developing
industry, building up national defence, and bringing well-being to the people
and prosperity and power to the nation, but all their dreams have been shattered.
Many well-intentioned educators, scientists and students have buried themselves
in their own work or studies and paid no attention to politics in the belief
that they could serve the country with their knowledge, but this too has
turned out to be a dream, a dream that has been shattered. This indeed is
a good sign, for the shattering of these childish dreams marks a starting-point
on China's road towards prosperity and strength. The Chinese people have
learned many things in the war; they know that after the defeat of the Japanese
aggressors they must build a new-democratic China enjoying independence,
freedom, democracy, unity, prosperity and strength, all of which are interrelated
and indispensable. If they do so, then a bright future lies before China.
The productive forces of the Chinese people will be released and given every
possibility to develop only when the political system of New Democracy obtains
in all parts of China. More and more people are coming to understand this
point every day.

When the political system of New Democracy is won, the Chinese people and
their government will have to adopt practical measures in order to build
heavy and light industry step by step over a number of years and transform
China from an agricultural into an industrial country. The new-democratic
state cannot be consolidated unless it has a solid economy as its base, a
much more advanced agriculture than at present, and a large-scale industry
occupying a predominant position in the national economy, with communications,
trade and finance to match.

We Communists are ready to fight for this objective in co-operation with
all the democratic parties and industrial circles throughout the country.
The Chinese working class will play a great role in this undertaking.

Ever since World War I, the Chinese working class has consciously fought
for the independence and liberation of China. The year 1921 witnessed the
birth of the Communist Party of China, the vanguard of the working class,
and China's struggle for liberation then entered a new stage. During the
ensuing three periods, the Northern Expedition, the Agrarian Revolutionary
War and the War of Resistance Against Japan, the working class and Communist
Party of China have worked extremely hard and made an invaluable contribution
to the cause of the liberation of the Chinese people. In the struggle for
the final defeat of the Japanese aggressors, and especially for the recovery
of the big cities and important lines of communications, the Chinese working
class will play a very great role. And it can be predicted that after the
anti-Japanese war, the effort and contribution of the Chinese working class
will be even greater. The task of the Chinese working class is to struggle
not only for the establishment of a new-democratic state but also for China's
industrialization and the modernization of her agriculture.

The policy of adjusting the interests of labour and capital will be adopted
under the new-democratic state system. On the one hand, it will protect the
interests of the workers, institute an eight- to ten-hour working day according
to circumstances, provide suitable unemployment relief and social insurance
and safeguard trade union rights; on the other hand, it will guarantee legitimate
profits to properly managed state, private and co-operative enterprises--so
that both the public and the private sectors and both labour and capital
will work together to develop industrial production.

The enterprises and property in China of the Japanese aggressors and of the
chief traitors will be confiscated and placed at the disposal of the government
when Japan is defeated.
8. The Problem of Culture, Education and the Intellectuals


The calamities brought upon the Chinese people by foreign and feudal oppression
also affect our national culture. The progressive cultural and educational
institutions and progressive cultural workers and educators have particularly
suffered. To sweep away foreign and feudal oppression and build a new-democratic
China, we need large numbers of educators and teachers for the people, and
also people's scientists, engineers, technicians, doctors, journalists, writers,
men of letters, artists and rank-and-file cultural workers. They must be
imbued with the spirit of serving the people and must work hard. Provided
they serve the people creditably, all intellectuals should be esteemed and
regarded as valuable national and social assets. The problem of the intellectuals
becomes particularly important in China because the country is culturally
backward as a result of foreign and feudal oppression and because intellectuals
are urgently needed in the people's struggle for liberation. The numerous
revolutionary intellectuals have played a very great role in the people's
struggle for liberation in the past half-century, and especially since the
May 4th Movement of 1919 and in the eight years of the anti-Japanese war.
They will play an even greater role in the struggles to come. Therefore,
the task of a people's government is systematically to develop all kinds
of intellectually equipped cadres from among the ranks of the people and
at the same time take care to unite with and re-educate all the useful
intellectuals already available.

The elimination of illiteracy among 80 per cent of the population is a vital
task for the new China.

Proper and firm steps should be taken to eliminate all enslaving feudal and
fascist culture and education.

Vigorous action should be taken to prevent and cure endemic and other diseases
among the people and to expand the people's medical and health services.

The old type of cultural and educational workers and doctors should be given
suitable re-education so that they can acquire a new outlook and new methods
to serve the people.

The Chinese people's culture and education should be new-democratic, that
is to say, China should establish her own new national, scientific and mass
culture and education.

As for foreign culture, it would be a wrong policy to shut it out, rather
we should as far as possible draw on what is progressive in it for use in
the development of China's new culture; it would also be wrong to copy it
blindly, rather we should draw on it critically to meet the actual needs
of the Chinese people. The new culture created in the Soviet Union should
be a model for us in building our people's culture. Similarly, ancient Chinese
culture should neither be totally rejected nor blindly copied, but should
be accepted discriminatingly so as to help the progress of China's new culture.
9. The Problem of the Minority Nationalities


The anti-popular clique of the Kuomintang denies that many nationalities
exist in China, and labels all excepting the Han nationality as "tribes".
It has taken over the reactionary policy of the governments of the Ching
Dynasty and of the Northern warlords in relation to the minority nationalities,
oppressing and exploiting them in every possible way. Clear cases in point
are the massacre of Mongolians of the Ikhchao League in 1943, the armed
suppression of the minority nationalities in Sinkiang since 1944 and the
massacres of the Hui people in Kansu Province in recent years. These are
manifestations of a wrong Han-chauvinistic ideology and policy.

In 1924 Dr. Sun Yat-sen wrote in the Manifesto of the First National Congress
of the Kuomintang that "the Kuomintang's Principle of Nationalism has a twofold
meaning, first, the liberation of the Chinese nation, and second, the equality
of all the nationalities in China" and that "the Kuomintang solemnly declares
that it recognizes the right to self-determination of all the nationalities
in China and that a free and united republic of China (a free union of all
the nationalities) will be established when the anti-imperialist and anti-warlord
revolution is victorious".

The Communist Party of China is in full agreement with Dr. Sun's policy on
nationalities as stated here. Communists must actively help the people of
all the minority nationalities to fight for it, and help them, including
all their leaders who have ties with the masses, to fight for their political,
economic and cultural emancipation and development and to establish their
own armies which will safeguard the people's interests. Their spoken and
written languages, their manners and customs and their religious beliefs
must be respected.

The attitude which the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the Liberated
Areas in northern China have for years adopted towards the Mongolian and
Hui nationalities is correct, and the work they have done has been fruitful.
10. The Problem of Foreign Policy


The Communist Party of China agrees with the Atlantic Charter and with the
decisions of the international conferences of Moscow, Cairo, Teheran and
the Crimea, [12] because these decisions all
contribute to the defeat of the fascist aggressors and the maintenance of
world peace.

The fundamental principle of the foreign policy advocated by the Chinese
Communist Party is as follows: China shall establish and strengthen diplomatic
relations with all countries and settle all questions of common concern,
such as co-ordination of military operations in the war, peace conferences,
trade and investment, on the basic conditions that the Japanese aggressors
must be completely defeated and world peace maintained, that there must be
mutual respect for national independence and equality, and that there must
be promotion of mutual interests and friendship between states and between
peoples.

The Chinese Communist Party fully agrees with the proposals of the Dumbarton
Oaks conference and the decisions of the Crimea conference on the establishment
of an organization to safeguard international peace and security after the
war. It welcomes the United Nations Conference on International Organization
in San Francisco.

It has appointed its own representative on China's delegation to this conference
in order to express the will of the Chinese people.
[13]

We hold that the Kuomintang government must cease its hostility towards the
Soviet Union and speedily improve Sino-Soviet relations. The Soviet Union
was the first country to renounce the unequal treaties and sign new, equal
treaties with China. At the time of the Kuomintang's First National Congress
called by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in 1924 and the subsequent Northern Expedition,
the Soviet Union was the only country to help China's war of liberation.
When the anti-Japanese war broke out in 1937, the Soviet Union was again
the first country to help China against the Japanese aggressors. The Chinese
people are grateful to the Soviet government and people for this help. We
believe that no final and thorough settlement of the problems of the Pacific
is possible without the participation of the Soviet Union.

We ask the governments of all the allied countries, and of the United States
and Britain in the first place, to pay serious attention to the voice of
the Chinese people and not to impair friendship with them by pursuing foreign
policies that run counter to their will. We maintain that if any foreign
government helps the Chinese reactionaries and opposes the Chinese people's
democratic cause, it will be committing a gross mistake.

The Chinese people welcome the steps taken by many foreign governments in
renouncing their unequal treaties and concluding new, equal treaties with
China. However, we maintain that the conclusion of equal treaties does not
in itself mean that China has actually won genuine equality. Genuine and
actual equality is never the gift of foreign governments, but must be won
mainly by the Chinese people through their own efforts, and the way to win
it is to build a new-democratic China politically, economically and culturally;
otherwise there will be only nominal and not actual independence and equality.
That is to say, China can never win genuine independence and equality by
following the present policy of the Kuomintang government.

We consider that, after the defeat and unconditional surrender of the Japanese
aggressors, it will be necessary to help all the democratic forces of the
Japanese people to establish their own democratic system so that Japanese
fascism and militarism may be thoroughly wiped out, together with their
political, economic and social roots. Unless the Japanese people have a
democratic system, it will be impossible thoroughly to wipe out Japanese
fascism and militarism and impossible to ensure peace in the Pacific.

We consider the decision of the Cairo conference regarding the independence
of Korea to be correct. The Chinese people should help the Korean people
to win liberation.

We hope that India will attain independence. For an independent and democratic
India is not only needed by the Indian people but is essential for world
peace.

As regards the Southeast Asian countries--Burma, Malaya, Indonesia, Viet
Nam and the Philippines--we hope that after the defeat of the Japanese aggressors
their people will exercise their right to establish independent and democratic
states of their own. As for Thailand, she should be treated like the fascist
satellite states in Europe.

  

So much for the major points of our specific programme.

To repeat, none of the points in this specific programme can be successfully
carried out on a nation-wide scale without a democratic coalition government
enjoying the support of the entire nation.

By its twenty-four years of struggle for the cause of the liberation of the
Chinese people, the Communist Party of China has attained a position such
that any political party or social group or any Chinese or foreigner ignoring
its opinion on questions concerning China will be making a serious mistake
and courting certain failure. There were, and still are, people who try to
ignore our opinions and to follow their own bigoted course, but they have
all ended in a blind alley. Why? Simply because our opinions conform to the
interests of the Chinese masses. The Chinese Communist Party is the most
faithful spokesman of the Chinese people, and whoever fails to respect it
in fact fails to respect the Chinese masses and is doomed to defeat.
THE TASKS IN THE KUOMINTANG AREAS


I have now given a detailed explanation of our Party's general and specific
programmes. There is no doubt that these programmes will eventually be put
into effect throughout China; this is the vista that the international and
domestic situation as a whole has opened up for the Chinese people. However,
at the moment conditions in the Kuomintang areas, the enemy-occupied areas
and the Liberated Areas differ from each other, making it necessary for us
to distinguish between them in implementing our programme. Different conditions
give rise to different tasks. Some of these tasks I have already explained
above, while others still need elaboration.

In the Kuomintang areas, the people are not free to engage in patriotic activity,
and democratic movements are considered illegal, and yet various social strata,
democratic parties and individuals are becoming increasingly active. The
China Democratic League issued a manifesto in January this year demanding
the termination of the Kuomintang's one-party dictatorship and the establishment
of a coalition government. Many sections of the people have made similar
declarations. Within the Kuomintang, too, many people are showing increasing
doubt and discontent over the policies of the leading bodies of their own
party, are becoming increasingly aware of the danger of their party's isolation
from the people, and are therefore demanding democratic reforms suited to
the times. In Chungking and other places democratic movements are growing
among the workers, the peasants, cultural circles, the students, educational
circles, women, industrial and commercial circles, government employees and
even among some of the soldiers and officers. Those facts indicate that the
democratic movements of all the oppressed strata are gradually converging
on a common objective. One weakness of the present movements is that the
basic sections of society have not yet joined it on a wide scale and that
the most important forces, namely, the peasants, workers, soldiers and the
lower-ranking government employees and teachers, who are all suffering so
bitterly, are not yet organized. Another weakness is that many of the democratic
personalities in the movement are still unclear and hesitant about the
fundamental policy, namely, that a change in the situation must be sought
through the waging of struggle on a democratic mass basis. However, the objective
situation is compelling all the oppressed strata, political parties and social
groups gradually to awaken and unite. No suppression by the Kuomintang government
can stop the advance of this movement.

All the oppressed strata, political parties and social groups in the Kuomintang
areas must extend their democratic movement on a broad scale and gradually
weld their scattered forces together in order to fight for national unity,
the establishment of a coalition government, the defeat of the Japanese
aggressors and the building of a new China. The Communist Party of China
and the people of the Liberated Areas should give them every possible help.

In the Kuomintang areas the Communists should continue to pursue the policy
of a broad National United Front Against Japan. In the fight for common
objectives, we should co-operate with anyone who does not oppose us today,
even though he might have done so yesterday.
THE TASKS IN THE JAPANESE-OCCUPIED AREAS


In the occupied areas, Communists should call on all who oppose Japan to
follow the French and Italian examples and form organizations and underground
forces to prepare armed uprisings, so that when the time comes they can act
from the inside in co-ordination with the armies attacking from the outside
and so wipe out the Japanese aggressors. The atrocities, plunder, rape and
humiliation suffered by our brothers and sisters in the occupied areas at
the hands of the Japanese aggressors and their servile lackeys have aroused
the burning wrath of all Chinese, and the hour of revenge is fast approaching.
The victories in the European theatre of war and the victories of our Eighth
Route and New Fourth Armies have stimulated and heightened the anti-Japanese
spirit of the people in the occupied areas. They urgently want to become
organized so as to achieve liberation as quickly as possible. Therefore,
we must raise our work in the occupied areas to the same level of importance
as that in the Liberated Areas. Large numbers of our working personnel must
be sent to work there. Large numbers of activists among the people there
must be trained and promoted and must take part in local work. We must intensify
our underground work in the four northeastern provinces which have been occupied
longer than any other region and which form a key industrial and troop
concentration area for the Japanese aggressors. With a view to the recovery
of these lost territories, we should strengthen our solidarity with the people
who have fled south from the Northeast.

Communists should pursue the broadest united front policy in all the occupied
areas. For the overthrow of the common enemy they must unite with anyone
who is opposed to the Japanese aggressors and their servile lackeys.

We should warn all the puppet armies, the puppet police and others who are
helping the enemy and opposing their countrymen that they must quickly recognize
the criminal nature of their actions, repent in time and atone for their
crimes by helping their countrymen against the enemy. Otherwise the nation
will certainly call them to account the day the enemy collapses.

Communists should direct persuasive propaganda at all puppet organizations
with a mass following so as to win the masses who have been misled over to
our side against the national enemy. At the same time, evidence should be
collected about those impenitent collaborators who have committed the most
heinous crimes, so that they can be brought to justice when the lost territories
are recovered.

Those Kuomintang reactionaries who have betrayed the nation by organizing
open collaborators to fight the Chinese people, the Communist Party, the
Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth Army and other armed forces of the people
must be warned to repent in time. Otherwise, when the lost territories are
recovered, they will certainly be punished for their crimes along with the
collaborators with Japan and will be shown no mercy.
THE TASKS IN THE LIBERATED AREAS


Our Party has put its whole new-democratic programme into practice in the
Liberated Areas with striking results, and so built up tremendous anti-Japanese
strength, and from now on this strength should be developed and consolidated
in every way.

In the prevailing circumstances, the troops of the Liberated Areas should
launch extensive attacks on all places that can be captured from the Japanese
and puppets in order to expand the Liberated Areas and reduce the occupied
areas.

But at the same time it should be borne in mind that the enemy is still strong
and may launch further attacks on the Liberated Areas. The army and the people
of our areas must be ready at all times to smash his attacks and must work
in every way to consolidate these areas.

We must expand the armies, the guerrilla units, the people's militia and
the self-defence corps of the Liberated Areas, and increase their combat
effectiveness by speeding up their training and consolidation in order to
build up adequate strength for the final defeat of the aggressors.

The army in the Liberated Areas must support the government and cherish the
people, while the democratic governments must lead the people in the work
of supporting the army and taking good care of the families of soldiers fighting
Japan. In this way relations between the army and the people will become
still better.

In the work of the local coalition governments and mass organizations, Communists
should continue to co-operate closely with all anti-Japanese democrats on
the basis of the new-democratic programme.

Similarly in military work, Communists should co-operate closely with all
anti-Japanese democrats who are willing to co-operate with us, whether or
not they are members of the armies of the Liberated Areas.

To increase the enthusiasm of the masses of the workers, peasants and other
working people for the war and for production, we must thoroughly apply the
policy of reducing rent and interest and of increasing the pay of workers
and office staff. The cadres of the Liberated Areas must diligently learn
to do economic work. All available forces must be mobilized for the extensive
development of agriculture, industry and trade and the improvement of the
livelihood of the soldiers and the people. For this purpose there must be
labour emulation campaigns, and rewards should be given to labour heroes
and model workers. When the Japanese aggressors are driven out of the cities,
our personnel must rapidly learn how to do urban economic work.

Our cultural and educational work must be developed in order to raise the
level of political consciousness of the people in the Liberated Areas and,
above all, of the masses of the workers, peasants and soldiers, and in order
to train large numbers of cadres. In carrying forward this work, those engaged
in it should adopt forms and select contents suited to the existing rural
conditions and to the needs and wishes of the people in the countryside.

In all our work in the Liberated Areas, manpower and material resources must
be used most sparingly, and in every field long-term plans must be made,
and misuse and waste must be avoided. This is needed both for defeating the
Japanese aggressors and for building up the new China.

In all our work in the Liberated Areas, we must take great care to help the
local people administer local affairs and to cultivate many local cadres
from among the best local people. It will be impossible to accomplish the
great task of the democratic revolution in the rural areas unless comrades
who come from other places identify themselves with the local people and
help the local cadres whole-heartedly, painstakingly and in ways that fit
the actual conditions, and unless they cherish them like their own brothers
and sisters.

When a unit of the Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth Army or any other armed
force of the people arrives at a place, it should immediately help the local
people to organize forces led by the local cadres, including not only militia
and self-defence corps but also local troops and regional forces. This will
make possible the eventual creation of regular forces and regular army formations
led by local people. This is an extremely important task. Unless it is
accomplished, we can neither build stable anti-Japanese base areas nor expand
the people's army.

Of course the local people for their part should warmly welcome and help
the revolutionary workers and people's forces coming from other areas.

Everybody should be alerted on the question of dealing with covert wreckers.
For it is easy to spot and handle overt enemies and wreckers of the national
cause, but not those who work under cover. Therefore we should take up this
matter in all seriousness and at the same time be very careful in dealing
with such people.

All religions are permitted in China's Liberated Areas, in accordance with
the principle of freedom of religious belief. All believers in Protestantism,
Catholicism, Islamism, Buddhism and other faiths enjoy the protection of
the people's government so long as they are abiding by its laws. Everyone
is free to believe or not to believe; neither compulsion nor discrimination
is permitted.

Our congress should propose to the people of the Liberated Areas that a people's
conference of the Chinese Liberated Areas [14]
be held in Yenan as soon as possible to discuss the questions of co-ordinating
the activities of the various Liberated Areas, strengthening their work in
the War of Resistance, helping the people's anti-Japanese democratic movement
in the Kuomintang areas, helping the underground armed forces of the people
in the occupied areas, and promoting national unity and the formation of
a coalition government. Now that China's Liberated Areas have become the
centre of gravity in the nationwide people's struggle to resist Japan and
save the country, the broad masses throughout the country pin their hopes
on us and it is our duty not to disappoint them. Such a conference would
give great impetus to the Chinese people's cause of national liberation.

V. LET THE WHOLE PARTY UNITE AND FIGHT TO ACCOMPLISH ITS
  TASKS!


Comrades! Now that we understand our tasks and the policies for accomplishing
them, what should be our attitude in carrying out these policies and performing
these tasks?

The present international and domestic situation opens up bright prospects
and provides unprecedentedly favorable conditions for us and the Chinese
people as a whole; this is evident and beyond doubt. But at the same time
there are still serious difficulties. Anyone who sees only the bright side
but not the difficulties cannot fight effectively for the accomplishment
of the Party's tasks.

Together with the Chinese people, our Party has built up immense strength
for the Chinese nation in the twenty-four years of the Party's history, including
the eight years of the War of Resistance Against Japan; the success of our
work is obvious and beyond doubt. But at the same time there are still defects
in our work. Anyone who sees only the successful side but not the defects
likewise cannot fight effectively for the accomplishment of the Party's tasks.

In the twenty-four years since its birth in 1921, the Communist Party of
China has gone through three great struggles--the Northern Expedition, the
Agrarian Revolutionary War and the War of Resistance Against Japan which
is still going on. From its very beginning our Party has based itself on
the theory of Marxism-Leninism, for Marxism-Leninism is the crystallization
of the most correct and most revolutionary scientific thought of the world
proletariat. When the universal truth of Marxism-Leninism began to be integrated
with the concrete practice of the Chinese revolution, the Chinese revolution
took on an entirely new complexion and the entire historical stage of New
Democracy emerged. Armed with Marxist-Leninist theory, the Communist Party
of China has brought a new style of work to the Chinese people, a style of
work which essentially entails integrating theory with practice, forging
close links with the masses and practicing self-criticism.

The universal truth of Marxism-Leninism, which reflects the practice of
proletarian struggle throughout the world, becomes an invincible weapon for
the Chinese people when it is integrated with the concrete practice of the
revolutionary struggle of the Chinese proletariat and people. This the Communist
Party of China has achieved. Our Party has grown and advanced through staunch
struggle against every manifestation of dogmatism and empiricism, which runs
counter to this principle. Dogmatism is divorced from concrete practice,
while empiricism mistakes fragmentary experience for universal truth; both
kinds of opportunist thinking run counter to Marxism. In the course of its
twenty-four years of struggle our Party has successfully fought such wrong
thinking and it is still doing so, thus greatly consolidating itself
ideologically. Our Party now has 1,210,000 members. The overwhelming majority
have joined during the War of Resistance, and there are various impurities
in their ideology. The same is true of some of the members who joined the
Party before the war. The work of rectification in the last few years has
been most successful and has gone a long way towards removing these impurities.
This work should be continued and ideological education within the Party
should be developed still more extensively in the spirit of "learning from
past mistakes to avoid future ones" and "curing the sickness to save the
patient". We must enable the Party's leading cadres at all levels to understand
that close integration of theory and practice is a hallmark distinguishing
our Party from all other political parties. Therefore ideological education
is the key link to be grasped in uniting the whole Party for great political
struggles. Unless this is done, the Party cannot accomplish any of its political
tasks.

Another hallmark distinguishing our Party from all other political parties
is that we have very close ties with the broadest masses of the people. Our
point of departure is to serve the people whole-heartedly and never for a
moment divorce ourselves from the masses, to proceed in all cases from the
interests of the people and not from the interests of individuals or groups,
and to understand the identity of our responsibility to the people and our
responsibility to the leading organs of the Party. Communists must be ready
at all times to stand up for the truth, because truth is in the interests
of the people; Communists must be ready at all times to correct their mistakes,
because mistakes are against the interests of the people. Twenty-four years
of experience tell us that the right task, policy and style of work invariably
conform with the demands of the masses at a given time and place and invariably
strengthen our ties with the masses, and the wrong task, policy and style
of work invariably disagree with the demands of the masses at a given time
and place and invariably alienate us from the masses. The reason why such
evils as dogmatism, empiricism, commandism, tailism, sectarianism, bureaucracy
and an arrogant attitude in work are definitely harmful and intolerable,
and why anyone suffering from these maladies must overcome them, is that
they alienate us from the masses. Our congress should call upon the whole
Party to be vigilant and to see that no comrade at any post is divorced from
the masses. It should teach every comrade to love the people and listen
attentively to the voice of the masses; to identify himself with the masses
wherever he goes and, instead of standing above them, to immerse himself
among them; and, according to their present level, to awaken them or raise
their political consciousness and help them gradually to organize themselves
voluntarily and to set going all essential struggles permitted by the internal
and external circumstances of the given time and place. Commandism is wrong
in any type of work, because in overstepping the level of political consciousness
of the masses and violating the principle of voluntary mass action it reflects
the disease of impetuosity. Our comrades must not assume that everything
they themselves understand is understood by the masses. Whether the masses
understand it and are ready to take action can be discovered only by going
into their midst and making investigations. If we do so, we can avoid commandism.
Tailism in any type of work is also wrong, because in falling below the level
of political consciousness of the masses and violating the principle of leading
the masses forward it reflects the disease of dilatoriness. Our comrades
must not assume that the masses have no understanding of what they themselves
do not yet understand. It often happens that the masses outstrip us and are
eager to advance a step when our comrades are still tailing behind certain
backward elements, for instead of acting as leaders of the masses such comrades
reflect the views of these backward elements and, moreover, mistake them
for those of the broad masses. In a word, every comrade must be brought to
understand that the supreme test of the words and deeds of a Communist is
whether they conform with the highest interests and enjoy the support of
the overwhelming majority of the people. Every comrade must be helped to
understand that as long as we rely on the people, believe firmly in the
inexhaustible creative power of the masses and hence trust and identify ourselves
with them, no enemy can crush us while we can crush every enemy and overcome
every difficulty.

Conscientious practice of self-criticism is still another hallmark distinguishing
our Party from all other political parties. As we say, dust will accumulate
if a room is not cleaned regularly, our faces will get dirty if they are
not washed regularly. Our comrades' minds and our Party's work may also collect
dust, and also need sweeping and washing. The proverb "Running water is never
stale and a door-hinge is never worm-eaten" means that constant motion prevents
the inroads of germs and other organisms. To check up regularly on our work
and in the process develop a democratic style of work, to fear neither criticism
nor self-criticism, and to apply such good popular Chinese maxims as "Say
all you know and say it without reserve", "Blame not the speaker but be warned
by his words" and "Correct mistakes if you have committed them and guard
against them if you have not"-- this is the only effective way to prevent
all kinds of political dust and germs from contaminating the minds of our
comrades and the body of our Party. The reason for the great effectiveness
of the rectification movement, the purpose of which was "to learn from past
mistakes to avoid future ones and to cure the sickness to save the patient",
was that the criticism and self-criticism we carried out were honest and
conscientious, and not perfunctory and distorted. As we Chinese Communists,
who base all our actions on the highest interests of the broadest masses
of the Chinese people and who are fully convinced of the justice of our cause,
never balk at any personal sacrifice and are ready at all times to give our
lives for the cause, can we be reluctant to discard any idea, viewpoint,
opinion or method which is not suited to the needs of the people? Can we
be willing to allow political dust and germs to dirty our clean faces or
eat into our healthy organism? Countless revolutionary martyrs have laid
down their lives in the interests of the people, and our hearts are filled
with pain as we the living think of them--can there be any personal interest,
then, that we would not sacrifice or any error that we would not discard?

Comrades! When this congress is over, we shall go to the front and, guided
by its resolutions, fight to bring about the final defeat of the Japanese
aggressors and to build a new China. To achieve this aim, we shall unite
with all the people of our country. Let me repeat: We shall unite with any
class, any party, any group or individual if they are for the defeat of the
Japanese aggressors and the building of a new China. To achieve this aim,
we shall solidly unite all the forces of our Party on democratic centralist
principles of organization and discipline. We shall unite with any comrade
if he abides by the Party's Programme, Constitution and decisions. In the
period of the Northern Expedition our Party had a membership of less than
60,000, most of whom were later dispersed by the enemy; in the period of
the Agrarian Revolutionary War we had a membership of less than 300,000,
most of whom were likewise dispersed by the enemy. Now we have more than
1,200,000 members; this time we must in no circumstances allow ourselves
to be dispersed by the enemy. If we can profit from the experience of those
three periods, if we are modest and guard against conceit and are able to
strengthen unity among all comrades inside the Party and with all the people
outside the Party, we can rest assured that, far from being dispersed by
the enemy, we shall destroy the Japanese aggressors and their servile running
dogs resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely, and thereafter build
a new-democratic China.

The experience of the three periods of the revolution, and especially that
of the War of Resistance Against Japan, has convinced us and the whole Chinese
people that without the efforts of the Chinese Communist Party, without the
Chinese Communists as the mainstay of the Chinese people, China can never
achieve independence or liberation, or industrialization and the modernization
of her agriculture.

Comrades! I firmly believe that with the Communist Party of China armed with
the experience of the three revolutions, we can accomplish our great political
task.

Thousands upon thousands of martyrs have heroically laid down their lives
for the people; let us hold their banner high and march ahead along the path
crimson with their blood!

A new-democratic China will soon be born. Let us hail that great day!
NOTES

l. The Chinese National Liberation Vanguard Corps, or to
give its shorter name the National Vanguard Corps, was a revolutionary youth
organization formed under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party in
September 1936 by the progressive youth who participated in the December
9th Movement of 1935. After the outbreak of the War of Resistance, many of
its members saw action and took part in building base areas behind the enemy
lines. The organizations of the National Vanguard Corps in the Kuomintang
areas were forcibly dissolved by the Chiang Kai-shek government in 1938;
those in the Liberated Areas were later merged into the Association of Youth
for National Salvation, an organization of even broader scope.

2. On July 7, 1937, the Japanese invading forces attacked
the Chinese garrison at Lukouchiao, some ten kilometres southwest of Peking.
Under the influence of the ardent and nation-wide anti-Japanese movement
the Chinese troops put up resistance. This incident marked the beginning
of the Chinese people's heroic War of Resistance Against Japan which lasted
for eight years.

3. For a fuller account of the three anti-Communist onslaughts,
see "A Comment on the Sessions of the Kuomintang Central Executive Committee
and of the People's Political Council", pp. 137-51 of this volume.

4. These operations to force China's north-south trunk
railways open for through traffic constituted the offensive launched in May
1944 by the Japanese army to seize the Canton-Hankow Railway along its entire
length and thus secure an uninterrupted land link between northern and southern
China.

5. Scobie was the commander of the British imperialist
forces of aggression in Greece. In October 1944, when the German invaders
were retreating in defeat on the European continent, Scobie's troops entered
the country, bringing with them the reactionary Greek government that had
been in exile in London. Scobie directed and assisted this government in
attacking the Greek People's Liberation Army, which had waged a long and
heroic struggle against the German invaders, and in massacring Greek patriots,
and so plunged Greece into a blood bath.

6. Pao chia was the administrative system by which
the Kuomintang reactionary clique enforced its fascist rule at the primary
level. On August 1, 1932, Chiang Kai-shek promulgated his "Regulations for
the Organization of Pao and Chia and for a Population Census
in the Counties", covering the provinces of Honan, Hupeh and Anhwei. The
"Regulations" provided that "the pao and chia are to be
organized on the basis of households; there is to be a head of each household,
of each chia, which is made up of ten households, and of each pao,
which is made up of ten chia". Neighbours were required to
watch each other's activities and report them to the authorities, and all
were punishable when one was found guilty; counter-revolutionary measures
for exacting compulsory labour were also laid down. On November 7, 1934,
the Kuomintang government officially announced that this system of fascist
rule was to be established in all the provinces and municipalities under
its rule.

7. The Cairo conference, held by China, the United States
and Britain in November 1943, issued the Cairo Declaration which clearly
stipulated that Taiwan and certain other territories were to be returned
to China. In June 1950 the U.S. government sent a fleet to control Taiwan
in open repudiation of this agreement, in the attempt to deprive China of
her sovereignty over it.

8. Yuan Shih-kai was the head of the Northern warlords
in the last years of the Ching Dynasty. After the Ching Dynasty was overthrown
by the Revolution of 1911, he usurped the president of the Republic and organized
the first government of the Northern warlords, which represented the big
landlord and big comprador classes. He did this by relying on
counter-revolutionary armed force and on the support of the imperialists
and by taking advantage of the conciliationist character of the bourgeoisie,
which was then leading the revolution. In 1915 he wanted to make himself
emperor and, to gain the support of the Japanese imperialists, accepted the
Twenty-one Demands with which Japan aimed at obtaining exclusive control
of all China. In December of the same year an uprising against his assumption
of the throne took place in Yunnan Province and promptly won nation-wide
response and support. Yuan Shih-kai died in Peking in June 1916.

9. Omei is a famous mountain in the southwestern part of
Szechuan Province. Here it symbolizes the mountainous areas of Szechuan,
the last refuge of the Chiang Kai-shek ruling clique in the War of Resistance
Against Japan.

10. From Dr. Sun Yat-sen's "Statement on My Departure
for the North", dated November 10, 1924.

11. For many decades, beginning with the end of the 18th
century, Britain exported an increasing quantity of opium to China. This
traffic not only subjected the Chinese people to drugging but also plundered
China of her silver. It aroused fierce opposition in China. In 1840, under
the pretext of safeguarding its trade with China, Britain launched armed
aggression against her. The Chinese troops led by Lin Tse-hsu put up resistance,
and the people in Canton spontaneously organized the "Quell the British Corps",
which dealt serious blows to the British forces of aggression. In 1842, however,
the corrupt Ching regime signed the Treaty of Nanking with Britain. This
treaty provided for the payment of indemnities and the cession of Hongkong
to Britain, and stipulated that Shanghai, Foochow, Amoy, Ningpo and Canton
were to be opened to British trade and that tariff rates for British goods
imported into China were to be jointly fixed by China and Britain.

12. The Atlantic Charter was issued jointly by the United
States and Britain at the conclusion of their Atlantic conference in August
1941. The Moscow conference was held in October 1943 by the foreign ministers
of the Soviet Union, the United States and Britain. The Teheran conference
of the Soviet Union, the United States and Britain was held in the capital
of Iran from November to December 1943. The Crimea conference of the Soviet
Union, the United States and Britain took place in February 1945 at Yalta.
At all these international conferences the signatories recorded their resolve
to defeat fascist Germany and Japan through common endeavour and, after the
war, to prevent the revival of the forces of aggression and the remnants
of fascism, maintain world peace and help the peoples of all countries to
realize their aspirations for independence and democracy. But immediately
after the war the U.S. and British governments violated all these international
agreements.

13. As the representative of China's Liberated Areas Comrade
Tang Pi-wu attended the United Nations Conference on International Organization
which was held at San Francisco from April to June 1945, with the participation
of representatives from fifty countries. The proposals for the Organization
of the United Nations were drafted at Dumbarton Oaks, U.S.A., where the
representatives of the Soviet Union, the United States, Britain and China
met from August to October 1944 in accordance with the decisions of the Moscow
and Teheran conferences.

14. With Japan's surrender the situation changed and the
people's conference of the Chinese Liberated Areas was not convened, although
a Preparatory Committee for this conference was formed in Yenan after the
Seventh National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party and held an inaugural
meeting which was attended by representative from all the Liberated Areas.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Production by the Army for Its Own Support and On the Importance of the Great Movements for Rectification and for Production







ON PRODUCTION BY THE ARMY FOR ITS OWN SUPPORT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON PRODUCTION BY THE ARMY FOR ITS OWN SUPPORT AND ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
  GREAT MOVEMENTS FOR RECTIFICATION AND FOR PRODUCTION

April 27, 1945

[This was an editorial written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Liberation
Daily, Yenan.] 
  

In the existing circumstances in which our army is facing extreme material
difficulties and is engaged in dispersed operations, it is absolutely
inadmissible for the leading bodies to assume full responsibility for
provisioning the army, for to do so would both hamper the initiative of the
large numbers of officers and men at the lower levels and fail to satisfy
their needs. We should say, "Comrades, let us all go into action and overcome
our difficulties!" If only the leadership at the higher levels sets the tasks
well and gives the lower levels a free hand to overcome difficulties by their
own efforts, the problem will be solved and, indeed, solved in a more
satisfactory way. But if, instead, the higher levels always shoulder loads
heavier than they can really carry, dare not give the lower levels a free
hand and do not arouse enthusiasm for self-reliance among the broad masses,
then in spite of all the efforts of the higher levels the result will be
that both the higher and the lower levels will find themselves in a predicament,
and the problem will never be solved in the existing circumstances. The
experience of the last few years has amply borne this out. The principle
of "unified leadership and decentralized management" has proved to be the
correct one for organizing all economic activities in our Liberated Areas
in the present circumstances. The armed forces of the Liberated Areas already
total more than 900,000 men. To defeat the Japanese aggressors, we must increase
them to several times this number. But we have so far received no outside
aid. Even if we get it in the future, we shall still have to provide our
own means of livelihood; on that score there must be no illusions whatsoever.
In the near future we shall have to take the necessary number of military
formations from the areas where they are now engaged in dispersed operations,
and concentrate them for attack on particular enemy objectives. Such big
formations for concentrated action will be unable to engage in production
to support themselves, and, what is more, will need large supplies from the
rear; only the local troops and regional formations remaining behind (and
they will still be considerable) will be able both to fight and to engage
in production as before. Such being the case, is there any doubt that, as
long as fighting and training are not impeded, all troops without exception
should use the present opportunity to learn how to be partially self-supporting
through production?

In our circumstances, production by the army for its own support, though
backward or retrogressive in form, is progressive in substance and of great
historic significance. Formally speaking, we are violating the principle
of division of labour. However, in our circumstances-- the poverty and disunity
of the country (resulting from the crimes of the chief ruling clique of the
Kuomintang), and the protracted and dispersed people's guerrilla war--what
we are doing is progressive. Look how pale and emaciated the Kuomintang soldiers
are, and how robust and strong our soldiers of the Liberated Areas are! Look
what difficulties we ourselves had before we started production for self-support,
and how much better off we have been since! Let us ask two army units here,
say two companies, to choose between the two methods, i.e., between the higher
levels supplying them with all their means of livelihood and the higher levels
supplying little or nothing but letting them produce for themselves all that
they need, or the greater part, or half, or even less than half of what they
need. Which method will yield better results? Which will they prefer? After
a year's serious experiment in production for self-support, they will surely
answer that the second method yields better results and be willing to adopt
it, and they will surely answer that the first method yields poorer results
and be unwilling to adopt it. The reason is that the second method can improve
the living conditions of everyone in the army, whereas the first method can
never satisfy their needs in the present difficult material circumstances,
however hard the higher levels may try. Because we have adopted what seems
to be a "backward" and "retrogressive" method, our troops are able to overcome
shortages in the means of livelihood and improve their living conditions,
so that every soldier is robust and strong; as a result, we are able to ease
the tax burden on the people who are also in difficulties, thus winning their
support, and we are able to keep up the protracted war and expand our armed
forces, thus extending the Liberated Areas, reducing the enemy-occupied areas
and attaining our objective of final victory over the aggressor and the
liberation of the whole of China. Is this not of great historic significance?

Production by the army for its own support has not only improved the army's
living conditions and lightened the burden on the people, thereby making
it possible further to expand the army. In addition, it has had many immediate
effects. They are as follows:

  (1) Improved relations between officers and men. Officers and men work together
  in production and become like brothers.


  (2) Better attitude to labour. What we now have is neither the old mercenary
  system nor universal military service, but a third system, the system of
  mobilizing volunteers. It is better than the mercenary system since it does
  not produce so many loafers, but it is not so good as universal military
  service. Nevertheless, our present conditions only allow us to adopt the
  system of mobilizing volunteers, and not that of universal military service.
  The mobilized soldiers have to lead an army life for a long time, which may
  impair their attitude to labour and so turn some of them into loafers or
  taint them with certain bad habits characteristic of the warlord armies.
  But since the army began to produce for its own support, the attitude to
  labour has improved and loafer ways have been overcome.


  (3) Strengthened discipline. Far from weakening discipline in battle and
  in army life, labour discipline in production actually strengthens it.


  (4) Improved relations between the army and the people. Once an armed force
  begins to "keep house" for itself, encroachments upon the property of the
  people seldom or never occur. As the army and the people exchange labour
  and help each other in production, the friendship between them is strengthened.


  (5) Less grumbling in the army about the government and improved relations
  between the two.


  (6) An impetus to the great production campaign of the people. Once the army
  engages in production, the need for government and other organizations to
  do likewise becomes more obvious, and they do so more energetically; also,
  the need for a universal campaign of the whole people to increase production
  naturally becomes more obvious, and this too is carried on more energetically.


The widespread movements for rectification and for production which began
in 1942 and 1943 respectively have played and are still playing a decisive
role, the one in our ideological and the other in our material life. Unless
we grasp these two links at the right time, we shall be unable to grasp the
whole chain of the revolution, and our struggle will not advance.

As we know, of the members who joined the Party before 1937, only a few tens
of thousands are left, and most of our present membership of 1,200,000 come
from the peasantry and other sections of the petty bourgeoisie. The revolutionary
fervour of these comrades is admirable and they wish to have Marxist training,
but they have brought with them into the Party ideas which are out of keeping
or not altogether in keeping with Marxism. The same is true of some people
who joined the Party before 1937. It constitutes an extremely serious
contradiction, an enormous difficulty. In those circumstances, could we have
advanced smoothly if we had not started a widespread movement of Marxist
education, that is, the rectification movement? Obviously not. But as we
have solved or are in the process of solving this contradiction among large
numbers of cadres--the contradiction, within the Party, between the proletarian
ideology and non-proletarian ideologies (including those of the petty
bourgeoisie, the bourgeoisie and even of the landlord class, but mainly of
the petty bourgeoisie), i.e., the contradiction between the Marxist ideology
and non-Marxist ideologies--our Party can go forward with great, firm strides
in unprecedented (though not complete) ideological, political and organizational
unity. From now on our Party can and should grow even larger and, guided
by the principles of Marxist ideology, we shall be able to steer its further
development still more effectively.

The other link is the movement for production. The War of Resistance has
been going on for eight years. When it began we had food and clothing. But
things got steadily worse until we were in great difficulty, running short
of grain, short of cooking oil and salt, short of bedding and clothing, short
of funds. This great difficulty, this great contradiction, came in the wake
of the big Japanese offensives and the Kuomintang government's three large-scale
attacks on the people (the "anti-Communist onslaughts") in 1940-43. Could
our anti-Japanese struggle have progressed if we had not overcome this
difficulty, solved this contradiction, grasped this link? Obviously not.
But we have learned and are still learning to develop production, and so
we are again full of vigour and vitality. Fearing no enemy, we shall prevail
over them all in a few years.

Thus there can be no doubt of the historic importance of the two great movements
for rectification and production.

Let us go forward and spread those two great movements everywhere as a foundation
for the fulfilment of other tasks in our struggle. If we can do so, the complete
liberation of the Chinese people will be assured.

Now is the season for spring ploughing, and it is hoped that the leading
comrades, all the working personnel and the masses of the people in every
Liberated Area will grasp the link of production in good time and strive
for even greater achievements than those of last year. Greater efforts must
be made this year, particularly in areas which have not yet learned to develop
production.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Concentrate a Superior Force to Destroy the Enemy Forces One by One







CONCENTRATE A SUPERIOR FORCE TO DESTROY THE ENEMY FORCES ONE BY ONE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

CONCENTRATE A SUPERIOR FORCE TO DESTROY THE ENEMY FORCES ONE BY ONE


September 16, 1946

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the
Revolutionary Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China.]

  

1. The method of fighting by concentrating a superior force to destroy the
enemy forces [1] one by one must be employed not
only in the disposition of troops for a campaign but also in the disposition
of troops for a battle.

2. With regard to the disposition for a campaign, when the enemy
employs many brigades [2] (or regiments) and advances
against our army from several directions, our army must concentrate an absolutely
superior force -- six, five, four or at least three times the enemy strength
-- and pick an opportune moment to encircle and wipe out one enemy brigade
(or regiment) first. It should be one of the enemy's weaker brigades (or
regiments), or one that has less support, or one stationed where the terrain
and the people are most favourable to us and unfavourable to the enemy. We
should tie down the rest of the enemy brigades (or regiments) with small
forces in order to prevent them from rushing reinforcements to the brigade
(or regiment) we are encircling and attacking so that we can destroy it first.
When this has been achieved, we should, according to the circumstances, either
wipe out one or several more enemy brigades or retire to rest and consolidate
for further fighting. (Here are two examples of the former. Our troops under
the command of Su Yu and Tan Chen-lin wiped out five thousand of the enemy's
communications police corps [3] near Jukao on August
22, one enemy brigade on August 26 and one and a half brigades on
August 27.[4] Our troops under Liu Po-cheng and
Teng Hsiao-ping annihilated one enemy brigade near Tingtao between September
3 and 6,another in the afternoon of September 6 and two more on September
7-8.[5] ) In the disposition for a campaign,
we must reject the wrong method of fighting, which underrates the enemy and
therefore divides our forces to deal with all the enemy detachments, for
by this method we cannot destroy even one enemy detachment but will land
ourselves in a passive position.

3. In the disposition for a battle, when we have concentrated an absolutely
superior force and encircled one of the enemy detachments (a brigade or
regiment), our attacking formations (or units) should not attempt to wipe
out all the encircled enemy simultaneously at one swoop and thus divide
themselves and strike everywhere without enough strength anywhere, losing
time and making it hard to get results. Instead, we should concentrate an
absolutely superior force, that is to say, a force six, five, four or at
least three times that of the enemy, concentrate the whole or the bulk of
our artillery, select one (not two) of the weak spots in the enemy's positions,
attack it fiercely and be sure to win. This accomplished, swiftly exploit
the victory and destroy the enemy forces one by one.

4. The effects of this method of fighting are, first, complete annihilation
and, second, quick decision. Only complete annihilation can deal the most
telling blows to the enemy, for when we wipe out one regiment, he will have
one regiment less, and when we wipe out one brigade, he will have one brigade
less. This method is most useful when employed against an enemy lacking
second-line troops. Only complete annihilation can replenish our own forces
to the greatest possible extent. It is now not only the main source of our
arms and ammunition, but also an important source of our manpower. Complete
annihilation demoralizes the enemy's troops and depresses his followers;
it raises the morale of our troops and inspires our people. A quick decision
makes it possible for our troops either to wipe out the enemy reinforcements
one by one or evade them. Quick decision in battle and campaign is a necessary
condition for the strategy of a protracted war.

5. Among our military cadres there are still many who, when not in action,
approve the principle of concentrating our forces to wipe out the enemy forces
one by one, but often fail to apply it in action. That is due to underestimation
of the enemy and to lack of intensive education and study. It is necessary
to cite detailed cases of past battles to explain again and again the advantages
of this method of fighting and to point out that it is the chief method of
defeating Chiang Kai-shek's attacks. Using this method we shall win. Acting
counter to it we shall lose.

6. The principle of concentrating our forces to wipe out the enemy forces
one by one has been a fine tradition of our army ever since its founding
more than a decade ago; this is not the first time it has been put forward.
During the War of Resistance Against Japan, however, the dispersal of our
forces for guerrilla warfare was primary, and the concentration of our forces
for mobile warfare was supplementary. In the present civil war, as conditions
have changed, so should the method of fighting. The concentration of our
forces for mobile warfare should be primary, and the dispersal of our forces
for guerrilla warfare should be supplementary. Now that Chiang Kai-shek's
army has acquired more powerful weapons, it is necessary for our army to
lay special stress on the method of concentrating a superior force to wipe
out the enemy forces one by one.

7. When the enemy is on the offensive and we are on the defensive, this method
must be employed. However, when the enemy is on the defensive and we are
on the offensive, we should distinguish between two kinds of situations and
adopt different methods. When our force is big and the enemy in that locality
is rather weak, or when we are making a surprise attack on the enemy, we
may strike at several of his units simultaneously. For example, between June
5 and 10, our troops in Shantung Province simultaneously attacked and captured
more than ten towns on the Tsingtao-Tsinan and the Tientsin-Pukow
Railways.[6] Or to take another example, between
August 10 and 21, our troops under Liu Po-cheng and Teng Hsiao-ping attacked
and captured more than ten towns along the section of the Lunghai Railway
between Kaifeng and Hsuchow.[7] On the other hand,
when we do not have enough forces, we should seize the enemy-occupied towns
one by one and should not attack the enemy at several towns simultaneously.
That was how our forces in Shansi Province took the towns along the Tatung-Puchow
Railway.[8]

8. When the main force of our troops is concentrated to annihilate the enemy,
it must co-ordinate its operations with vigorous activities by the regional
formations, local guerrillas and people's militia. When regional formations
(or troops) attack an enemy regiment, battalion or company, they should also
adopt the principle of concentrating our forces to annihilate the enemy forces
one by one.

9. The principle of concentrating our forces to wipe out the enemy forces
one by one is aimed chiefly at annihilating the enemy's effective strength,
not at holding or seizing a place. In some circumstances, it is permissible
to abandon certain places for the purpose of concentrating our forces to
wipe out the enemy or of enabling our main force to avoid heavy enemy attacks
and to facilitate rest and consolidation for further fighting. So long as
we are able to wipe out the enemy's effective strength on a large scale,
it will be possible to recover lost territory and seize new territory. Therefore,
all those who succeed in destroying the enemy's effective strength should
be commended. This applies not only to those who destroy the enemy's regular
forces but also to those who destroy his peace preservation corps, home-going
contingents [9] and other reactionary local armed
bands. However, we must hold or seize territory wherever the relative strength
of the enemy and our own forces makes this possible or wherever such territory
is significant for our campaigns or battles; to do otherwise would be a mistake.
Therefore, those who succeed in holding or seizing such territory should
also be commended. 

NOTES


1. The expressions "to destroy the enemy", "to wipe out
the enemy" and "to annihilate the enemy" are used as synonyms in this book.
They all include enemy troops killed, wounded and captured. To wipe out
(annihilate, destroy) an enemy force means either to wipe it out completely
or to wipe out the major part of that force.

2. A regular corps of the Kuomintang army originally consisted
of three (sometimes two) divisions, each with three regiments. Beginning
in May 1946 the Kuomintang regular troops south of the Yellow River were
reorganized in stages; what had been a corps became a reorganized division
and with three (sometimes two) regiments. Part of the Kuomintang troops north
of the Yellow River were not reorganized, and their designations remained
the same. Some of the reorganized divisions later reverted to their original
designation of corps.

3. The communications police corps of the Kuomintang was
formed in March 1945. Following Japan's surrender, the corps was deployed
along communication lines for "garrison duties" under the pretext of guarding
the railways, but actually to carry on secret police activities. It was one
of the forces the Kuomintang used for fighting the civil war.

4. In July 1946 the Kuomintang forces began a large-scale
invasion of the Kiangsu-Anhwei Liberated Area, and our army fought bravely
in self-defence. The Kuomintang troops attacking the Central Kiangsu Liberated
Area consisted of fifteen brigades with about 120,000 men under Tang En-po.
From July 13 to August 27, eighteen regiments of the Eastern China People's
Liberation Army, commanded by Su Yu, Tan Chen-lin and other comrades,
concentrated superior forces and fought seven successive battles in the region
of Taihsing, Jukao, Hai-an and Shaopai in central Kiangsu. Our forces wiped
out six enemy brigades and five battalions of the enemy's communications
police corps. The text refers to the results of two of these battles.

5. In August 1946 the Kuomintang forces advanced along
two routes from the Hsuchow and Chengchow sectors and attacked the
Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Liberated Area. The People's Liberation Army
of this area, under the command of Liu Po-cheng, Teng Hsiao-ping and other
comrades, concentrated superior forces to engage the enemy detachment advancing
from Chengchow. Between September 3 and 8 they wiped out four enemy brigades
in succession in the region of Hotse, Tingtao and Tsaohsien in Shantung Province.

6. Early in June 1946 the Shantung People's Liberation
Army sent an expedition against the puppet troops along the Tsingtao-Tsinan
and Tientsin-Pukow Railways and liberated more than ten towns, including
Chiaohsien, Changtien, Choutsun, Tehchow, Tai-an and Tsaochuang.

7. From August 10 to 21, 1946, the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan
People's Liberation Army, supporting the Central Plains and Eastern China
People's Liberation Armies, moved by several routes and attacked the enemy
troops stationed along the Kaifeng-Hsuchow section of the Lunghai Railway,
capturing more than ten towns, including Tangshan, Lanfeng, Huangkou, Lichuang
and Yangchi.

8. In July 1946 the Kuomintang forces under Hu Tsung-nan
and Yen Hsi-shan jointly attacked the Southern Shansi Liberated Area. The
Taiyueh units of the Shansi-Hopei- Shantung-Honan People's Liberation Army
and a part of the Shansi-Suiynan People's Liberation Army counter-attacked
and beat back the enemy in southern Shansi. In August they started an offensive
against the enemy between Linfen and Lingshih along the Tatung-Puchow Railway
and liberated the towns of Hungtung, Chaocheng, Huohsien, Lingshih and Fenhsi.

9. During the People's War of Liberation some landlords
and local tyrants in the Liberated Areas fled to the Kuomintang areas. They
were organized by the Kuomintang into "home-going contingents", "home-going
legions" and other reactionary armed bands to attack the Liberated Areas
together with the Kuomintang troops. Everywhere they robbed, killed and committed
all kinds of atrocities. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Concept of Operations for the Northwest War Theatre







THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE NORTHWEST WAR THEATRE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE NORTHWEST WAR THEATRE


April 15, 1947

[This telegram was sent by Comrade Mao Tse-tung to the Northwest Field Army,
which was then composed of the People's Liberation Army forces of the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia and Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Areas and commanded by
Peng Teh-huai, Ho Lung, Hsi Chung-hsun and other comrades. ] 
  

1. The enemy is now quite tired, but not yet tired out. He is in considerable
difficulties with his food supply, but not yet in extreme difficulties. Although
our army has not destroyed any large number of the enemy's forces since wiping
out his 31st Brigade,[1] in the last twenty days we have
achieved the objective of tiring him and considerably reducing his food supplies,
thus creating favourable conditions for tiring him out completely, cutting
off all his food supplies and finally wiping him out.

2. At present, despite the enemy's fatigue and shortage of food, his policy
is to drive our main force east across the Yellow River, then seal off Suiteh
and Michih and divide his forces for "mopping-up" operations. The enemy troops
reached Chingchien on March 31 but did not advance north immediately; their
purpose was to leave us a clear passage. Their advance west towards Wayaopao
was designed to drive us to Suiteh and Michih. Having discovered our troops,
they are now veering to the south and west of Wayaopao and then they will
again advance towards that town to drive us northward.

3. Our policy is to continue our former method, that is, to keep the enemy
on the run in this area for a time (about another month); the purpose is
to tire him out completely, reduce his food supplies drastically and then
look for an opportunity to destroy him. There is no need for our main force
to hurry north to attack Yulin or south to cut off the enemy's retreat. It
should be made clear to the commanders and fighters and also to the masses
that this method of our army is the necessary road to the final defeat of
the enemy. Unless we reduce the enemy to extreme fatigue and complete starvation,
we cannot win final victory. This may be called the tactics of "wear and
tear", that is, of wearing the enemy down to complete exhaustion and then
wiping him out.

4. As you are now in localities east and north of Wayaopao, it would be best
to induce the enemy to move to the north of Wayaopao; then you may attack
the weaker part of Liao Ang's[2] forces and induce the
enemy to move east; afterwards you may turn towards Ansai, and induce the
enemy to move west again.

5. But within a few days you must order the entire 359th Brigade to complete
its preparations for a southward drive, so that a week from now it can be
sent southward to make a surprise attack on the area south of the Yenchang-Yenan
line and north of the Yichuan-Lochuan line and cut the enemy's food transport
line.

6. Please reply whether you consider the above views sound. 
NOTES

1. Having withdrawn from Yenan on its own initiative, the
Northwest People's Liberation Army sent out a small force to lure the enemy's
main force as far as Ansai, northwest of Yenan, while leaving its main force
to ambush the enemy in the Chinghuapien sector, northeast of Yenan. On March
25, 1947, a Kuomintang regiment of the 31st Brigade of Hu Tsung-nan's Reorganized
27th Division, led by the brigade headquarters, walked right into this trap
and was completely destroyed in a battle lasting just over an hour.

2. Liao Ang, Commander of the Reorganized 76th Division
of the Kuomintang forces under Hu Tsung-nan, was later captured in a battle
at Chingchien on October 11, 1947. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Strategy for the Second Year of the War of Liberation







STRATEGY FOR THE SECOND YEAR OF THE WAR OF LIBERATION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

STRATEGY FOR THE SECOND YEAR OF THE WAR OF LIBERATION


September 1, 1947

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China when he and the Central Committee
were at Chukuanchai, Chiahsien County, northern Shensi. The directive formulated
the basic task for the second year of the War of Liberation. This task was
to carry the war into the Kuomintang areas with our main forces and to switch
from fighting on interior lines to fighting on exterior lines, that is, to
pass from the stage of the strategic defensive to that of the strategic
offensive. In accordance with the strategic plan laid down by Comrade Mao
Tse-tung, the People's Liberation Army went over to the offensive on a
country-wide scale during July-September 1947. The Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan
Field Army forced the Yellow River in southwestern Shantung on June 30, crossed
the Lunghai Railway early in August and thrust into the Tapieh Mountains.
The Taiyueh Army of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Field Army forced the
Yellow River from southern Shansi in late August and thrust into western
Honan. The Eastern China Field Army thrust into southwestern Shantung early
in September after smashing a concentrated attack by the enemy. In the same
month the Shantung Army of the Eastern China Field Army started an offensive
against the enemy in eastern Shantung. The Northwest Field Army went over
to the offensive late in August. The Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Field Army started
an offensive against the enemy along the northern section of the Peiping-Hankow
Railway early in September. Immediately after its summer offensive throughout
the Northeast, the Northeast Field Army, beginning in September, launched
a large-scale autumn offensive in the Changchun-Kirin-Szepingkai region and
in the Chinhsi-Ihsien sector along the Peiping-Liaoning Railway. The offensives
in all these theatres of war constituted a general offensive by the entire
People's Liberation Army. This large-scale offensive led to a turning point
in the War of Liberation, marking a radical change in the war situation.
See "The Present Situation and Our Tasks", pp. 157-76 of this volume.]

  

1. In the first year's fighting (from July last year to June this year),
we wiped out 97 regular brigades, or 780,000 men, and puppet troops, peace
preservation corps and others totalling 340,000 -- altogether 1,120,000 of
the enemy. This was a great victory. It dealt the enemy a heavy blow, created
profound defeatism in the whole enemy camp, elated the people throughout
the country and laid the foundation for the complete annihilation of the
enemy by our army and for final victory.

2. In the first year's fighting, the enemy launched a large-scale offensive
against the Liberated Areas, using 218 of his 248 regular brigades, or more
than 1,600,000 men, and nearly 1,000,000 men from the special arms (navy,
air force, artillery, engineer corps and armoured units) and from the puppet
troops, communications police corps and peace preservation corps. Our army
rightly adopted the strategy of fighting on interior lines; and in order
to hold the initiative at all times and places it did not balk at paying
the price of over 300,000 casualties and of enemy occupation of large tracts
of territory. Consequently, we succeeded in wiping out 1,120,000 enemy troops,
forced the enemy to disperse his troops, steeled and strengthened our own
forces, launched strategic counter-offensives in the Northeast, Jehol, eastern
Hopei, southern Shansi and northern Honan, recovered large territories and
liberated vast new areas.[1]

3. In the second year of fighting, our army's basic task is to launch a
country-wide counter-offensive, that is, to use our main forces to fight
our way to exterior lines, carry the war into the Kuomintang areas, wipe
out large numbers of the enemy on the exterior lines and completely wreck
the Kuomintang's counter-revolutionary strategy, which is, on the contrary,
to continue to carry the war into the Liberated Areas, further damage and
drain our manpower and material resources and make it impossible for us to
hold out very long. In the second year's fighting, a partial task of our
army is to use a portion of our main forces and large numbers of our regional
troops to continue fighting on interior lines, wipe out the enemy there and
recover lost territory.

4. Our army will of course meet many difficulties in carrying out the policy
of fighting on exterior lines and bringing the war into the Kuomintang areas.
For it takes time to build new bases in the Kuomintang areas and we can build
stable bases only when we have wiped out large numbers of the enemy in many
back-and-forth mobile operations, aroused the masses, distributed land,
established our political power and built up the people's armed forces. Until
then, there will be quite a few difficulties. But they can and must be overcome.
For the enemy will be forced to spread out even more, and vast territories
will be available to our army as battlefields for mobile operations, and
so we will be able to wage mobile warfare; the broad masses in those territories
hate the Kuomintang and support us; and though part of the enemy forces still
has a comparatively high combat effectiveness, on the whole the enemy's morale
and combat effectiveness are much lower than a year ago.

5. The keys to victory in fighting in the Kuomintang areas are, first, to
be good at seizing the opportunities for fighting, to be brave and determined
and win as many battles as possible; and, second, to carry out resolutely
the policy of winning the masses and enable the broad masses to benefit so
that they side with our army. If these two points are carried out, we shall
win victory.

6. Up to the end of August this year, the distribution of enemy forces, including
those which had been wiped out or dealt crushing blows, was 157 brigades
on the southern front, 70 on the northern front and 21 in the Kuomintang
rear areas. The total in the whole country was still 248 brigades and the
actual number of troops was about 1,500,000. Troops in the special arms,
puppet troops, communications police and peace preservation corps numbered
about 1,200,000. Non-combatants in the military institutions in the enemy
rear were about 1,000,000. The entire enemy forces totalled about 3,700,000
men. Of the troops on the southern front, 117 brigades belong to Ku Chu-tung's
group, 7 to Cheng Chien's group and others, and 33 to Hu Tsung-nan's group.
Of the 117 brigades of Ku Chu-tung's group, 63 have been wiped out or have
received crushing blows. Of these, some have not been replenished; others,
although they are being replenished, have few men and low combat effectiveness;
and others, although their manpower and arms have been fairly well replenished
and their combat effectiveness has to some extent been restored, are still
far weaker than before. There are only 54 brigades which have neither been
wiped out nor received crushing blows. Of Ku Chutung's entire forces, 82
to 85 brigades are employed for garrison duty and can be used only for local
manoeuvres, and no more than 32 to 35 brigades can be used for strategic
manoeuvres. The 7 brigades of Cheng Chien's group and others can in the main
be used only for garrison duty, and one has already received a crushing blow.
Of the 33 brigades of Hu Tsung-nan's group (including those east of Lanchow,
south of Ningsia and Yulin, and west of Linfen and Loyang), 12 have been
wiped out or received crushing blows, only 7 can be used for strategic
manoeuvres, and the rest are on garrison duty. On the northern front the
enemy has 70 brigades altogether. Of these, the Northeast group has 26 brigades,
of which 16 have been wiped out or have received crushing blows, Sun Lien-chung's
group has 19 brigades, of which 8 have been wiped out or received crushing
blows; Fu Tso-yi has 10 brigades, of which 2 have received crushing blows;
and Yen Hsi-shan has 15 brigades, of which 9 have been wiped out or received
crushing blows. These enemy troops are now mainly on the defensive and only
a small part is available for mobile operations. In the Kuomintang rear areas
there are only 21 brigades on garrison duty. Of these, 8 brigades are in
Sinkiang and western Kansu, 7 in Szechuan and Sikang, 2 in Yunnan, 2 in Kwangtung
(that is, the 69th Division that was wiped out) and 2 in Taiwan. There are
no regular troops at all in the six provinces of Hunan, Kwangsi, Kweichow,
Fukien, Chekiang and Kiangsi. The Kuomintang is planning, with U.S. assistance,
to draft 1,000,000 men this year to replenish the front and to train a number
of new brigades and replacement regiments. However, if our army can wipe
out an average of 8 enemy brigades a month, as it did in the first year of
fighting, and wipe out another 96 to 100 brigades in the second year (already
in July and August 16 brigades were wiped out), then the enemy army will
be further and greatly weakened, its strategic reserve will be reduced to
the minimum, and it will be forced into a defensive position in all parts
of the country and will be attacked by us everywhere. Although the Kuomintang
has this plan of drafting 1,000,000 men and training new brigades and replacement
regiments, it will be of no avail. Since its only methods of recruiting are
pressganging and hiring, to reach a million will certainly be difficult and
many will desert. Moreover, by carrying out the policy of fighting on exterior
lines our army will be able to reduce the enemy's manpower and material
resources.

7. The operational principles of our army are still the same as those laid
down before:

Attack dispersed, isolated enemy forces first (this applies also to a large-scale
campaign of annihilation directed against several brigades, such as the Laiwu
campaign[2] in February and the Southwestern Shantung
campaign[3] in July this year); attack concentrated, strong
enemy forces later.

Take medium and small cities and extensive rural areas first; take big cities
later.

Make wiping out the enemy's effective strength our main objective; do not
make holding or seizing a place our main objective. Holding or seizing a
place is the outcome of wiping out the enemy's effective strength, and often
a place can be held or seized for good only after it has changed hands a
number of times.

In every battle, concentrate an absolutely superior force, encircle the enemy
forces completely, strive to wipe them out thoroughly and do not let any
escape from the net. In special circumstances, use the method of dealing
crushing blows to the enemy, that is, concentrate all our strength to make
a frontal attack and also to attack one or both of his flanks, with the aim
of wiping out one part and routing another so that our army can swiftly move
its troops to smash other enemy forces.

On the one hand, be sure to fight no battle unprepared, fight no battle you
are not sure of winning; make every effort to be well prepared for each battle,
make every effort to ensure victory in the given set of conditions as between
the enemy and ourselves. On the other hand, give full play to our fine style
of fighting -- courage in battle, no fear of sacrifice, no fear of fatigue,
and continuous fighting (that is, fighting successive battles in a short
time).

Strive to draw the enemy into mobile warfare, but at the same time lay great
stress on learning the tactics of positional attack and on stepping up the
building of the artillery and engineer corps in order to capture enemy fortified
points and cities on a large scale.

Resolutely attack and seize all fortified points and cities which are weakly
defended. Attack and seize at opportune moments all fortified points and
cities defended with moderate strength, provided circumstances permit. For
the time being, leave alone all fortified points and cities which are strongly
defended.

Replenish our strength with all the arms and most of the soldiers captured
from the enemy (80-90 per cent of the men and a small number of the junior
officers). Seek replenishment chiefly from the enemy and from the Kuomintang
areas and only partly from the old Liberated Areas; this applies especially
to the armies on the southern front.

In all the new and old Liberated Areas, we must resolutely carry through
the land reform (which is the most fundamental requirement for supporting
a long war and winning country-wide victory), develop production, practice
economy and strengthen the building of war industry -- all for victory at
the front. Only by doing this can we support a long war and win victory in
the whole country. If we do so, we shall certainly be able to support a long
war and win victory throughout the country.

8. The above sums up the year's fighting and sets forth the principles for
future fighting. Leading comrades in all areas are requested to pass the
contents on to all cadres of regimental rank and above, of the level of
prefectural Party committee and above and of the level of prefectural
commissioner's office and above, so that everyone will understand his own
task and carry it out resolutely and unwaveringly.
NOTES 

1. This strategic counter-offensive in the Northeast, Jehol
and eastern Hopei was the 1947 summer offensive of the Northeast People's
Liberation Army. On May 13, the People's Liberation Army began simultaneous
offensives on these fronts and by July 1 had wiped out over 80,000 enemy
troops and recovered more than 40 county towns. The enemy plan of cutting
up the Liberated Areas in northeastern China was thus completely wrecked.
The enemy troops, driven into two narrow corridors along the Chinese Changchun
Railway and the Peiping-Liaoning Railway, were forced into the "defence of
key points". This changed the whole situation in northeastern China. The
strategic counter-offensive in southern Shansi and northern Honan comprised
the offensives launched by the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan People's Liberation
Army in northern Honan and on the flanks of the Tatung-Puchow Railway in
southern Shansi between March and May 1947. Our army in northern Honan started
attacking on March 23. After taking Yenchin, Yangwu, Puyang and Fengchiu
one after another, our army turned north to exploit these successes. By May
28 it had captured Tsihsien, Chunhsien, Huahsien and Tangyin and wiped out
over 45,000 enemy troops. Our troops in southern Shansi began offensive
operations on April 4. By May 4 they had captured twenty-two county towns,
including Chuwo, Hsinchiang and Yungtsi, and two important ferry crossings
on the Yellow River, Yumenkou and Fenglingtu, and had wiped out over 18,000
enemy troops.

2. The Laiwu campaign was a campaign of mobile warfare
fought by the Eastern China People's Liberation Army in the Laiwu region,
southeast of Tsinan, Shantung Province. Towards the end of January 1947 the
Kuomintang troops launched an offensive against the Shantung Liberated Areas
from both the north and the south. From the south, eight Kuomintang reorganized
divisions drove northward by three routes along the Yiho and Shuho Rivers
towards Linyi and from the north, in coordination with them, three Kuomintang
corps belonging to the Li Hsien-chou group advanced southward on Laiwu and
Hsintai from Mingshui, Tsechuan and Poshan, seeking to engage the main force
of the Eastern China People's Liberation Army in a decisive battle in the
Yi-Meng mountain area. Our army used part of its forces to block the enemy
from the south but marched its main force north towards Laiwu to destroy
the Li Hsien-chou group. All the enemy troops, over 60,000 men, were wiped
out in a battle which started on February 20 and ended on the afternoon of
February 23. Li Hsien-chou, Deputy Commander of the 2nd Pacification Zone
of the Kuomintang's Hsuchow Pacification Headquarters, was captured, and
thirteen towns were recovered.

3. This Southwestern Shantung campaign was the campaign
fought by the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan People's Liberation Army in July
1947 in the region of Hotse, Yuncheng, Chuyeh, Tingtao, Chinhsiang and Tsaohsien,
in southwestern Shantung Province. In this campaign 4 Kuomintang division
headquarters and 9 brigades, totalling more than 56,000 men, were wiped out.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Manifesto of the Chinese Peoples Liberation Army







MANIFESTO OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

MANIFESTO OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY


October 1947

[This political manifesto was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the General
Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army. It analysed the political
situation in China at the time, raised the slogan "Overthrow Chiang Kai-shek
and liberate all China!" and announced the eight basic policies of the Chinese
People's Liberation Army, which were also those of the Communist Party of
China. The manifesto was issued on October 10, 1947, and was known as the
"October 10th Manifesto". It was drafted at Shenchuanpao, Chiahsien County,
northern Shensi.] 
  

The Chinese People's Liberation Army, having smashed Chiang Kai-shek's offensive,
has now launched a large-scale counter-offensive. Our armies on the southern
front are advancing on the Yangtse River valley, our armies on the northern
front are advancing on the Chinese Changchun Railway and the Peiping-Liaoning
Railway. Wherever our troops go, the enemy flees pell-mell before us and
the people give thunderous cheers. The whole situation between the enemy
and ourselves has fundamentally changed as compared with a year ago.

The aim of our army in this war, as proclaimed time and again to the nation
and the world, is the liberation of the Chinese people and the Chinese nation.
And today, our aim is to carry out the urgent demand of the people of the
whole country, that is, to overthrow the arch-criminal of the civil war,
Chiang Kai-shek, and form a democratic coalition government in order to attain
the general goal of liberating the people and the nation.

For eight long years the Chinese people fought heroically against Japanese
imperialism for their own liberation and national independence. After the
Japanese surrender the people longed for peace, but Chiang Kai-shek wrecked
all their peace efforts and forced on them the disaster of an unprecedented
civil war. Hence the people of all strata throughout the country were forced
to unite to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek, having no other way out.

Chiang Kai-shek's present policy of civil war is no accident but is the
inevitable outcome of the anti-popular policy which he and his reactionary
clique have consistently followed. As far back as 1927, Chiang Kai-shek,
devoid of all gratitude, betrayed the revolutionary alliance between the
Kuomintang and the Communist Party[1] and betrayed the
revolutionary Three People's principles and the Three Great Policies of Sun
Yat-sen;[2] then he set up a dictatorship, capitulated
to imperialism, fought ten years of civil war and brought on the aggression
of the Japanese bandits. In the Sian Incident of 1936, the Communist Party
of China returned good for evil and, acting together with Generals Chang
Hsueh-liang and Yang Hu-cheng, set Chiang Kai-shek free in the hope that
he would repent, turn over a new leaf and join in the fight against the Japanese
aggressors. But once again he proved devoid of all gratitude; he was passive
against the Japanese invaders, active in suppressing the people and extremely
hostile to the Communist Party. The year before last (1945), Japan surrendered
and the Chinese people once more forgave Chiang Kai-shek, demanding that
he should stop the civil war he had already started, put democracy into practice
and unite with all parties and groups for peace and national reconstruction.
But no sooner had the truce agreement been signed, the resolutions of the
Political Consultative Conference adopted and the four
pledges[3] proclaimed than the utterly faithless Chiang
Kai-shek went back on his word completely. Time and again the people showed
themselves forbearing and conciliatory for the sake of the common good but,
aided by U.S. imperialism, Chiang Kai-shek was determined to launch an
unprecedented all-out offensive against the people, in utter disregard of
the fate of the country and the nation. From January last year (1946), when
the truce agreement was announced, up to the present, Chiang Kai-shek has
mobilized more than 220 brigades of his regular troops and nearly a million
miscellaneous troops[4] and launched large-scale attacks
against the Liberated Areas which the Chinese people wrested from Japanese
imperialism after bloody battles; he has seized successively the cities of
Shenyang, Fushun, Penki, Szepingkai, Changchun, Yungchi, Chengteh, Chining,
Changchiakou, Huaiyin, Hotse, Linyi, Yenan and Yentai and vast rural areas.
Wherever Chiang Kai-shek's troops go, they murder and burn, rape and loot,
carry out the policy of three atrocities[5] and behave
exactly like the Japanese bandits. In November last year Chiang Kai-shek
convened the bogus National Assembly and proclaimed the bogus constitution.
In March this year he expelled the representatives of the Communist Party
from the Kuomintang areas. In July he issued an order of general mobilization
against the people.[6] Towards the just movement of the
people in different parts of the country against civil war, against hunger
and against U.S. imperialist aggression and towards the struggle for existence
waged by the workers, peasants, students, townspeople, government employees
and teachers, Chiang Kai-shek's policy is one of repression, arrest and massacre.
Towards our country's minority nationalities, his policy is one of Han
chauvinism, of persecution and repression by every possible means. In all
the areas under Chiang Kai-shek's rule corruption is rife, secret agents
run amuck, taxes are innumerable and crushing, prices are skyrocketing, the
economy is bankrupt, all business languishes, conscription and the grain
levy are imposed and voices of discontent are heard everywhere; all this
has plunged the overwhelming majority of people throughout the country into
an abyss of suffering. Meanwhile the financial oligarchs, corrupt officials,
local bullies and bad gentry, all headed by Chiang Kai-shek, have amassed
vast fortunes. Chiang Kai-shek and his like made these fortunes by using
their dictatorial powers to extort taxes and levies and promote their private
interests under the guise of serving the public. To maintain his dictatorship
and carry on the civil war, Chiang Kai-shek has not hesitated to sell out
our country's sovereign rights to foreign imperialism, to collude with the
U.S. armed forces so that they should remain in Tsingtao and elsewhere and
to procure advisers from the United States to take part in directing the
civil war and training troops to slaughter his own fellow-countrymen. Aircraft,
tanks, guns and ammunition for the civil war are shipped from the United
States in great quantities. Funds for the civil war are borrowed from the
United States on a large scale. In return for its favours, Chiang Kai-shek
has presented U.S. imperialism with military bases and the rights of air
flight and navigation and concluded with it a commercial treaty of
enslavement[7] -- acts of treason many times worse than
those of Yuan Shih-kai.[8] In a word, Chiang Kai-shek's
twenty-year rule has been traitorous, dictatorial and against the people.
Today, the overwhelming majority of the people throughout the country, north
and south, young and old, know his towering crimes and hope that our army
will quickly launch the counter-offensive, overthrow Chiang Kai-shek and
liberate all China.

We are the army of the Chinese people and in all things we take the will
of the Chinese people as our will. The policies of our army represent the
urgent demands of the Chinese people and chief among them are the following:

(1) Unite workers, peasants, soldiers, intellectuals and businessmen, all
oppressed classes, all people's organizations, democratic parties, minority
nationalities, overseas Chinese and other patriots; form a national united
front; overthrow the dictatorial Chiang Kai-shek government; and establish
a democratic coalition government.

(2) Arrest, try and punish the civil war criminals headed by Chiang Kai-shek.

(3) Abolish the Chiang Kai-shek dictatorship, carry out the system of people's
democracy and guarantee freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly and
of association for the people.

(4) Abolish the rotten institutions of the Chiang Kai-shek regime, clear
out all corrupt officials and establish clean government.

(5) Confiscate the property of the four big families[9]
of Chiang Kai-shek, T. V. Soong, H. H. Kung and the Chen Li-fu brothers,
and the property of the other chief war criminals; confiscate bureaucrat-capital,
develop the industry and commerce of the national bourgeoisie, improve the
livelihood of workers and employees, and give relief to victims of natural
calamities and to poverty-stricken people.

(6) Abolish the system of feudal exploitation and put into effect the system
of land to the tillers.

(7) Recognize the right to equality and autonomy of the minority nationalities
within the borders of China.

(8) Repudiate the traitorous foreign policy of Chiang Kai-shek's dictatorial
government, abrogate all the treasonable treaties and repudiate all the foreign
debts contracted by Chiang Kai-shek during the civil war period. Demand that
the U.S. government withdraw its troops stationed in China, which are a menace
to China's independence, and oppose any foreign country's helping Chiang
Kai-shek to carry on civil war or trying to revive the forces of Japanese
aggression. Conclude treaties of trade and friendship with foreign countries
on the basis of equality and reciprocity. Unite in a common struggle with
all nations which treat us as equals.

The above are the basic policies of our army. They will be put into practice
at once wherever our army goes. These policies conform with the demands of
more than 90 per cent of the people in our country.

Our army does not reject all Chiang Kai-shek's personnel but adopts a policy
of dealing with each case on its merits. That is, the chief criminals shall
be punished without fail, those who are accomplices under duress shall go
unpunished and those who perform deeds of merit shall be rewarded. As for
Chiang Kai-shek, the arch-criminal who started the civil war and who has
committed most heinous crimes, and as for all his hardened accomplices who
have trampled the people underfoot and are branded as war criminals by the
broad masses, our army will hunt them down, even to the four corners of the
earth, and will surely bring them to trial and punishment. Our army warns
all officers and men in Chiang Kai-shek's army, all officials in his government
and all members of his party whose hands are not yet stained with the blood
of innocent people that they should strictly refrain from joining these criminals
in their evil-doing. Those who have been doing evil should immediately stop,
repent and start anew and break with Chiang Kai-shek, and we will give them
a chance to make amends for their crimes by good deeds. Our army will not
kill or humiliate any of Chiang Kai-shek's army officers and men who lay
down their arms, but will accept them into our service if they are willing
to remain with us or send them home if they wish to leave. As for those troops
of Chiang Kai-shek who rise in revolt and join our army and those who work
for our army openly or in secret, they shall be rewarded.

In order to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek and form a democratic coalition government
at an early date, we call on our fellow-countrymen in all walks of life to
co-operate actively with us wherever our army goes in cleaning up the reactionary
forces and setting up a democratic order. In places we have not yet reached,
they should take up arms on their own, resist pressganging and the grain
levy, distribute the land, repudiate debts and take advantage of the enemy's
gaps to develop guerrilla warfare.

In order to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek and form a democratic coalition government
at an early date, we call on the people in the Liberated Areas to carry through
the land reform, consolidate the foundations of democracy, develop production,
practice economy, strengthen the people's armed forces, eliminate the remaining
strongholds of the enemy and support the fighting at the front.

All comrade commanders and fighters of our army! We are shouldering the most
important, the most glorious task in the history of our country's revolution.
We should make great efforts to accomplish our task. Our efforts will decide
the day when our great motherland will emerge from darkness into light and
our beloved fellow-countrymen will be able to live like human beings and
to choose the government they wish. All officers and fighters of our army
must improve their military art, march forward courageously towards sure
victory in the war and resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely wipe
out all enemies. They must all raise their level of political consciousness,
learn the two skills of wiping out the enemy forces and arousing the masses,
unite intimately with the masses and rapidly build the new Liberated Areas
into stable areas. They must heighten their sense of discipline and resolutely
carry out orders, carry out policy, carry out the Three Main Rules of Discipline
and the Eight Points for Attention -- with army and people united, army and
government united, officers and soldiers united, and the whole army united
-- and permit no breach of discipline. All our officers and fighters must
always bear in mind that we are the great People's Liberation Army, we are
the troops led by the great Communist Party of China. Provided we constantly
observe the directives of the Party, we are sure to win.

Down with Chiang Kai-shek!

Long live New China! 
NOTES 

1. See "The Situation and Our Policy After the Victory
in the War of Resistance Against Japan", Note 7, p. 23 of this volume.

2. See "On a Statement by Chiang Kai-shek's Spokesman",
Note 2, pp. 44-45 of this volume.

3. The "four pledges" were made by Chiang Kai-shek at the
opening session of the Political Consultative Conference in 1946. They were,
to guarantee freedom of the people, to guarantee the legal status of political
parties, to hold a general election and to release political prisoners.

4. By miscellaneous troops are meant the Kuomintang's irregular
troops which included the local peace preservation corps, communications
police corps, gendarmes, the puppet troops taken over and reorganized by
the Kuomintang, etc.

5. The Japanese invaders carried out the policy of three
atrocities -- burn all, kill all, loot all -- against the Liberated Areas
in China.

6. On July 4, 1947, the reactionary Kuomintang government
adopted Chiang Kai-shek's "General Mobilization Bill" and immediately afterwards
issued the "Order for General Mobilization to Suppress the Insurrection of
the Communist Bandits". In fact, Chiang Kai-shek had carried out a general
mobilization for his counterrevolutionary civil war much earlier. By that
time the Chinese People's Liberation Army had begun to shift to a country-wide
offensive. Chiang Kai-shek himself admitted that his regime was in a "serious
crisis". The "Order for General Mobilization" was merely his dying kick.

7. This refers to the "Sino-U.S. Treaty of Friendship,
Commerce and Navigation" concluded between the Chiang Kai-shek government
and the U.S. government on November 4, 1946. The treaty sold out China's
sovereign rights to the United States. See "Greet the New High Tide of the
Chinese Revolution", Note 6, p. 126 of this volume.

8. Yuan Shih-kai was the head of the Northern warlords
in the last years of the Ching Dynasty. After the Ching Dynasty was overthrown
by the Revolution of 1911, he usurped the presidency of the Republic and
organized the first government of the Northern warlords, which represented
the big landlord and big comprador classes; he did this by relying on a
counter-revolutionary armed force and the support of the imperialists and
by taking advantage of the compromising nature of the bourgeoisie then leading
the revolution. In 1915 he wanted to make himself emperor and, to gain the
support of the Japanese imperialists, he accepted Japan's Twenty-one Demands
which were designed to obtain exclusive control of all China. In December
of the same year an uprising against his assumption of the throne took place
in Yunnan Province and promptly won country-wide response and support. Yuan
Shih-kai died in June 1916.

9. This refers to the four big monopoly capitalist groups
of Chiang Kai-shek, T. V. Soong, H. H. Kung and Chen Li-fu. See "The Present
Situation and Our Tasks", Section 6, pp. 167-69 of this volume. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Reissue of the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for Attention — Instruction of the general Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army







ON THE REISSUE OF THE THREE MAIN RULES OF DISCIPLINE AND THE EIGHT
  POINTS FOR ATTENTION -- INSTRUCTION OF THE GENERAL HEADQUARTERS OF THE CHINESE
  PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON THE REISSUE OF THE THREE MAIN RULES OF DISCIPLINE AND THE EIGHT POINTS
  FOR ATTENTION -- INSTRUCTION OF THE GENERAL HEADQUARTERS OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S
  LIBERATION ARMY


October 10, 1947


1. Our Army's Three Main Rules of Discipline and Eight Points for Attention
[1] have been practiced for many years, but their
contents vary slightly in army units in different areas. They have now been
unified and are hereby reissued. It is expected that you will take this version
as the standard one for thorough education and strict enforcement. As to
other matters needing attention, the high command of the armed forces in
different areas may lay down additional points in accordance with specific
conditions and order their enforcement.

2. The Three Main Rules of Discipline are as follows: 

  (1) Obey orders in all your actions.


  (2) Don't take a single needle or piece of thread from the masses.


  (3) Turn in everything captured.


3. The Eight Points for Attention are as follows: 

  (1) Speak politely.


  (2) Pay fairly for what you buy.


  (3) Return everything you borrow.


  (4) Pay for anything you damage.


  (5) Don't hit or swear at people.


  (6) Don't damage crops.


  (7) Don't take liberties with women.


  (8) Don't ill-treat captives.


NOTES

1. The Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points
for Attention were the rules of discipline laid down by Comrade Mao Tse-tung
for the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army during the Second Revolutionary
Civil War. They formed an important part of the political work of the Red
Army and played a great role in building the people's armed forces, handling
relations within the army correctly, forging unity with the masses of the
people and laying down the correct policy of the people's army towards captives.
From the earliest days of the Red Army, Comrade Mao Tse-tung required the
soldiers to speak politely to the masses, pay fairly for all purchases and
never impress people into forced labour or hit or swear at people. In the
spring of 1928, when the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army was in the Chingkang
Mountains, Comrade Mao Tse-tung set down Three Rules of Discipline: (1)
Obey orders in your actions; (2) Don't take anything from the workers and
peasants; and (3) Turn in all things taken from local bullies. In the summer
of 1928 he set forth Six Points for Attention: (1) Put back the doors you
have taken down for bed-boards; (2) Put back the straw you have used for
bedding; (3) Speak politely; (4) Pay fairly for what you buy; (5) Return
everything you borrow; and (6) Pay for anything you damage. After 1929 Comrade
Mao Tse-tung made the following changes: Rule 2 became "Don't take a single
needle or piece of thread from the masses", and Rule 3 was changed first
to "Turn in all money raised" and then to "Turn in everything captured".
To the Six Points for Attention he added two more: "Don't bathe within sight
of women" and "Don't search the pockets of captives". This was the origin
of the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for Attention.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Present Situation and Our Tasks







THE PRESENT SITUATION AND OUR TASKS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE PRESENT SITUATION AND OUR TASKS


December 25, 1947

[This report was made by Comrade Mao Tse-tung to a meeting of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China held on December 25-28 1947, at
Yangchiakou, Michih County, northern Shensi. In addition to those members
and alternate members of the Central Committee able to attend, responsible
comrades of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the Shansi-Suiyuan
Border Region were present. The meeting discussed and adopted this report
and also another document written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung,
"Some Points in Appraisal of the Present International
Situation" (see pp. 87-88 of this volume). Concerning Comrade Mao Tse-tung's
report, the decision adopted at the meeting stated, "This report is a
programmatic document in the political, military and economic fields for
the entire period of the overthrow of the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek ruling
clique and of the founding of a new-democratic China. The whole Party and
the whole army should carry on intensive education around, and strictly apply
in practice, this document and, in connection with it, the documents published
on October 10, 1947 [namely, 'Manifesto of the Chinese People's Liberation
Army', 'Slogans of the Chinese People's Liberation Army', 'Instruction on
the Reissue of the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for
Attention', 'Outline Land Law of China' and 'Resolution of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China on the Promulgation of the Outline Land Law
of China']. In carrying out policies in different places any departure from
the principles laid down in the report should be rectified at once." Other
important decisions taken at the meeting were: 

(1) That every effort should be made to carry the Chinese people's revolutionary
war forward uninterruptedly to complete victory, and that the enemy should
not be allowed to use stalling tactics (peace negotiations) to gain time
for rest and reorganization for a fresh attack on the people.

(2) That the time was not yet ripe for the formation of a revolutionary central
government, which was to be considered only when our army had won greater
victories, and that the promulgation of a constitution was even more a question
for the future.

The meeting also discussed in detail current tendencies in the Party and
certain specific policies in the land reform and the mass movements. The
results of these discussions were subsequently set forth by Comrade Mao Tse-tung
in the article "On Some Important Problems of the
Party's Present Policy" (see pp. 181-89 of this volume). All the articles
in this book starting with this report and ending with
"A Circular on the Situation", dated March 20,
1948 (pp. 219-26), were written at Yangchiakou, Michih County, northern Shensi.]



I 

The Chinese people's revolutionary war has now reached a turning point. That
is, the Chinese People's Liberation Army has beaten back the offensive of
several million reactionary troops of Chiang Kai-shek, the running dog of
the United States of America, and gone over to the offensive. Already in
the first year of the present war, from July 1946 to June 1947, the People's
Liberation Army beat back Chiang Kai-shek's offensive on several fronts and
forced him onto the defensive. And beginning with the first quarter of the
second year of the war, July-September 1947, the People's Liberation Army
went over to the offensive on a national scale and wrecked Chiang Kai-shek's
counter-revolutionary plan of continuing to carry the war into the Liberated
Areas in order to destroy them completely. Now the war is no longer being
fought chiefly in the Liberated Areas but in the Kuomintang areas; the main
forces of the People's Liberation Army have carried the fight into the Kuomintang
areas.[1] In this land of China, the People's
Liberation Army has turned back the wheel of counterrevolution -- of U.S.
imperialism and its lackey, the Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang -- and sent it
down the road to destruction and has pushed the wheel of revolution forward
along the road to victory. This is a turning point in history. It is the
turning point from growth to extinction for Chiang Kai-shek's twenty-year
counter-revolutionary rule. It is the turning point from growth to extinction
for imperialist rule in China, now over a hundred years old. This is a momentous
event. It is momentous because it is occurring in a country with a population
of 475 million and, having occurred, it will certainly culminate in victory
throughout the country. Furthermore, it is momentous because it is occurring
in the East, where over 1,000 million people -- half of mankind -- suffer
under imperialist oppression. The turn of the Chinese People's War of Liberation
from the defensive to the offensive cannot but gladden and inspire these
oppressed nations. It is also of assistance to the oppressed people now
struggling in many countries in Europe and the Americas.

II

From the day Chiang Kai-shek started his counter-revolutionary war we said
that we not only must defeat him but can defeat him. We must defeat him because
the war he started is a counter-revolutionary war directed by U.S. imperialism
against the independence of the Chinese nation and the liberation of the
Chinese people. After the conclusion of World War II and the overthrow of
Japanese imperialism, the task of the Chinese people was to complete the
new-democratic transformation politically, economically and culturally, to
achieve national unification and independence and to change China from an
agricultural into an industrial country. But at that time, after the victorious
conclusion of the anti-fascist Second World War, U.S. imperialism and its
lackeys in various countries stepped into the shoes of German and Japanese
imperialism and their lackeys and formed a reactionary camp against the Soviet
Union, against the People's Democracies in Europe, against the workers' movements
in the capitalist countries, against the national movements in the colonies
and semi-colonies and against the liberation of the Chinese people. At such
a time the Chinese reactionaries headed by Chiang Kai-shek acted as the running
dog for U.S. imperialism, just as Wang Ching-wei had done for Japanese
imperialism, sold out China to the United States and unleashed a war against
the Chinese people to check the advance of their liberation. At such a time,
if we had shown weakness or given ground and had not dared to rise resolutely
to oppose counterrevolutionary war with revolutionary war, China would have
become a world of darkness and the future of our nation would have been
forfeited. The Communist Party of China has led the Chinese People's Liberation
Army in firmly waging a patriotic, just and revolutionary war against Chiang
Kai-shek's offensive. The Communist Party of China, having made a clear-headed
appraisal of the international and domestic situation on the basis of the
science of Marxism-Leninism, recognized that all attacks by the reactionaries
at home and abroad not only had to be defeated but could be defeated. When
dark clouds appeared in the sky, we pointed out that this was only temporary,
that the darkness would soon pass and the sun break through. When the Chiang
Kai-shek bandit gang launched the country-wide counter-revolutionary war
in July 1946, they thought it would take them only three to six months to
defeat the People's Liberation Army. They reckoned that they had a regular
army of two million, more than a million irregulars and another million or
more men in the military establishments and armed units in the rear, making
a total military strength of more than four million; that they had taken
time to complete their preparations for the offensive; that they had regained
control of the big cities; that they had a population of more than 300 million;
that they had taken over all the equipment of a million Japanese invading
troops; and that they had received huge military and financial aid from the
U.S. government. They also reckoned that the People's Liberation Army was
tired after fighting for eight years in the War of Resistance Against Japan
and was far inferior to the Kuomintang army in numbers and equipment; that
the population of the Liberated Areas was only a little more than 100 million;
and that in most of these areas the reactionary feudal forces had not yet
been cleaned up and the land reform had not yet been universally and thoroughly
carried out, namely, that the rear area of the People's Liberation Army had
not yet been consolidated. Proceeding from this appraisal, the Chiang Kai-shek
bandit gang ignored the Chinese people's desire for peace, finally tore up
the truce agreement signed by the Kuomintang and the Communist Party in January
1946 as well as the resolutions adopted by the Political Consultative Conference
of all parties and launched an adventurist war. We said then that Chiang
Kai-shek's superiority in military forces was only transient, a factor which
could play only a temporary role, that U.S. imperialist aid was likewise
a factor which could play only a temporary role, while the anti-popular character
of Chiang Kai-shek's war and the feelings of the people were factors that
would play a constant role, and that in this respect the People's Liberation
Army was in a superior position. Patriotic, just and revolutionary in character,
the war waged by the People's Liberation Army was bound to win the support
of the people of the whole country. That was the political foundation for
victory over Chiang Kai-shek. The experience of eighteen months of war has
fully confirmed our judgement.

III

In seventeen months of fighting (from July 1946 to November 1947; December
figures are not yet available), we killed, wounded and captured 1,690,000
of Chiang Kai-shek's regular and irregular troops -- 640,000 killed and wounded
and 1,050,000 captured. Thus we were able to beat back Chiang Kai-shek's
offensive, preserve the main territories of the Liberated Areas and go over
to the offensive. Speaking from the military aspect, we were able to do this
because we employed the correct strategy. Our principles of operation are:


1. Attack dispersed, isolated enemy forces first; attack concentrated, strong
enemy forces later.

2. Take small and medium cities and extensive rural areas first; take big
cities later.

3. Make wiping out the enemy's effective strength our main objective; do
not make holding or seizing a city or place our main objective. Holding or
seizing a city or place is the outcome of wiping out the enemy's effective
strength, and often a city or place can be held or seized for good only after
it has changed hands a number of times.

4. In every battle, concentrate an absolutely superior force (two, three,
four and sometimes even five or six times the enemy's strength), encircle
the enemy forces completely, strive to wipe them out thoroughly and do not
let any escape from the net. In special circumstances, use the method of
dealing crushing blows to the enemy, that is, concentrate all our strength
to make a frontal attack and also to attack one or both of his flanks, with
the aim of wiping out one part and routing another so that our army can swiftly
move its troops to smash other enemy forces. Strive to avoid battles of attrition
in which we lose more than we gain or only break even. In this way, although
we are inferior as a whole (in terms of numbers), we are absolutely superior
in every part and every specific campaign, and this ensures victory in the
campaign. As time goes on, we shall become superior as a whole and eventually
wipe out all the enemy.

5. Fight no battle unprepared, fight no battle you are not sure of winning;
make every effort to be well prepared for each battle, make every effort
to ensure victory in the given set of conditions as between the enemy and
ourselves.

6. Give full play to our style of fighting -- courage in battle, no fear
of sacrifice, no fear of fatigue, and continuous fighting (that is, fighting
successive battles in a short time without rest).

7. Strive to wipe out the enemy through mobile warfare. At the same time,
pay attention to the tactics of positional attack and capture enemy fortified
points and cities.

8. With regard to attacking cities, resolutely seize all enemy fortified
points and cities which are weakly defended. Seize at opportune moments all
enemy fortified points and cities defended with moderate strength, provided
circumstances permit. As for strongly defended enemy fortified points and
cities, wait till conditions are ripe and then take them.

9. Replenish our strength with all the arms and most of the personnel captured
from the enemy. Our army's main sources of manpower and matériel are
at the front.

10. Make good use of the intervals between campaigns to rest, train and
consolidate our troops. Periods of rest, training and consolidation should
in general not be very long, and the enemy should so far as possible be permitted
no breathing space.

These are the main methods the People's Liberation Army has employed in defeating
Chiang Kai-shek. They are the result of the tempering of the People's Liberation
Army in long years of fighting against domestic and foreign enemies and are
completely suited to our present situation. The Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang
and the U.S. imperialist military personnel in China are very well acquainted
with these military methods of ours. Seeking ways to counter them, Chiang
Kai-shek has often assembled his generals and field officers for training
and distributed for their study our military literature and the documents
captured in the war. The U.S. military personnel have recommended to Chiang
Kai-shek one kind of strategy and tactics after another for destroying the
People's Liberation Army; they have trained Chiang Kai-shek's troops and
supplied them with military equipment. But none of these efforts can save
the Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang from defeat. The reason is that our strategy
and tactics are based on a people's war; no army opposed to the people can
use our strategy and tactics. On the basis of a people's war and of the
principles of unity between army and people, of unity between commanders
and fighters and of disintegrating the enemy troops, the People's Liberation
Army has developed its vigorous revolutionary political work, which is an
important factor in winning victory over the enemy. When we abandoned many
cities on our own initiative in order to evade fatal blows from superior
enemy forces and shift our forces to destroy the enemy in mobile warfare,
our enemies were jubilant. They took this to be their victory and our defeat.
They became dizzy with this momentary "victory". On the afternoon of the
day he seized Changchiakou, Chiang Kai-shek ordered the convening of his
reactionary National Assembly, as though his reactionary regime had from
that moment become as stable as Mount Taishan. The U.S. imperialists, too,
danced with joy, as though their wild scheme for converting China into a
U.S. colony could now be realized without obstruction. But with the lapse
of time, Chiang Kai-shek and his U.S. masters began to change their tune.
Now all our enemies, domestic and foreign, are gripped by pessimism. They
heave great sighs, wail about a crisis and no longer show any sign of joy.
In the past eighteen months, most of Chiang Kai-shek's high-ranking field
commanders have been replaced for losing battles. Among them are Liu Chih
(Chengchow), Hsueh Yueh (Hsuchow), Wu Chi-wei (northern Kiangsu), Tang En-po
(southern Shantung), Wang Chung-lien (northern Honan), Tu Yu-ming and Hsiung
Shih-hui (Shenyang) and Sun Lien-chung (Peiping). Chen Cheng, too, was relieved
of his post as Chiang Kai-shek's chief of staff in over-all command of operations
and demoted to command a single front in the
Northeast.[2] However, it was in the very period
when Chiang Kai-shek himself assumed overall command in Chen Cheng's place
that the situation changed and that his armies shifted from the offensive
to the defensive, while the People's Liberation Army went over from the defensive
to the offensive. By now the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek clique and its U.S.
masters should have realized their mistake. They had regarded as signs of
cowardice and weakness all the efforts for peace and against civil war which
the Communist Party of China, representing the wishes of the Chinese people,
had made over a long period after the surrender of Japan. They had overestimated
their own strength, underestimated the strength of the revolution and rashly
unleashed the war and so were caught in their own trap. Our enemy's strategic
calculations failed completely.

IV

The rear areas of the People's Liberation Army are much more consolidated
now than eighteen months ago. The reason is that our Party, standing resolutely
on the side of the peasants, has carried out the land reform. During the
War of Resistance Against Japan, our Party, on its own initiative and for
the sake of forming an anti-Japanese united front with the Kuomintang and
uniting with those who could still oppose Japanese imperialism, changed its
pre-war policy of confiscating the land of the landlords and distributing
it among the peasants to the policy of reducing rent and interest. This was
entirely necessary. After the Japanese surrender, the peasants urgently demanded
land, and we made a timely decision to change our land policy from reducing
rent and interest to confiscating the land of the landlord class for distribution
among the peasants. The directive issued by the Central Committee of our
Party on May 4, 1946,[3] marked this change. In
September 1947 our Party called the National Land Conference and drew up
the Outline Land Law of China,[4] which was promptly
carried out in all areas. This measure not only reaffirmed the policy set
forth in last year's "May 4th Directive" but also explicitly corrected a
certain lack of thoroughness in that directive. The Outline Land Law provides
for equal distribution of land per head,[5] based
on the principle of abolishing the land system of feudal and semi-feudal
exploitation and putting into effect the system of land to the tillers. This
is a method which most thoroughly abolishes the feudal system and fully meets
the demands of the broad masses of China's peasants. To carry out the land
reform resolutely and thoroughly, it is necessary to organize in the villages,
as lawful bodies for carrying out the reform, not only peasant associations
on the broadest mass basis, including farm labourers, poor peasants and middle
peasants and their elected committees, but first of all poor peasant leagues
composed of poor peasants and farm labourers and their elected committees;
and these poor peasant leagues should be the backbone of leadership in all
rural struggles. Our policy is to rely on the poor peasants and unite solidly
with the middle peasants to abolish the feudal and semi-feudal system of
exploitation by the landlord class and by the old-type rich peasants. Landlords
or rich peasants must not be allotted more land and property than the peasant
masses. But there should be no repetition of the wrong ultra-Left policy,
which was carried out in 1931-34, of "allotting no land to the landlords
and poor land to the rich peasants". Although the proportion of landlords
and rich peasants in the rural population varies from place to place, it
is generally only about 8 per cent (in terms of households), while their
holdings usually amount to 70 to 80 per cent of all the land. Therefore the
targets of our land reform are very few, while the people in the villages
who can and should take part in the united front for land reform are many
-- more than 90 per cent (in terms of households). Here two fundamental
principles must be observed. First, the demands of the poor peasants and
farm labourers must be satisfied; this is the most fundamental task in the
land reform. Second, there must be firm unity with the middle peasants, and
their interests must not be damaged. As long as we grasp these two basic
principles, we can certainly carry out our tasks in the land reform successfully.
The reason why, under the principle of equal distribution, the surplus land
and part of the property of the old-type rich peasants should be handed over
for distribution is that the rich peasants in China generally and to a great
degree have the character of feudal and semi-feudal exploiters; most of them
also rent out land and practice usury and they hire labour on semi-feudal
terms.[6] Furthermore, as the rich peasants have
more and better land,[7] the demands of the poor
peasants and farm labourers cannot be satisfied unless this land is distributed.
However, in accordance with the Outline Land Law, rich peasants should generally
be treated differently from landlords. In the land reform, the middle peasants
show approval of equal distribution because it does no harm to their interests.
Under equal distribution, the land of one section of the middle peasants
remains unchanged and that of another is increased; only the section of
well-to-do middle peasants has a little surplus land, and they are willing
to hand it over for equal distribution because their burden of land tax will
then be lightened. Nevertheless, in carrying out equal distribution of land
in different places, it is necessary to listen to the opinions of the middle
peasants and make concessions to them if they object. During the confiscation
and distribution of the land and property of the feudal class, the needs
of certain middle peasants should receive attention. In determining class
status care must be taken to avoid the mistake of classifying middle peasants
as rich peasants. The active middle peasants must be drawn into the work
of the peasant association committees and the government. With respect to
the burdens of the land tax and of supporting the war, the principle of being
fair and reasonable must be observed. These are the specific policies our
Party must follow in carrying out its strategic task of uniting solidly with
the middle peasants. The whole Party must understand that thoroughgoing reform
of the land system is a basic task of the Chinese revolution in its present
stage. If we can solve the land problem universally and completely, we shall
have obtained the most fundamental condition for the defeat of all our enemies.

V

To carry out the land reform resolutely and thoroughly and to consolidate
the rear areas of the People's Liberation Army, it is necessary to educate
and reorganize the ranks of our Party. On the whole, the rectification
movement[8] inside the Party during the War of
Resistance Against Japan was successful. Its main success was that our leading
bodies and large numbers of cadres and Party members obtained a firmer grasp
of our basic orientation, which is to unite the universal truth of
Marxism-Leninism with the concrete practice of the Chinese revolution. In
this respect our Party has taken a big stride forward as compared with all
the historical stages before the War of Resistance. However, in the Party's
local organizations, especially the organizations at the primary level in
the countryside, the problem of impurities in the class composition of our
ranks and in our style of work is still unsolved. During the eleven years
1937-47 the membership of our Party has grown from several tens of thousands
to 2,700,000, and this is a very big leap forward. This has made our Party
a more powerful party than any in Chinese history. It has enabled us to defeat
Japanese imperialism, beat back Chiang Kai-shek's offensives, lead the Liberated
Areas with a population of more than 100 million and lead a People's Liberation
Army two million strong. But shortcomings have also cropped up. Many landlords,
rich peasants and riffraff have seized the opportunity to sneak into our
Party. In the rural areas they control a number of Party, government and
people's organizations, tyrannically abuse their power, ride roughshod over
the people, distort the Party's policies and thus alienate these organizations
from the masses and prevent the land reform from being thorough. This grave
situation sets us the task of educating and reorganizing the ranks of our
Party. We cannot make headway in the countryside unless we perform this task.
The Party's National Land Conference discussed this problem thoroughly and
laid down the proper measures and methods. These are now being resolutely
applied everywhere, together with the decision on the equal distribution
of land. First and foremost comes the unfolding of criticism and self-criticism
within the Party and the thorough exposure of mistaken ideas and serious
situations in the local organizations, which are departures from the Party
line. All Party members must realize that a decisive link in the solution
of the land problem and for the support of the long-drawn-out war is the
removal of impurities from Party organizations and the education and
reorganization of the Party's ranks, so that the Party and the broadest masses
of working people can all march in the same direction and the Party can lead
the masses forward.

VI

Confiscate the land of the feudal class and turn it over to the peasants.
Confiscate monopoly capital, headed by Chiang Kai-shek, T. V. Soong, H. H.
Kung and Chen Li-fu, and turn it over to the new-democratic state. Protect
the industry and commerce of the national bourgeoisie. These are the three
major economic policies of the new-democratic revolution. During their
twenty-year rule, the four big families, Chiang, Soong, Kung and Chen, have
piled up enormous fortunes valued at ten to twenty thousand million U.S.
dollars and monopolized the economic lifelines of the whole country. This
monopoly capital, combined with state power, has become state-monopoly
capitalism. This monopoly capitalism, closely tied up with foreign imperialism,
the domestic landlord class and the old-type rich peasants, has become comprador,
feudal, state-monopoly capitalism. Such is the economic base of Chiang Kai-shek's
reactionary regime. This state-monopoly capitalism oppresses not only the
workers and peasants but also the urban petty bourgeoisie, and it injures
the middle bourgeoisie. This state-monopoly capitalism reached the peak of
its development during the War of Resistance and after the Japanese surrender;
it has prepared ample material conditions for the new-democratic revolution.
This capital is popularly known in China as bureaucrat-capital. This capitalist
class, known as the bureaucrat-capitalist class, is the big bourgeoisie of
China. Besides doing away with the special privileges of imperialism in China,
the task of the new-democratic revolution at home is to abolish exploitation
and oppression by the landlord class and by the bureaucrat-capitalist class
(the big bourgeoisie), change the comprador, feudal relations of production
and unfetter the productive forces. The upper petty bourgeoisie and middle
bourgeoisie, oppressed and injured by the landlords and big bourgeoisie and
their state power, may take part in the new-democratic revolution or stay
neutral, though they are themselves bourgeois. They have no ties, or
comparatively few, with imperialism and are the genuine national bourgeoisie.
Wherever the state power of New Democracy extends, it must firmly and
unhesitatingly protect them. In Chiang Kai-shek's areas, there are a small
number of people among the upper petty bourgeoisie and the middle bourgeoisie,
the right wing of these classes, who have reactionary political tendencies,
spread illusions about U.S. imperialism and the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek
clique and oppose the people's democratic revolution. As long as their
reactionary tendencies can affect the masses, we should unmask them before
the people under their political influence, attack this influence and liberate
the masses from it. But political attack and economic annihilation are two
different matters, and we shall make mistakes if we confuse the two. The
new-democratic revolution aims at wiping out only feudalism and monopoly
capitalism, only the landlord class and the bureaucrat-capitalist class (the
big bourgeoisie), and not at wiping out capitalism in general, the upper
petty bourgeoisie or the middle bourgeoisie. In view of China's economic
backwardness, even after the country-wide victory of the revolution, it will
still be necessary to permit the existence for a long time of a capitalist
sector of the economy represented by the extensive upper petty bourgeoisie
and middle bourgeoisie. In accordance with the division of labour in the
national economy, a certain development of all parts of this capitalist sector
which are beneficial to the national economy will still be needed. This
capitalist sector will still be an indispensable part of the whole national
economy. The upper petty bourgeoisie referred to here are small industrialists
and merchants employing workers or assistants. In addition, there are also
great numbers of small independent craftsmen and traders who employ no workers
or assistants and, needless to say, they should be firmly protected. After
the victory of the revolution all over the country, the new-democratic state
will possess huge state enterprises taken over from the bureaucrat-capitalist
class and controlling the economic lifelines of the country, and there will
be an agricultural economy liberated from feudalism which, though it will
remain basically scattered and individual for a fairly long time, can later
be led to develop, step by step, in the direction of co-operatives. In these
circumstances the existence and development of these small and middle capitalist
sectors will present no danger. The same is true of the new rich peasant
economy which will inevitably emerge in the rural areas after the land reform.
It is absolutely impermissible to repeat such wrong ultra-Left polices towards
the upper petty bourgeois and middle bourgeois sectors in the economy as
our Party adopted during 1931-34 (unduly advanced labour conditions, excessive
income tax rates, encroachment on the interests of industrialists and merchants
during the land reform, and the adoption as a goal of the so-called "workers'
welfare", which was a short-sighted and one-sided concept, instead of the
goal of developing production, promoting economic prosperity, giving
consideration to both public and private interests and benefiting both labour
and capital). To repeat such mistakes would certainly damage the interests
both of the working masses and of the new-democratic state. One of the provisions
in the Outline Land Law of China reads, "The property and lawful business
of industrialists and merchants shall be protected from encroachment."
"Industrialists and merchants" refers to all small independent craftsmen
and traders as well as all small and middle capitalist elements. To sum up,
the economic structure of New China will consist of: (1) the state-owned
economy, which is the leading sector; (2) the agricultural economy, developing
step by step from individual to collective; and (3) the economy of small
independent craftsmen and traders and the economy of small and middle private
capital. These constitute the whole of the new-democratic national economy.
The principles guiding the new-democratic national economy must closely conform
to the general objective of developing production, promoting economic prosperity,
giving consideration to both public and private interests and benefiting
both labour and capital. Any principle, policy or measure that deviates from
this general objective is wrong.

VII

The People's Liberation Army issued a manifesto in October 1947 which stated
in part: 

Unite workers, peasants, soldiers, intellectuals and businessmen, all oppressed
classes, all people's organizations, democratic parties, minority nationalities,
overseas Chinese and other patriots; form a national united front; overthrow
the dictatorial Chiang Kai-shek government; and establish a democratic coalition
government.

That is the fundamental political programme of the People's Liberation Army
and of the Communist Party of China. On the surface, our revolutionary national
united front appears to have narrowed in the present period as compared with
the period of the War of Resistance. As a matter of fact, it has been precisely
in the present period, after Chiang Kai-shek sold out the nation's interests
to U.S. imperialism and launched the country-wide civil war against the people
and after the crimes of U.S. imperialism and the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek
clique were completely exposed before the Chinese people, that our national
united front has really broadened. During the War of Resistance, Chiang Kai-shek
and the Kuomintang were not yet completely discredited among the Chinese
people and were still able to deceive them in many ways. Now it is different;
all their deceptions have been shown up by their own deeds, they no longer
have any mass following, they are completely isolated. In contrast to the
Kuomintang, the Communist Party of China not only has the confidence of the
broadest masses of the people in the Liberated Areas but has also won the
support of the broad masses in the areas and big cities under Kuomintang
control. If in 1946 a section of the upper petty bourgeois and middle bourgeois
intellectuals under Chiang Kai-shek's rule still cherished the idea of a
so-called third road,[9] this idea is now bankrupt.
Because our Party adopted a thoroughgoing land policy, it has won whole-hearted
support from much broader masses of peasants than during the War of Resistance.
As a result of U.S. imperialist aggression, Chiang Kai-shek's oppression
and our Party's correct policy of firmly protecting the interests of the
masses, our Party has won the sympathy of the broad masses of the working
class, the peasantry and the urban petty and middle bourgeoisie in Chiang
Kai-shek's areas. Driven by hunger, political oppression and Chiang Kai-shek's
civil war against the people, which has made life impossible, the masses
have been waging incessant struggles against U.S. imperialism and Chiang
Kai-shek's reactionary government; their basic slogans are against hunger,
against persecution, against civil war and against U.S. interference in China's
internal affairs. Never before has their awakening reached such a level,
neither before nor during the War of Resistance, nor in the period immediately
after the Japanese surrender. That is why we say that our new-democratic
revolutionary united front is now broader and more consolidated than ever.
This development is not only linked with our land and urban policies but
is also closely linked with the whole political situation-with the victories
of the People's Liberation Army, with Chiang Kai-shek's turn from the offensive
to the defensive, with the People's Liberation Army's turn from the defensive
to the offensive, with the period of a new high tide in the Chinese revolution.
Realizing that Chiang Kai-shek's regime is inevitably doomed, people now
place their hopes on the Communist Party of China and the People's Liberation
Army, and this is quite natural. Without the broadest united front of the
overwhelming majority of the population, it will be impossible to win victory
in China's new-democratic revolution. Moreover, this united front must be
under the firm leadership of the Communist Party of China. Without the Party's
firm leadership, no revolutionary united front can win victory. When the
Northern Expedition reached its climax in 1927, the capitulationists in our
Party's leading body voluntarily gave up the Party's leadership of the peasant
masses, urban petty bourgeoisie and middle bourgeoisie, and in particular
gave up the Party's leadership of the armed forces, thus causing the defeat
of the revolution. During the War of Resistance, our Party combated ideas
similar to those of the capitulationists, that is, such ideas as making
concessions to the Kuomintang's anti-popular policies, having more confidence
in the Kuomintang than in the masses, not daring to arouse and give full
rein to mass struggles, not daring to expand the Liberated Areas and the
people's armies in the Japanese-occupied areas, and handing over the leadership
in the War of Resistance to the Kuomintang. Our Party waged a resolute struggle
against such impotent and degenerate ideas, which run counter to the principles
of Marxism-Leninism, resolutely carried out its political line of "developing
the progressive forces, winning over the middle forces and isolating the
die-hard forces" and resolutely expanded the Liberated Areas and the People's
Liberation Army. This ensured not only that our Party was able to defeat
Japanese imperialism in the period of its aggression, but also that, in the
period after the Japanese surrender when Chiang Kai-shek launched his
counter-revolutionary war, our Party was able to switch smoothly and without
loss to the course of opposing Chiang Kai-shek's counter-revolutionary war
with a people's revolutionary war and to win great victories in a short time.
All Party comrades must keep these lessons of history firmly in mind.



VIII

When the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek clique launched the country-wide civil
war against the people in 1946, the reason they dared take this risk was
that they relied not merely on their own superior military strength but mainly
on the U.S. imperialists with their atom bombs, whom they regarded as
"exceptionally powerful" and "matchless in the world". On the one hand, they
thought U.S. imperialism could meet their military and financial needs with
a stream of supplies. On the other hand, they wildly speculated that "war
between the United States and the Soviet Union is inevitable" and that "the
outbreak of a third world war is inevitable". This dependence on U.S. imperialism
is the common feature of the reactionary forces in all countries since World
War II. It reflects the severity of the blows world capitalism received in
World War II; it reflects the weakness of the reactionary forces in all
countries, their panic and loss of confidence; and it reflects the might
of the world revolutionary forces -- all of which make reactionaries in all
countries feel that there is no way out except to rely on U.S. imperialist
support. But, in fact, is U.S. imperialism after World War II as powerful
as Chiang Kai-shek and the reactionaries of other countries imagine? Can
it really pour out a stream of supplies for them? No, that is not so. The
economic power of U.S. imperialism, which grew during World War II, is confronted
with unstable and daily shrinking domestic and foreign markets. The further
shrinking of these markets will cause economic crises to break out. The war
boom in the United States of America was only temporary. The strength of
the United States of America is only superficial and transient. Irreconcilable
domestic and international contradictions, like a volcano, menace U.S.
imperialism every day. U.S. imperialism is sitting on this volcano. This
situation has driven the U.S. imperialists to draw up a plan for enslaving
the world, to run amuck like wild beasts in Europe, Asia and other parts
of the world, to muster the reactionary forces in all countries, the human
dregs cast off by their peoples, to form an imperialist and anti-democratic
camp against all the democratic forces headed by the Soviet Union, and to
prepare for war in the hope that in the future, at a distant time, some day,
they can start a third world war to defeat the democratic forces. This is
a preposterous plan. The democratic forces of the world must defeat this
plan and certainly can defeat it. The strength of the world anti-imperialist
camp has surpassed that of the imperialist camp. It is we, not the enemy,
who are in the superior position. The anti-imperialist camp headed by the
Soviet Union has already been formed. The socialist Soviet Union is free
from crises, on the ascendant and cherished by the world's broad masses;
its strength has already surpassed that of the imperialist United States,
which is seriously menaced by crises, on the decline and opposed by the world's
broad masses. The People's Democracies in Europe are consolidating themselves
internally and are uniting with each other. In the European capitalist countries
the people's anti-imperialist forces are developing, with those in France
and Italy taking the lead. Within the United States, there are people's
democratic forces which are getting stronger every day. The peoples of Latin
America are not slaves obedient to U.S. imperialism. In the whole of Asia
a great national liberation movement has arisen. All the forces of the
anti-imperialist camp are uniting and forging ahead. The Communist and Workers'
Parties of nine European countries have established their Information Bureau
and issued a call to the people of the world to rise against the imperialist
plan of enslavement.[10] This call to battle has
inspired the oppressed people of the world, charted the course of their struggle
and strengthened their confidence in victory. It has thrown world reaction
into panic and confusion. All the anti-imperialist forces in the countries
of the East, too, should unite together, oppose oppression by imperialism
and by their domestic reactionaries and make the goal of their struggle the
emancipation of the more than 1,000 million oppressed people of the East.
We certainly should grasp our own destiny in our own hands. We should rid
our ranks of all impotent thinking. All views that overestimate the strength
of the enemy and underestimate the strength of the people are wrong. If everyone
makes strenuous efforts, we, together with all the democratic forces of the
world, can surely defeat the imperialist plan of enslavement, prevent the
outbreak of a third world war, overthrow all reactionary regimes and win
lasting peace for mankind. We are soberly aware that on our way forward there
will still be all kinds of obstacles and difficulties and that we should
be prepared to deal with the maximum resistance and desperate struggle by
all our enemies, domestic and foreign. But so long as we can grasp the science
of Marxism-Leninism, have confidence in the masses, stand closely together
with the masses and lead them forward, we shall be fully able to surmount
any obstacle and overcome any difficulty. Our strength will be invincible.
This is the historic epoch in which world capitalism and imperialism are
going down to their doom and world socialism and people's democracy are marching
to victory. The dawn is ahead, we must exert ourselves.
NOTES 

1. For the circumstances of how the People's Liberation
Army went over to the offensive on various fronts in succession and carried
the war into the Kuomintang areas, see "On the Great Victory in the Northwest
and on the New Type of Ideological Education Movement in the Liberation Army",
Note 4, pp. 215-16 of this volume.

2. Liu Chih, Director of the Kuomintang's Pacification
Headquarters in Chengchow, Honan Province, was dismissed in November 1946
for his defeat in the battle of Tingtao, southwestern Shantung Province,
in September. Hsueh Yueh, Director of the Kuomintang's Pacification Headquarters
in Hsuchow, Kiangsu Province, was dismissed in March 1947 for a series of
heavy defeats suffered by the Kuomintang troops under his command: in the
campaign in the area north of Suchien, Kiangsu Province in December 1946;
in the campaign in southern Shantung in January 1947; and in the Laiwu campaign,
central Shantung, in February 1947. Wu Chi-wei, Deputy Director of the
Kuomintang's Pacification Headquarters in Hsuchow, was dismissed in March
1947 for his defeat in the campaign in the area north of Suchien in December
1946. Tang En-po, Commander of the Kuomintang's 1st Army, was dismissed in
June 1947 because the Kuomintang's Reorganized 74th Division was wiped out
in the battle of Mengliangku, southern Shantung, in May. Wang Chung-lien,
Commander of the Kuomintang's 4th Army, was dismissed in August 1947 for
his defeat in the Southwestern Shantung campaign in July. Tu Yu-ming, Commander
of the Kuomintang's Peace Preservation Headquarters in the Northeast, and
Hsiung Shih-hui Director of the Kuomintang Generalissimo's Headquarters in
the Northeast, were both dismissed for being severely defeated by the People's
Liberation Army in its summer offensive in the Northeast in June 1947. Sun
Lien-chung, Commander of the Kuomintang's 11th War Zone, was demoted to Director
of the Pacification Headquarters in Paoting, Hopei Province, for his defeats
in the Ching-Tsang campaign and the campaign in the Hsushui area north of
Paoting in June 1947. Chen Cheng Chiang Kai-shek's chief of general staff,
was demoted to governor-general of the Northeast in August 1947 because of
the successive defeats of the campaigns he directed in Shantung Province.

3. For the directive, see "A Three Months' Summary", Note
4, p. 118 of this volume.

4. The National Land Conference of the Communist Party
of China was held in September 1947 in Hsipaipo Village, Pingshan County,
Hopei Province. The Outline Land Law of China, adopted by the conference
on September 13, was published by the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China on October 10, 1947. It stipulated the following: 

Abolish the land system of feudal and semi-feudal exploitation and put into
effect the system of land to the tillers.

All the land of the landlords and the public land in the villages is to be
taken over by the local peasant associations and, together with all other
land there, is to be equally distributed among the entire rural population,
regardless of sex or age.

The peasant associations of the villages shall take over the draught animals
farm tools, houses, grain and other property of the landlords, requisition
the surplus of such property of the rich peasants, distribute all this property
among the peasants and other poor people who are in need of it and allot
the same share to the landlords.

Thus the Outline Land Law not only confirmed the principle of "confiscation
of the land of the landlords and its distribution among the peasants" laid
down in the "May 4th Directive" of 1946 but also made up for the lack of
thoroughness in that directive, which had shown too much consideration for
certain landlords.

5. Subsequently in the implementation some changes were
made in the method of equal distribution of land provided in the Outline
Land Law of China. In February 1948 the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China specified in its "Directive on the Work of Land Reform and
of Party Consolidation in the Old and Semi-Old Areas that in the old and
semi-old Liberated Areas where the feudal system had already been overthrown,
there would be no further equal distribution of land, but that the poor peasants
and farm labourers who had not yet completely shaken off the feudal yoke
should, if circumstances so required, be given a certain amount of land and
other means of production through readjustment, by the method of taking from
those who had a surplus and giving to those who had a shortage and taking
from those who had better and giving to those who had worse, while the middle
peasants would be allowed to keep more land than the average poor peasant.
In areas where the feudal system still existed, equal distribution was confined
mainly to the land and property of landlords and the surplus land and property
of old-type rich peasants. In all areas, it was permissible to take the surplus
land of middle peasants and new-type rich peasants for purposes of readjustment
only if this was actually necessary and if the owners really consented. In
the land reform in the new Liberated Areas, no land was to be taken from
any middle peasant.

6. The question of the rich peasants in China's land reform
was a peculiar one arising from her specific historical and economic conditions.
China's rich peasants differed from those in many capitalist countries in
two respects: first, they generally and to a great degree had the character
of feudal and semi-feudal exploiters and, second, this rich peasant economy
did not occupy an important place in the country's agricultural economy.
In the struggle against feudal exploitation by the landlord class in China,
the broad masses of poor peasants and farm labourers also demanded the abolition
of feudal and semi-feudal exploitation by the rich peasants. During the War
of Liberation, the Communist Party of China adopted the policy of requisitioning
the surplus land and property of rich peasants for distribution among the
peasants, and thus satisfied the demands of the masses of poor peasants and
farm labourers and ensured victory in the People's War of Liberation. As
the war progressed towards victory, the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China in February 1948 laid down new policies for the land reform
in the new Liberated Areas. The reform was to be divided into two stages:
in the first stage, neutralize the rich peasants and concentrate the blows
on the landlords, primarily the big landlords; in the second stage, while
distributing the land of the landlords, also distribute the land rented out
by rich peasants and their surplus land, but continue to treat the rich peasants
differently from the landlords (see "Essential Points in Land Reform in the
New Liberated Areas", pp. 201-02 of this volume). After the founding of the
People's Republic of China, the Central People's Government in June 1950
promulgated the Land Reform Law, which provided that in the land reform only
the land rented out by the rich peasants should partly or wholly be
requisitioned, while the rest of their land and property was to be protected.
In the subsequent stage of socialist revolution, the rich peasant economy
disappeared as the movement for agricultural co-operation deepened and the
rural economy developed.

7. That is to say, a rich peasant household owned on the
average more and better land than a poor peasant household. Taking the country
as a whole, the quantity of the means of production owned by China's rich
peasants and the volume of their farm produce were both very small. The rich
peasant economy did not occupy an important place in China's rural economy.

8. This refers to the movement for rectifying the style
of work conducted by the Communist Party of China in 1942-43 throughout the
Party; its content was the combating of subjectivism, sectarianism and
stereotyped writing. Under the leadership of Comrade Mao Tse-tung, this
rectification movement adopted the principles of "learning from past mistakes
to avoid their repetition, curing the sickness to save the patient" and "clearing
up wrong thinking while uniting with comrades". Through the method of criticism
and self-criticism, the movement corrected the "Left" and Right errors which
had occurred on various occasions in the history of the Party by getting
down to their ideological roots, greatly raised the ideological level of
the broad ranks of Party cadres, helped immensely to unify thinking within
the Party on the basis of Marxism-Leninism and thus brought about a high
degree of unity in the whole Party.

9. In the early stage of the People's War of Liberation
some democratic personages fancied that they could find a so-called third
road, apart from the Kuomintang dictatorship of big landlords and big bourgeoisie
and apart from the people's democratic dictatorship led by the Communist
Party of China. This third road was in fact the road of a dictatorship of
the bourgeoisie on the British and U.S. pattern.

10. The Information Bureau of the Communist and Workers'
Parties was founded at a meeting held in Warsaw, Poland, in September 1947
by representatives of the Communist and Workers' Parties of Bulgaria, Rumania,
Hungary, Poland, the Soviet Union, France, Czechoslovakia, Italy and Yugoslavia.
Later, at a meeting in Rumania in June 1948, the Bureau announced the expulsion
of the Yugoslav Communist Party because the latter persisted in its
anti-Marxist-Leninist stand and adopted an attitude opposed to the Soviet
Union and the socialist camp. The Information Bureau's call to the people
of the world to rise against the imperialist plan of enslavement, mentioned
here by Comrade Mao Tse-tung, was the "Declaration on the International
Situation" adopted at the September 1947 meeting of the Information Bureau.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Democratic Movement in the Army 








THE DEMOCRATIC MOVEMENT IN THE ARMY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE DEMOCRATIC MOVEMENT IN THE ARMY


January 30, 1948

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the
Revolutionary Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China. ] 
  

The policy for political work in our army units is fully to arouse the masses
of soldiers, the commanders and all working personnel in order to achieve,
through a democratic movement under centralized leadership, three major
objectives, namely, a high degree of political unity, an improvement in living
conditions and a higher level of military technique and tactics. The Three
Check-ups and Three Improvements [1] now being
enthusiastically carried out in our army units are intended to attain the
first two of these objectives through the methods of political and economic
democracy.

With regard to economic democracy, the representatives elected by the soldiers
must be ensured the right to assist (but not to bypass) the company leadership
in managing the company's supplies and mess.

With regard to military democracy, in periods of training there must be mutual
instruction as between officers and soldiers and among the soldiers themselves;
and in periods of fighting the companies at the front must hold big and small
meetings of various kinds. Under the direction of the company leadership,
the masses of soldiers should be roused to discuss how to attack and capture
enemy positions and how to fulfil other combat tasks. When the fighting lasts
several days, several such meetings should be held. This kind of military
democracy was practiced with great success in the battle of Panlung
[2] in northern Shensi and in the battle of
Shihchiachuang [3] in the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei area.
It has been proved that the practice can only do good and can do no harm
whatsoever.

The masses of soldiers should have the right to expose the errors and misdeeds
of bad elements among the cadres. We should be confident that the soldiers
will cherish all the good and comparatively good cadres. Moreover, the soldiers
should have the right, when necessary, to nominate those whom they trust
from their own ranks for lower-level cadre posts, subject to appointment
by the higher level. When there is an acute shortage of lower-level cadres,
this kind of nomination is very useful. It is not to be the rule, however,
but is to be done only when necessary. 

NOTES


1. The "Three Check-ups" and "Three Improvements" constituted
an important movement for Party consolidation and for ideological education
in the army which was carried out by our Party in conjunction with the land
reform during the People's War of Liberation. In the localities, the "Three
Check-ups" meant checking on class origin, ideology and style of work; in
the armed units, the check-ups were on class origin, performance of duty
and will to fight. The "Three Improvements" meant organizational consolidation,
ideological education and rectification of style of work.

2. Panlung, northeast of Yenan, was a town where the Northwest
People's Liberation Army surrounded and wiped out over 6,700 Kuomintang troops
under the command of Hu Tsung-nan in May 1947.

3. Shihchiachuang was liberated by units of the People's
Liberation Army of the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Border Region on November 12,
1947. Its enemy garrison of more than 24,000 men was totally destroyed. It
was the first important city liberated by the People's Liberation Army in
northern China. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Great Victory in the Northwest and on the New Type of Ideological Education Movement in the Liberation Army 







ON THE GREAT VICTORY IN THE NORTHWEST AND ON THE NEW TYPE OF IDEOLOGICAL
  EDUCATION MOVEMENT IN THE LIBERATION ARMY 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON THE GREAT VICTORY IN THE NORTHWEST AND ON THE NEW TYPE OF IDEOLOGICAL
  EDUCATION MOVEMENT IN THE LIBERATION ARMY


March 7, 1948

[This commentary was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the spokesman of
the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army. At that
time the enemy offensive in the Northwest theatre of war had been smashed,
and our army had gone over to its own offensive. This commentary analysed
the situation in the Northwest theatre and also outlined conditions in the
other theatres of war. More important, it stressed the great significance
of the new type of ideological education movement in the army, carried out
by the methods of "pouring out grievances" and of the "three check-ups".
This new type of movement was an important development of the political work
and the democratic movement in the People's Liberation Army. It was the
reflection in the army of the movements for land reform and Party consolidation
then vigorously proceeding in all the Liberated Areas. This movement greatly
enhanced the political consciousness, discipline and combat effectiveness
of all officers and soldiers. At the same time it most effectively speeded
the process of reforming large numbers of captured Kuomintang soldiers into
Liberation Army fighters. Thus it played an important role in consolidating
and expanding the People's Liberation Army and in ensuring victories in the
field. For the significance of this movement, see also "The Democratic Movement
in the Army" pp. 191-92, "Speech at a Conference of Cadres in the Shansi-Suiyuan
Liberated Area" pp. 227-39, and "On the September Meeting -- Circular of
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China", pp. 269-77, of this
volume. ] 
  

Commenting on the recent great victory of the Northwest People's Liberation
Army, a spokesman for the General Headquarters of the People's Liberation
Army said: This victory has changed the situation in the Northwest and will
affect the situation in the Central Plains. It has proved that through the
new type of ideological education movement in the army by the methods of
"pouring out grievances" and of the "three check-ups" the People's Liberation
Army will make itself invincible.

The spokesman said: On this occasion, the Northwest People's Liberation Army
suddenly encircled an enemy brigade at Yichuan, and Hu Tsung-nan ordered
Liu Kan, Commander of his 29th Corps, to rush 4 brigades of 2 reorganized
divisions from the Lochuan-Yichun line to the relief of Yichuan. They were
the 31st and 47th Brigades of the Reorganized 27th Division and the 53rd
and 61st Brigades of the Reorganized 90th Division, totalling more than 24,000
men; they reached the area southwest of Yichuan on February 28. The Northwest
People's Liberation Army started a battle of annihilation and in thirty hours
of fighting on February 29 and March 1 completely wiped out these reinforcements,
letting none escape from the net. More than 18,000 men were captured, and
more than 5,000 were killed and wounded; Liu Kan himself, Yen Ming, Commander
of the 90th Division, and other officers were killed. Then on March 3 we
captured Yichuan and here again wiped out over 5,000 men of the 24th Brigade
of the enemy's Reorganized 76th Division which was defending the city. In
this campaign we wiped out, all told, 1 corps headquarters, 2 division
headquarters and 5 brigades of the enemy, a total of 30,000 men. This is
our first great victory in the Northwest theatre.

Analysing the situation in the Northwest theatre, the spokesman said: Of
the 28 brigades of the so-called "Central Army" directly commanded by Hu
Tsung-nan, 8 belonged to his 3 crack divisions, the Reorganized 1st, 36th
and 90th Divisions. Of these divisions, the 1st Brigade of the Reorganized
1st Division had been wiped out[1] by us once before
at Fushan, southern Shansi, in September 1946 and the main force of the same
division's 167th Brigade had been wiped out once at Panlung town, northern
Shensi, in May last year; the 123rd and 165th Brigades of the Reorganized
36th Division had been wiped out once at Shachiatien in Michih County, northern
Shensi, in August last year; and this time the Reorganized 90th Division
was also completely wiped out. Of the remainder of Hu Tsung-nan's main force,
only the 78th Brigade of the Reorganized 1st Division and the 28th Brigade
of the Reorganized 36th Division have not yet been wiped out. Hu Tsung-nan's
whole army can therefore be said to have practically no more crack units.
As a result of the Yichuan battle of annihilation, of the 28 regular brigades
formerly under Hu Tsung-nan's direct command, only 23 are left. These 23
brigades are distributed in the following areas: 1 brigade at Linfen in southern
Shansi is immobilized and doomed, 9 brigades are on the Shensi-Honan border
and along the Loyang-Tungkuan line to cope with our field army under Chen
Keng and Hsieh Fu-chih, and another brigade in southern Shensi is guarding
the Hanchung area. The remaining 12 brigades are distributed along the T-shaped
communication lines from Tungkuan to Paoki and from Hsienyang to Yenan. Of
these, 3 are "reserve brigades" composed entirely of recruits, 2 have been
completely wiped out by our army and replenished recently, another 2 have
received crushing blows from us and 5 have received relatively few blows.
It can be seen that not only are these forces very weak but also they are
mostly on garrison duty. In addition to Hu Tsung-nan's army, there are 2
brigades under Teng Pao-shan defending Yulin, while 9 brigades under Ma Hung-kuei
of Ningsia Province and Ma Pu-fang of Chinghai Province are distributed in
the Sanpien and Lungtung areas.[2] All the regular
troops under Hu Tsung-nan, Teng Pao-shan and the two Mas now total 34 brigades,
including the units replenished after having been wiped out once or twice.

That is how things stand with the enemy in the Northwest. To return to the
T-shaped communication lines, of those 5 brigades which have received relatively
few blows, 2 are hemmed in at Yenan and 3 are in the Greater Kuanchung
Area.[3] As for the other brigades there, most
of them have been recently replenished, and a few have received crushing
blows. In other words, the enemy's forces in the whole Greater Kuanchung
Area and especially in Kansu Province are very sparse and weak and cannot
possibly stop the offensive of the People's Liberation Army. This situation
is bound to affect some of the dispositions of Chiang Kai-shek's forces on
the southern front and, first of all, his dispositions vis-à-vis our
field army under Chen Keng and Hsieh Fu-chih on the Honan-Shensi border.
In its present southward drive the Northwest People's Liberation Army has
won victory as soon as its banner was displayed, gained resounding fame and
changed the relation of forces between the enemy and ourselves in the Northwest;
from now on it will be able to fight even more effectively in co-ordination
with the forces of the People's Liberation Army on the southern fronts.

The spokesman said: Since last summer and autumn our three field armies,
commanded respectively by Liu Po-cheng and Teng Hsiao-ping, Chen Yi and Su
Yu, and Chen Keng and Hsieh Fu-chih, have advanced south across the Yellow
River, swept through the length and breadth of the territory enclosed by
the Yangtse, Huai, Yellow and Han Rivers, wiped out large numbers of enemy
troops, manipulated and drawn towards themselves some 90 out of the 160 odd
brigades which Chiang Kai-shek has on the southern front, forced his armies
into a passive position, played a decisive strategic role and won the acclaim
of the people all over the country.[4] In its winter
offensive our Northeast Field Army braved bitter cold of 30 degrees below
zero, annihilated most of the enemy troops, captured one well-known city
after another and won resounding fame throughout the
country.[5] After wiping out large numbers of enemy
troops in heroic battles last year,[6] our field
armies in the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei area, Shantung, northern Kiangsu and the
Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan area completed their training and consolidation
last winter, and they will soon unfold their spring
offensive.[7] A review of the whole situation proves
one truth. Provided we firmly oppose conservatism, fear of the enemy and
fear of difficulties, and provided we follow the general strategy of the
Central Committee of the Party and its directive on the ten major principles
of operation,[8] we can unfold our offensives,
wipe out vast numbers of enemy troops and strike such blows at the forces
of the Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang that they can only parry them for a time
without being able to hit back, or that they cannot even parry our blows
and will be completely wiped out, one after another.

The spokesman emphatically pointed out: The combat effectiveness of our Northwest
Field Army is far higher than at any time last
year.[9] In last year's fighting the Northwest
Field Army could destroy at most two enemy brigades at a time; now in the
Yichuan campaign it has been able to wipe out five enemy brigades at one
time. The reasons for this outstanding victory were many, among which we
should point out the firm yet flexible command of the leading comrades at
the front, the energetic support given by the leading comrades and the broad
masses in the rear, the relative isolation of the enemy troops and a terrain
favourable to us. What is most noteworthy, however, is the new type of
ideological education movement in the army, which was carried out for more
than two months last winter by the methods of pouring out grievances and
the three check-ups. The correct unfolding of the movement for pouring out
grievances (the wrongs done to the labouring people by the old society and
by the reactionaries) and the three check-ups (on class origin, performance
of duty and will to fight) greatly heightened the political consciousness
of commanders and fighters throughout the army in the fight for the emancipation
of the exploited working masses, for nation-wide land reform and for the
destruction of the common enemy of the people, the Chiang Kai-shek bandit
gang. It also greatly strengthened the firm unity of all commanders and fighters
under the leadership of the Communist Party. On this basis, the army achieved
greater purity in its ranks, strengthened discipline, unfolded a mass movement
for training and further developed its political, economic and military democracy
in a completely well-led and orderly way. Thus the army has become united
as one man, with everybody contributing his ideas and his strength, fearless
of sacrifice and capable of overcoming material difficulties, an army which
displays mass heroism and daring in destroying the enemy. Such an army will
be invincible.

The spokesman said: It is not only in the Northwest that this new
type of ideological education movement in the army has been carried out;
it has been, or is being, carried on in the People's Liberation Army throughout
the country. Conducted between battles, the movement does not interfere with
fighting. Taking in conjunction with the movement for Party consolidation
and the land reform movement now being correctly carried out by our Party,
taking in co-ordination with our Party's correct policy of narrowing the
scope of attack by opposing only imperialism, feudalism and
bureaucrat-capitalism, by strictly forbidding beating and killing without
discrimination (the fewer killings, the better) and by firmly uniting the
masses of the people who make up over 90 per cent of the country's population,
and taking in co-ordination with the application of our Party's correct urban
policy and its policy of firmly protecting and developing the industry and
commerce of the national bourgeoisie, this ideological education movement
is bound to make the People's Liberation Army invincible. However desperate
the exertions of the Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang and its master, U.S.
imperialism, against the great struggle of the Chinese people's democratic
revolution, victory will certainly be ours. 

NOTES


1. See "Concentrate a Superior Force to Destroy the Enemy
Forces One by One", Note 1, p. 106 of this volume.

2. Sanpien is an area in northwestern Shensi Province.
Lungtung is the eastern part of Kansu Province. Both Sanpien and Lungtung
were then prefectures in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Liberated Area.

3. This refers to central Shensi and northwestern Kansu
taken together.

4. Starting from June 30, 1947, 7 columns of the
Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Field Army led by Liu Po-cheng, Teng Hsiao-ping
and other comrades forced the Yellow River and pushed towards the Tapieh
Mountains, thus ushering in the strategic offensive of the People's Liberation
Army. By the end of March 1948, more than 100,000 enemy troops had been wiped
out, and new base areas had been built on the Hupeh-Honan border, in western
Anhwei, in the Tungpai mountain area on the Hupeh-Honan border, the plains
between the Yangtse and Han Rivers and other places. Eight columns of the
Eastern China Field Army led by Chen Yi, Su Yu and other comrades, having
smashed the enemy's concentrated attacks on Shantung Province in August 1947,
swept into southwestern Shantung and the Honan-Anhwei-Kiangsu Border Region,
wiped out over 100,000 enemy troops, built the Honan-Anhwei-Kiangsu Liberated
Area and isolated the enemy's strategic centres of Kaifeng and Chengchow.
Two columns and one corps of the Taiyueh Army of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan
area, commanded by Chen Keng, Hsieh Fu-chih and other comrades, forced the
Yellow River in southern Shansi in August 1947, advanced into western Honan,
wiped out more than 40,000 enemy troops and built base areas on the
Honan-Shensi-Hupeh border and in southern Shensi, completely isolating Loyang,
the enemy's strategic centre in western Honan Province, and threatening Tungkuan.

6. Fighting continuously for ninety days from December
15, 1947 to March 15, 1948, 10 columns and 12 independent divisions of the
Northeast Field Army led by Lin Piao, Lo Jung-huan and other comrades waged
a winter offensive on an unprecedented scale along the Szepingkai-Tashihchiao
section of the Chinese Changchun Railway and the Shanhaikuan-Shenyang section
of the Peiping-Liaoning Railway; they wiped out more than 156,000 enemy troops
and captured the enemy's heavily-fortified strategic centre of Szepingkai
and eighteen other cities. One enemy division garrisoning Yingkow revolted
and came over to our side. The enemy force defending the city of Kirin fled
towards Changchun. After this, the area under enemy control in the Northeast
shrank to only 1 per cent of the whole, and the enemy lairs in the cities
along the Changchun-Shenyang-Chinchow line were isolated.

5. From early September to mid-November 1947, 5 columns
of the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Field Army led by Nieh Jung-chen and other comrades
fought successive battles in the area north of the Taching River and in the
Chingfengtien area and the battle for the liberation of Shihchiachuang, wiping
out a total of nearly 50,000 enemy troops and linking up the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei
and Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Liberated Areas into one contiguous territory.
From September to December 1947, 3 columns of the Shantung Army belonging
to the Eastern China Field Army and regional armed forces fought the Eastern
Shantung campaign under the command of Hsu Shih-yu, Tan Chen-lin and other
comrades, wiping out more than 63,000 of the enemy and recovering more than
ten county towns; this changed the whole situation in Shantung Province.
From August to December 1947, units of the Eastern China Field Army in northern
Kiangsu, in successive battles at Yencheng, Lipao and other points, annihilated
more than 24,000 enemy troops and recovered a wide area in northern Kiangsu.
In December 1947, units of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Field Army led
by Hsu Hsiang-chien and other comrades fought in co-ordination with units
of the Northwest Field Army and captured Yuncheng, destroying more than 13,000
enemy troops; they wiped out all the enemy forces in southwestern Shansi
and isolated the enemy at Linfen.

7. In the spring of 1948, following a period of training
and consolidation in the previous winter, the field armies of the People's
Liberation Army launched successive offensives. Between March and May, the
Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Field Army and units of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan
and Shansi-Suiyuan Field Armies campaigned in southern Chahar, eastern Suiyuan
and the Linfen area of Shansi, wiping out more than 43,000 enemy troops and
recovering much territory. Between March 7 and May 29, units of the Central
Plains and Eastern China Field Armies fought successive battles at Loyang
and Sungho and in the sectors west and east of Nanyang, wiped out more than
56,000 enemy troops and thus crushed the enemy's defence system on the Central
Plains and expanded and consolidated the Liberated Area there. Between March
11 and May 8, the Shantung Army of the Eastern China Field Army fought battles
first on the western section of the Tsingtao-Tsinan Railway and then at Weihsien,
wiping out more than 84,000 enemy troops. Thus, except for a few strong-points,
such as Tsinan, Tsingtao, Linyi and Yenchow, which were held by the Kuomintang,
Shantung Province was liberated. In March the Northern Kiangsu Army fought
a successful battle at Yilin.

8. For the ten major principles of operation, see "The
Present Situation and Our Tasks", Section 3, pp. 160-63 of this volume.

9. The Northwest Field Army led by Peng Teh-huai, Ho Lung,
Hsi Chung-hsun and other comrades employed a main force of 2 columns and
2 brigades, totalling more than 25,000 men, in the fighting in northern Shensi
in the summer of 1947. By the spring of 1948 the main force had increased
to 5 columns, totalling more than 75,000 men. After having been steeled by
a year's fighting and by the new type of ideological education movement in
the army in the winter of 1947, the political consciousness of the broad
masses of officers and soldiers and the combat effectiveness of the military
units rose to unprecedented heights. This created the necessary conditions
for the Northwest Field Army to turn to fighting on exterior lines in March
1948. On April 12, following its major victory at Yichuan, the Northwest
Field Army launched a campaign in Hsifu (the area west of Sian and between
the Chingshui and Weishui Rivers) and eastern Kansu, pushed forward into
the broad area between the Chingshui and Weishui Rivers, cut the Sian-Lanchow
highway, and on April 22 recovered Yenan. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Concept of Operations for the Liaoshi-Shenyang Campaign







THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE LIAOHSI-SHENYANG CAMPAIGN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE LIAOHSI-SHENYANG CAMPAIGN
  [1]


September and October 1948

[These telegrams addressed to Lin Piao, Lo Jung-huan and other comrades were
drawn up by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Revolutionary Military Commission
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. The concept of
operations he set forth here for the Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign was fully
carried out later. The results of the campaign were as follows:

  (1) The destruction of 470,000 enemy troops, plus the victories in other
  theatres during that period, made the qualitatively superior People's Liberation
  Army superior to the Kuomintang army in numbers as well.


  (2) The entire territory of northeastern China was liberated, and the conditions
  were created for the liberation of Peiping, Tientsin and all northern China.


  (3) Our army gained experience in fighting large-scale campaigns of annihilation.


  (4) As a result of the liberation of northeastern China, a strategically
  secure rear area with a fair industrial base was won for the War of Liberation,
  and the Party and the people obtained favourable conditions for gradually
  turning to economic rehabilitation.


The Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign was the first of the three greatest campaigns
of decisive significance in the Chinese People's War of Liberation. The other
two were the Huai-Hai and the Peiping-Tientsin campaigns. In these three
great campaigns, which lasted four months and nineteen days, 144 divisions
(brigades) of the enemy's regular troops and 29 divisions of its irregular
troops, or more than 1,540,000 men in all, were wiped out. During this period
the People's Liberation Army also launched offensives on other fronts, destroying
large numbers of the enemy. In the first two years of the war, the People's
Liberation Army had wiped out an average of about 8 enemy brigades per month.
Now the number of enemy troops destroyed by the People's Liberation Army
no longer averaged 8 brigades per month but 38 brigades. These three major
campaigns virtually annihilated the crack troops on which the Kuomintang
relied for waging the counter-revolutionary civil war and greatly speeded
victory in the War of Liberation all over the country. For the Huai-Hai and
Peiping-Tientsin campaigns, see "The Concept of Operations for the Huai-Hai
Campaign", pp. 279-82 and "The Concept of Operations for the Peiping-Tientsin
Campaign", pp. 289-93, of this volume. ]
  
I. THE TELEGRAM OF SEPTEMBER 7

We are prepared to bring about the fundamental overthrow of the Kuomintang
in about five years, counting from July 1946.[2] This
is possible. Our objective can be attained provided we destroy about 100
brigades of Kuomintang regular troops every year, or some 500 brigades over
the five years. In the past two years our army has annihilated a total of
191 brigades of enemy regulars, an average of 95 brigades a year,
or nearly 8 brigades a month. In the next three years it is required that
our army should wipe out 300 or more brigades of enemy regulars. Between
July this year and June next year we expect to destroy some 115 brigades
of enemy regulars. This total is apportioned among our various field armies
and armies.[3] The Eastern China Field Army is required
to wipe out about 40 brigades (including the 7 already wiped out in July)
and capture Tsinan and a number of large, medium and small cities in northern
Kiangsu, eastern Honan and northern Anhwei. The Central Plains Field Army
is required to wipe out about 14 brigades (including the 1 1/2 brigades wiped
out in July) and capture a number of cities in the provinces of Hupeh, Honan
and Anhwei. The Northwest Field Army is required to wipe out about 12
brigades (including the 1 brigades wiped out in August). The army in
northern China commanded by Hsu Hsiang-chien and Chou Shih-ti is required
to wipe out about 14 brigades under Yen Hsi-shan (including the 8 brigades
annihilated in July) and capture Taiyuan. You are required, in co-ordination
with the 2 armies commanded by Lo Jui-ching and Yang Cheng-wu, to wipe out
about 35 brigades of the 2 army groups under Wei Li-huang and Fu Tso-yi
(including 1 brigade wiped out by Yang Cheng-wu in July) and capture all
the cities along the Peiping-Liaoning, Peiping-Suiyuan, Peiping-Chengteh
and Peiping-Paoting Railways, except Peiping, Tientsin and Shenyang. The
decisive factors for the achievement of this objective are the proper disposition
and command of troops in campaigns and a proper balance between fighting
and rest. If in the two months of September and October, or a little longer,
you can wipe out the enemy along the line from Chinchow to Tangshan and take
Chinchow, Shanhaikuan and Tangshan, you will have achieved the task of wiping
out some 18 enemy brigades. In order to wipe them out, you must now prepare
to employ your main force on this line, leaving the enemy forces at Changchun
and Shenyang alone. When you are attacking Chinchow, be prepared also to
wipe out the enemy forces that may come to its rescue from Changchun and
Shenyang. Because the enemy forces In and near Chinchow, Shanhaikuan and
Tangshan are isolated from each other, success in attacking and wiping them
out is pretty certain, and there is also a fair hope of success in capturing
Chinchow and in attacking enemy reinforcements. If, however, you were to
dispose your main force at Hsinmin and its northern environs in preparation
for attacking the enemy forces which might come out from Changchun and Shenyang,
then the enemy might not dare come out at all because you would be too great
a menace. On the one hand, the enemy at Changchun and Shenyang might not
come out. And, on the other hand, because the forces you dispatch towards
Chinchow, Shanhaikuan and Tangshan would be too small, the enemy in and near
these three cities (comprising 18 brigades) would probably fall back on Chinchow
and Tangshan, and you would find it rather difficult and yet necessary to
attack them, wasting time and energy and thus perhaps landing yourselves
in a passive position. For these reasons, it will be better to leave the
enemy at Changchun and Shenyang alone and focus your attention on the enemy
at Chinchow, Shanhaikuan and Tangshan. Another point: you must prepare to
fight three big campaigns in the ten months from September to next June and
to spend about two months on each campaign, making a total of about six months
and leaving four months for rest. During the Chinchow-Shanhaiknan-Tangshan
campaign (the first big campaign), if the enemy at Changchun and Shenyang
sallies forth in full strength to rescue Chinchow (because your main force
will be disposed not at Hsinmin but around Chinchow, Wei Li-huang will be
emboldened to come to the rescue), then, without leaving the
Chinchow-Shanhaikuan-Tangshan line, you can follow up immediately with
large-scale annihilating attacks on the enemy reinforcements and strive to
wipe out all Wei Li-huang's troops on the spot. This would be the ideal
situation. Hence, you should pay attention to the following:

  (1) Be firmly determined to attack and capture Chinchow, Shanhaikuan and
  Tangshan and to take control of the entire line.


  (2) Be firmly determined to fight a battle of annihilation on a scale larger
  than you have ever fought before, that is, dare to fight all Wei Li-huang's
  army when it comes to the rescue.


  (3) In keeping with these two resolves, reconsider your plan of operations,
  make arrangements to meet the military requirements of your whole force (food,
  ammunition, recruits, and so on) and to handle captives.


Please consider the above and telegraph your reply.
II. THE TELEGRAM OF OCTOBER 10

1. From the day you start attacking Chinchow, there will be a period when
the tactical situation will be very tense. We hope that you will inform us
by radio every two or three days of the enemy's situation (the strength of
the resistance by his forces defending Chinchow, the progress of his
reinforcements from Hulutao and Chinhsi and from Shenyang and the probable
course of action of his troops in Changchun) and of our own situation (the
progress of our attack on the city and the casualties sustained in attacking
the city and holding off enemy reinforcements).

2. It is highly possible that, as you have said, the tactical situation during
this period will develop most favourably, that is, that you will be able
to wipe out not only the enemy's forces defending Chinchow but also a part
of his reinforcements from Hulutao and Chinhsi and some or most of his forces
fleeing from Changchun. If the enemy's reinforcements from Shenyang advance
to the area north of the Taling River just after you have taken Chinchow
and when you are thus able to shift your forces to encircle them, then it
will be possible to wipe out these reinforcements as well. The key to all
this lies in striving to capture Chinchow in about a week.

3. Decide on the disposition of your troops for checking the enemy reinforcements
according to your progress in attacking Chinchow and their progress in advancing
both from the east and from the west. In case the enemy reinforcements from
Shenyang advance rather slowly (as may happen if, during your attack on Chinchow,
the enemy besieged in Changchun breaks out but is caught and crushed by our
12th Column and other forces, in which case the enemy reinforcements from
Shenyang may be so bewildered as to advance rather slowly or halt or turn
back to rescue the Changchun forces) while the enemy reinforcements from
Hulutao and Chinhsi advance rather quickly, you should be ready to throw
in your general reserves to help the 4th and 11th Columns wipe out part of
the latter reinforcements and, first of all, to check their advance. If the
enemy reinforcements from Hulutao and Chinhsi are being tied down and checked
by our 4th and 11th Columns and other forces and therefore advance rather
slowly or halt, if the enemy forces in Changchun do not break out, if the
enemy reinforcements from Shenyang advance rather quickly, and if most of
the Chinchow enemy forces have been wiped out and the capture of the city
is imminent, then you should let the enemy forces from Shenyang advance deep
into the area north of the Taling River, so that you can make a timely shift
of your forces to encircle them and wipe them out at your convenience.

4. You must centre your attention on the operations in Chinchow and strive
to capture this city as quickly as possible. Even if none of the other objectives
is attained and Chinchow alone is captured, you will have won the initiative,
which in itself will be a great victory. It is hoped that you will give due
attention to all the above points. Especially during the first few days of
the battle for Chinchow, the enemy reinforcements from both the east and
the west will not make any major moves, and you should concentrate all your
energies on the operations on the Chinchow front.
NOTES

1. The Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign was a gigantic campaign
fought by the Northeast People's Liberation Army in the western part of Liaoning
Province and in the Shenyang-Changchun area between September 12 and November
2, 1948. On the eve of the campaign, the total strength of the Kuomintang
forces in northeastern China consisted of 4 armies, made up of 14 corps,
or 44 divisions. These forces had shortened their lines and dug themselves
in at three sectors isolated from each other, Changchun, Shenyang and Chinchow.
With the aim of completely wiping out the enemy troops in the Northeast and
quickly liberating the whole of the Northeast, the People's Liberation Army
in this region, supported by the broad masses of the local people, began
the Liaobsi-Shenyang campaign in September 1948 with a main force of 12 columns,
1 artillery column and regional armed forces, altogether totalling 53 divisions
or over 700,000 men. Chinchow, on the Peiping-Liaoning Railway, was the strategic
link between northeastern and northern China. The enemy forces garrisoning
the Chinchow sector consisted of 8 divisions, with more than 100,000 men
under Fan Han-chieh, Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Kuomintang's Northeast
"Bandit Suppression" Headquarters. The capture of Chinchow was the key to
the success of the Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign. Acting on the directives of
Comrade Mao Tse-tung, the Northeast People's Liberation Army used 1 column
and 7 independent divisions to continue the siege operations against Changchun;
6 columns, 1 artillery column and 1 tank battalion to surround and attack
Chinchow and 2 columns, placed in the Tashan-Kaochiao sector southwest of
Chinchow, along with 3 columns in the Heishan-Tahushan-Changwu sector to
intercept any reinforcements the enemy might send from Chinhsi and Hulutao
and from Shenyang to relieve Chinchow. The fighting in the Chinchow area
started on September 12. Just as our army was mopping up the enemy in the
outskirts of Chinchow after taking Ihsien, Chiang Kai-shek hurriedly flew
to the Northeast to take personal charge of the operations and urgently summoned
5 enemy divisions from the Northern China "Bandit Suppression" Headquarters
on the Peiping Liaoning Railway and 2 divisions from Shantung Province to
join the 4 divisions in Chinhsi; all these 11 divisions began a furious attack
on our positions at Tashan on October 10 but could not break through. Meanwhile,
the Kuomintang 9th Army under Liao Yao-hsiang, with 11 divisions and 3 cavalry
brigades, which had sallied out from Shenyang to rescue Chinchow, was intercepted
by our army northeast of Heishan and Tahushan. Our army began the assault
on Chinchow on October 14 and, after thirty-one hours of fierce fighting,
completely wiped out the defending enemy forces, capturing Fan Han-chieh,
Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Northeast "Bandit Suppression" Headquarters,
Lu Chun-chuan, Commander of the 6th Army, and more than 100,000 men under
their command. The liberation of Chinchow impelled part of the enemy forces
at Changchun to revolt against the Kuomintang and the rest to surrender.
The complete collapse of the Kuomintang troops in the Northeast then became
a foregone conclusion. But Chiang Kai-shek, still dreaming of recapturing
Chinchow and of reopening the line of communications between northeastern
and northern China, gave strict orders to the army under Liao Yao-hsiang
to continue its advance towards Chinchow. After taking Chinchow, the People's
Liberation Army immediately swung back to the northeast and closed in on
Liao's army from the north and south of Heishan and Tahushan. On October
26 the People's Liberation Army succeeded in surrounding the enemy in the
Heishan-Tahushan-Hsinmin sector and, after stiff fighting lasting two days
and one night, completely wiped them out, capturing army commander Liao
Yao-hsiang, corps commanders Li Tao, Pai Feng-wu and Cheng Ting-chi, and
more than 100,000 men. Our army vigorously followed up this victory and liberated
Shenyang and Yingkow on November 2, wiping out over 149,000 enemy troops.
The whole of the Northeast was thus liberated. A total of more than 470,000
enemy troops were wiped out in the campaign.

2. See "A Circular on the Situation", Note 7, p. 226 of
this volume.

3. On November 1, 1948, the Revolutionary Military Commission
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China classified all troops
in the big strategic areas into field, regional and guerrilla forces in
accordance with decisions made at the September meeting of the Political
Bureau of the Central Committee. The field forces were organized into field
armies. A field army was composed of armies, an army of corps (originally
called columns), a corps of divisions, and a division of regiments. In accordance
with their locations, the field armies were designated the Northwest Field
Army, Central Plains Field Army, Eastern China Field Army, Northeast field
Army and Northern China Field Army of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.
The number of armies, corps and divisions in each field army differed according
to the concrete conditions in each big strategic area. Later, the Northwest
Field Army was renamed the First Field Army, comprising 2 armies; the Central
Plains Field Army was renamed the Second Field Army, comprising 3 armies;
the Eastern China Field Army was renamed the Third Field Army, comprising
4 armies; and the Northeast Field Army was renamed the Fourth Field Army,
comprising 4 armies. The 3 armies making up the Northern China Field Army
were placed under the direct command of the General Headquarters of the Chinese
People's Liberation Army. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Concept of Operations for the Huai-hai Campaign







THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE HUAI-HAI CAMPAIGN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE HUAI-HAI CAMPAIGN


October 11, 1948

[This telegram, addressed to the Eastern China and Central Plains Field Armies
and the Bureaus of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
in those two areas, was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Revolutionary
Military Commission of the Party's Central Committee. The Huai-Hai campaign
was one of the three greatest campaigns of decisive significance in the Chinese
People's War of Liberation. The campaign was fought jointly by the Eastern
China and Central Plains Field Armies and the regional troops of the eastern
China and Central Plains areas. In this campaign over 555,000 Kuomintang
troops were wiped out. The concept of operations set forth by Comrade Mao
Tse-tung in this telegram led to complete success; in fact, the campaign
proceeded more smoothly than expected, and the victory was therefore quicker
and greater. After this campaign, Nanking, the capital of the reactionary
Kuomintang government, became subject to direct threat by the People's Liberation
Army. The Huai-Hai campaign was concluded on January 10, 1949, and on January
21 Chiang Kai-shek announced his "retirement"; after that, the reactionary
Kuomintang ruling clique in Nanking fell apart. ] 
  

Here are a few points for your consideration concerning the dispositions
for the Huai-Hai campaign. [1]

1. In the first stage of this campaign, the central task is to concentrate
forces to wipe out Huang Po-tao's army, effect a breakthrough in the centre
and capture Hsinanchen, the Grand Canal Railway Station, Tsaopachi, Yihsien,
Tsaochuang, Lincheng, Hanchuang, Shuyang, Pihsien, Tancheng, Taierhchuang
and Linyi. To achieve these objectives, you should use two columns to wipe
out each enemy division, that is to say, use six or seven columns to cut
up and wipe out the enemy's 25th, 63rd and 64th Divisions. Use five or six
columns to hold off and attack enemy reinforcements. Use one or two columns
to annihilate the one brigade under Li Mi at Lincheng and Hanchuang and strive
to capture those two towns in order to menace Hsuchow from the north so that
the two armies under Chiu Ching-chuan and Li Mi will not dare move east in
full strength as reinforcements. Use one column plus regional formation in
southwestern Shantung to make a flank attack on the Hsuchow-Shangchiu section
of the railway in order to tie down a portion of Chiu Ching-chuan's army
(as three enemy divisions under Sun Yuan-liang are about to move east, it
is hoped that Liu Po-cheng, Chen Yi and Teng Hsiao-ping will dispose their
troops at once to attack the Chengchow-Hsuchow line and so tie down Sun
Yuan-liang's army). Use one or two columns to operate in the
Suchien-Suining-Lingpi area to hold down Li Mi's army. These dispositions
mean that before the objective of annihilating the three divisions of Huang
Po-tao's army can be achieved, more than half our total force has to be employed
against the two armies under Chiu Ching-chuan and Li Mi to tie down, check
and destroy part of them. The dispositions should, by and large, be similar
to those of last September for capturing Tsinan and attacking the enemy's
reinforcements;[2]otherwise it will be impossible to achieve
the objective of annihilating the three divisions of Huang Po-tao's army.
You must strive to conclude the first stage two to three weeks after the
start of the campaign.

2. In the second stage, use about five columns to attack and wipe out the
enemy in Haichow, Hsinpu, Lienyunkang and Kuanyun and capture these towns.
It is calculated that by then the enemy's 54th and 32nd Divisions will very
likely have been transported by sea from Tsingtao to the
Haichow-Hsinpu-Lienyunkang area.[3] Altogether three enemy
divisions will be in that area, including the one division already there;
therefore we must use five columns to attack them and employ the remaining
forces (our main strength) to tie down the two armies under Chiu Ching-chuan
and Li Mi, again on the principle underlying the dispositions made in September
for capturing Tsinan and attacking the enemy's reinforcements. You must strive
to conclude this stage also in two to three weeks.

3. In the third stage, it may be assumed that the battle will be fought around
Huaiyin and Huai-an. By that time the enemy will have increased his strength
by about one division (the Reorganized 8th Division in Yentai is being shipped
south); therefore we must be prepared again to use about Eve columns as the
attacking force, while using the rest of our main force to strike at and
hold down the enemy's reinforcements. This stage will also take about two
to three weeks.

These three stages will take about a month and a half to two months.

4. You are to complete the Huai-Hai campaign in two months, November and
December. Rest and consolidate your forces next January. From March to July
you will be fighting in co-ordination with Liu Po-cheng and Teng Hsiao-ping
to drive the enemy to points along the Yangtse River, where he will dig in.
By autumn your main force will probably be fighting to cross the Yangtse.

NOTES


1. The Huai-Hai campaign was a campaign of decisive importance
fought by the People's Liberation Army over a large territory in Kiangsu,
Shantung, Anhwei and Honan Provinces, centering on Hsuchow, and extending
as far as Haichow in the east, Shangchiu in the west, Lincheng (now renamed
Hsuehcheng) in the north and the Huai River in the south. The Kuomintang
forces massed in this theatre of war consisted of 5 armies and the troops
of three Pacification Zones -- the 4 armies and the troops of three Pacification
Zones under Liu Chih and Tu Yu-ming (respectively Commander and Deputy Commander
of the Kuomintang's "Bandit Suppression" Headquarters at Hsuchow) and the
army under Huang Wei, which was later dispatched there from central China
as reinforcements. On the side of the People's Liberation Army, a force more
than 600,000 strong took part in the campaign -- it included 16 columns from
the Eastern China Field Army, 7 columns from the Central Plains Field Army
and regional armed forces from the Eastern China Military Area, the Central
Plains Military Area and the Hopei-Shantung-Honan Military Area (then a part
of the Northern China Military Area). The campaign lasted sixty-five days,
from November 6, 1948 to January 10, 1949; 22 corps, or 56 divisions, of
the Kuomintang's crack forces, comprising 555,000 men, were completely wiped
out (including 4 divisions which revolted and came over), and 2 armies under
Liu Ju-ming and Li Yen-nien (reinforcements from Nanking) were repulsed.
As a result of the campaign, those parts of the eastern China and Central
Plains areas north of the Yangtse River were almost entirely liberated. The
campaign took place in three stages. During the first stage, November 6-22,
the Eastern China Field Army, in co-ordination with the Central Plains Field
Army, surrounded and wiped out the army under Huang Po-tao in the
Hsinanchen-Nienchuang sector east of Hsuchow, killing Huang Po-tao and liberating
large territories on both sides of the Lunghai Railway east of Nienchuang,
on both sides of the Hsuchow-Pengpu section of the Tientsin-Pukow Railway
and to the west and north of Hsuchow. In the Taierhchuang-Tsaochuang sector,
3 divisions of the Kuomintang 3rd Pacification Zone, totalling over 23,000
men, revolted and came over to us. During the second stage, from November
23 to December 15, the Central Plains Field Army, in coordination with the
main force of the Eastern China Field Army, surrounded and wiped out the
army under Huang Wei at and around Shuangtuichi, southwest of Suhsien, capturing
Huang Wei and Wu Shao-chou, the commander and deputy commander of the army;
1 division of this army revolted and came over to us. At the same time, our
forces wiped out the army under Sun Yuan-liang which was fleeing west from
Hsuchow. Only Sun Yuan-liang managed to escape. During the third stage, from
January 6 to 10, 1949, the Eastern China Field Army, in co-ordination with
the Central Plains Field Army, surrounded and annihilated in the
Chinglungchi-Chenkuanchuang sector, northeast of Yungcheng, 2 Kuomintang
armies which were fleeing westward from Hsuchow and were commanded respectively
by Chiu Ching-chuan and Li Mi, under the personal command of Tu Yu-ming.
Tu Yu-ming was captured, Chiu Ching-chuan was killed and Li Mi barely escaped.
This marked the successful end of the great Huai-Hai campaign.

2. "Capturing Tsinan and attacking the enemy's reinforcements"
refers to the tactics employed by the People's Liberation Army during the
Tsinan campaign in the middle of September 1948. Tsinan, a strategic position
of the Kuomintang in Shantung Province, was garrisoned by over 110,000 men
of the Kuomintang 2nd Pacification Zone. In addition, 23 brigades of the
Kuomintang's main forces, with some 170,000 men, which were disposed in the
Hsuchow area, were ready to move north to relieve Tsinan. Our Eastern China
Field Army formed a group of 7 columns to assault the city and another group
of 8 columns to strike at the enemy's reinforcements. The onslaught against
Tsinan started on the evening of September 16, 1948. On September 24, after
eight days and nights of continuous fighting, the enemy garrison was completely
wiped out (1 corps revolted and came over to us), and Wang Yao-wu, Commander
of the Kuomintang 2nd Pacification Zone, was captured. Our forces took Tsinan
so rapidly that the enemy at Hsuchow did not dare to go north to its rescue.

3. In fact, these 2 enemy divisions did not dare to come.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Momentous Change in China's Military Situation







THE MOMENTOUS CHANGE IN CHINA'S MILITARY SITUATION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE MOMENTOUS CHANGE IN CHINA'S MILITARY SITUATION


November 14, 1948

[This commentary was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Hsinhua News
Agency. Here Comrade Mao Tse-tung, basing himself on the new situation, that
is, the change in the relation of forces between the enemy and ourselves
after the Lisohsi-Shenyang campaign, made a new estimate of the time needed
to win victory in the People's War of Liberation and pointed out that the
reactionary rule of the Kuomintang could be overthrown in no more than a
year from November 1948. Subsequent developments in China's military situation
fully confirmed his prediction.] 
  

The military situation in China has reached a new turning point and the balance
of forces between the two sides in the war has undergone a fundamental change.
The People's Liberation Army, long superior in quality, has now become superior
in numbers as well. This is a sign that the victory of the Chinese revolution
and the realization of peace in China are at hand.

At the end of the second year of the war, that is, at the end of June this
year, the Kuomintang army still had a total of some 3,650,000 men. This was
650,000 less than the 4,300,000 men the Kuomintang had in July 1946 when
it started the country-wide civil war. The Kuomintang recruited about 2,440,000
men during the two years of war, which is the reason why the decrease was
only 650,000, although in that period approximately 3,090,000 were wiped
out or captured, or deserted (2,640,000 were wiped out or captured). Recently
a sudden change took place. In the first four months of the third year of
the war, from July 1 to November 2 when Shenyang was liberated, the Kuomintang
army lost 1,000,000 men. Its replacements during these four months have not
yet been ascertained; supposing it was able to recruit 300,000 men, then
the net decrease would be 700,000. Thus the whole of the Kuomintang's armed
forces -- army, navy and air force, regulars and irregulars, combat troops
and men in the rear-service establishments -- are now only some 2,900,000.
On the other hand, the People's Liberation Army, which had 1,200,000 men
in June 1946, grew to 2,800,000 in June 1948 and has now increased to more
than 3,000,000. Thus, the numerical superiority long enjoyed by the Kuomintang
army has rapidly turned into inferiority. This is the result of heroic fighting
by the People's Liberation Army during the past four months in all the war
theatres of the country; it is especially the result of the Sui-Ki and Tsinan
campaigns [1] on the southern front and of the
Chinchow, Changchun, Liaohsi and Shenyang campaigns
[2] on the northern front. Up to the end of June
this year, the Kuomintang still had designations for 285 divisions because
it had frantically incorporated its irregulars into its regular forces. In
these four months, the battalions and larger units wiped out by the People's
Liberation Army totalled 8, divisions, including 63 whole divisions.

Accordingly, the war will be much shorter than we originally estimated. The
original estimate was that the reactionary Kuomintang government could be
completely overthrown in about five years, beginning from July 1946.
As we now see it, only another year or so may be needed to overthrow
it completely. A longer time will be needed, however, to eliminate the
reactionary forces in all parts of the country and complete the liberation
of the people.

The enemy is collapsing rapidly, but the Communists, the People's Liberation
Army and people of all walks of life throughout the country must continue
to unite as one man and redouble their efforts; only thus can we finally
and completely wipe out the reactionary forces and build a united, democratic
people's republic in the whole country. 

NOTES


1. The Sui-Ki campaign, also known as the Eastern Honan
campaign, was fought by the People's Liberation Army in the sector comprising
Kaifeng, Suihsien and Kihsien. The campaign started on June 17, 1948. On
June 22 our army captured Kaifeng. To save his critical military situation,
Chiang Kai-shek went to the front, took personal command and mustered 3 armies
under Chiu Ching-chuan, Ou Shou-nien and Huang Po-tao to start an attack
on Kaifeng from several directions. Six columns of our Eastern China Field
Army, 2 columns of our Central Plains Field Army and our Kwangtung-Kwangsi
Column surrounded the armies under Ou Shou-nien and Huang Po-tao in the
Suihsien-Kihsien sector and, after nine days and nights of fierce fighting
(June 27-July 6), they wiped out 2 divisions, or 6 brigades, of Ou Shou-nien's
army and a part of Huang Po-tao's army, a total of over 90,000 men. Ou Shou-nien,
army commander, and Shen Cheng-nien, Commander of the Reorganized 75th Division,
were captured. For the Tsinan campaign, see "The Concept of Operations for
the Huai-Hai Campaign", Note 2, p. 282 of this volume.

2. The Chinchow, Changchun, Liaoshi and Shenyang campaigns
in northeastern China, taken together, were called the Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign.
See "The Concept of Operations for the Liaohsi-Shenyang Campaign", Note 1,
pp. 265-66 of this volume. 
 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Concept of Operations for the Peiping-Tientsin Campaign







THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE PEIPING-TIENTSIN CAMPAIGN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE PEIPING-TIENTSIN CAMPAIGN
  [1]


December 11, 1948

[This was a telegram drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Revolutionary
Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
and addressed to Lin Piao, Lo Jung-huan and other comrades. The Peiping-Tientsin
campaign was the last of the three greatest campaigns of decisive significance
in the Chinese People's War of Liberation. In this campaign, we wiped out
or reorganized over 520,000 Kuomintang troops, liberated the important cities
of Peiping, Tientsin and Changchiakou and concluded, in the main, the fighting
for the liberation of northern China. The concept of operations for the campaign,
set forth here by Comrade Mao Tse-tung, was fully realized in practice.]

  

1. The enemy forces in Changchiakou, Hsinpao-an and Huailai and
in the entire area of Peiping, Tientsin, Tangku and Tangshan -- except a
few units, such as certain divisions of the 35th 62nd and 84th Corps, which
still have a fairly high combat effectiveness for the defence of fortified
positions-have little offensive spirit; they are like birds startled by the
mere twang of a bow-string. This is especially the case since you advanced
south of the Great Wall. You should on no account overrate the enemy's combat
effectiveness. Some of our comrades have suffered through overrating the
enemy's combat effectiveness, but they have arrived at a correct understanding
after being criticized. The enemy at both Changchiakou and Hsinpao-an is
definitely encircled and will in all probability find it extremely difficult
to break through and escape. About half the 16th Corps has been speedily
wiped out. The enemy's 104th Corps at Huailai has hurriedly fled south and
will probably be wiped out today or tomorrow. After that is done, you will
be ready to dispatch the 4th Column from the southwest[2]
to the northeast to cut the link between Nankow and Peiping. We think this
may not be easy to accomplish; for, either the remnants of the 84th and 16th
Corps will quickly withdraw to Peiping, or the 94th, 16th and 92nd Corps
will concentrate in the Nankow-Changping-Shahochen region for joint defence.
But this move by our 4th Column will directly menace the northwestern and
northern suburbs of Peiping and tie down those enemy forces so that they
dare not move. If they should dare to move further west to reinforce the
35th Corps, we could either directly cut off their retreat or launch a direct
attack on Peiping; therefore they will probably not dare to move further
west. The army in northern China commanded by Yang Teh-chih, Lo Jui-ching
and Keng Piao is employing 9 divisions to encircle 3 divisions of the enemy's
35th Corps; this is absolute superiority. They have proposed to wipe out
these enemy divisions at an early date, but we intend to ask them not to
attack for the time being so as to lure the enemy at Peiping and Tientsin
and make it difficult for him to come to a decision to flee by sea. They
have employed 2 columns to encircle the 35th Corps and 1 column to check
the 104th Corps and have beaten back both these enemy forces.

2. We now agree to your sending the 5th Column immediately to the vicinity
of Nankow to menace the enemy at Peiping, Nankow and Huaijou from the northeast.
This column will remain there so that later (in about ten or fifteen days,
that is, when the army in northern China commanded by Yang Teh-chih, Lo Jui-ching
and Keng Piao has annihilated the 35th Corps) your 4th Column can be released
for service in the east. Therefore, please order the 5th Column to continue
its march west today.

3. The 3rd Column should on no account go to Nankow but, in accordance with
our telegram of the 9th, should move to the region east of Peiping and south
of Tunghsien to threaten Peiping from the east and, together with the 4th,
11th and 5th Columns, form an encirclement around Peiping.

4. But our real aim is not to encircle Peiping first but rather to encircle
Tientsin, Tangku, Lutai and Tangshan first.

5. We estimate that your 10th, 9th, 6th and 8th Columns, your Artillery Column
and your 7th Column will have assembled in the region around Yutien by about
December 15. We propose that, in the few days between December 20 and 25,
you move with lightning speed and employ the 6 columns -- the 3rd (which
is to march east from the eastern suburbs of Peiping), the 6th, 7th, 8th,
9th and 10th -- to encircle the enemy at Tientsin, Tangku, Lutai and Tangshan,
provided that the enemy's situation at those points remains roughly the same
as now. The method is to place 2 columns around Wuching -- at Langfang, Hohsiwu
and Yangtsun -- and to use 5 columns as wedges to be driven between enemy
positions at Tientsin, Tangku, Lutai, Tangshan and Kuyeh and so cut off contacts
between the enemy forces. All these columns should build two-way blocking
positions to ensure that the enemy cannot escape. Then they should rest and
consolidate their troops and, after recovering from fatigue, attack and wipe
out some small enemy groups. In the meantime the 4th Column should move from
northwest to east of Peiping. Before the 4th Column starts to move, the army
in northern China commanded by Yang Teh-chih, Lo Jui-ching and Keng Piao
should wipe out the enemy in Hsinpao-an. In the east, according to circumstances,
every effort should be made to wipe out the enemy in Tangku first and control
that seaport. If these two points, Tangku (the most important) and Hsinpao-an,
are captured, you will have the initiative on the whole chessboard. The above
dispositions constitute, in reality, the wholesale encirclement of the enemy
in Changchiakou, Hsinpao-an, Nankow, Peiping, Huaijou, Shunyi, Tunghsien,
Wanping (Chohsien and Lianghsiang have been captured), Fengtai, Tientsin,
Tangku, Lutai, Tangshan and Kaiping.

6. This method is generally the same as that you used in the fighting along
the line through Ihsien, Chinchow, Chinhsi, Hsingcheng, Suichung, Shanhaikuan
and Luanhsien.[3]

7. In the two weeks beginning from today (December 11-25), the basic principle
is to encircle without attacking (in the case of Changchiakou and Hsinpao-an)
and, in some cases, to cut off without encircling (in the case of Peiping,
Tientsin and Tungchow, to make only a strategic encirclement and cut the
links between the enemy forces, but not to make a tactical encirclement)
in order to wait for the completion of our dispositions and then wipe out
the enemy forces one by one. In particular, you must not wipe out all the
enemy forces at Changchiakou, Hsinpao-an and Nankow because that would compel
the enemy east of Nankow to make a quick decision to bolt. Please make sure
you understand this point.

8. In order not to prompt Chiang Kai-shek quickly to decide to ship his troops
in the Peiping-Tientsin area south by sea, we are going to order Liu Po-cheng,
Teng Hsiao-ping, Chen Yi and Su Yu, after they have wiped out Huang Wei's
army, to spare the remainder of Tu Yu-ming's armies under Chiu Ching-chuan,
Li Mi and Sun Yuanliang (about half of which have already been destroyed)
and for two weeks to make no dispositions for their final annihilation.

9. To prevent the enemy from fleeing towards Tsingtao, we are going to order
our troops in Shantung to mass certain forces to control a section of the
Yellow River near Tsinan and to make preparations along the Tsingtao-Tsinan
Railway.

10. There is little or no possibility that the enemy will flee towards Hsuchow,
Chengchow, Sian or Suiyuan.

11. The main or the only concern is that the enemy might flee by sea. Therefore,
in the coming two weeks the general method should be to encircle without
attacking or to cut off without encircling.

12. This plan is beyond the enemy's range of expectation, and it will be
very difficult for him to discern it before you complete your final dispositions.
At present, the enemy is probably calculating that you will attack Peiping.

13. The enemy always underrates the energy of our army and overrates his
own strength, though at the same time he is like a bird startled by the mere
twang of a bow-string. The enemy at Peiping and Tientsin will never expect
you to be able to complete the above dispositions by December 25.

14. In order to complete these dispositions by December 25, you should inspire
your troops in the next two weeks to ignore fatigue, to have no fear of depletion
of numbers and have no fear of cold and hunger; after these dispositions
have been made, they can rest and consolidate and take their time in attacking.

15. The sequence of attacks will be roughly the following: first, the
Tangku-Lutai sector; second, Hsinpao-an; third, the Tangshan sector; fourth,
the Tientsin and Changchiakou sectors; and, lastly, the Peiping sector.

16. What are your views on this plan? What are its shortcomings? Are there
any difficulties in its execution? Please consider all this and reply by
telegraph. 

NOTES


1. The Peiping-Tientsin campaign, fought by the Northeast
Field Army and two armies of the Northern China People's Liberation Army
under the command of Lin Piao, Lo Jung-huan, Nieh Jung-chen and other comrades,
began early in December 1948, immediately after the victorious conclusion
of the Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign in the Northeast. Acting upon Comrade Mao
Tse-tung's instructions, the Northeast Field Army, immediately after it had
victoriously fulfilled its task of liberating the whole Northeast, swept
south of the Great Wall and joined the armies of the People's Liberation
Army in northern China in co-ordinated actions to encircle and wipe out the
Kuomintang troops in northern China. Greatly alarmed by the victory of the
People's Liberation Army in the Northeast, more than 600,000 Kuomintang troops
under Fu Tso-yi, Commander-in-Chief of the Kuomintang's Northern China "Bandit
Suppression" Headquarters, hurriedly shortened their lines of defence with
the intention of fleeing south by sea or west to Suiyuan Province. Our army,
moving with lightning speed, cut apart the enemy forces and surrounded them
separately at five strong-points -- Peiping, Tientsin, Changchiakou, Hsinpao-an
and Tangku -- thus blocking their escape routes to the south and west. On
December 22, the enemy's main force at Hsinpao-an (the headquarters of his
35th Corps and 2 divisions) was surrounded and wiped out. On the 24th,
Changchiakou was taken and a corps headquarters and 7 divisions of the enemy's
11th Army, over 54,000 men in all, were wiped out. On January 14, 1949, our
troops surrounding Tientsin launched a general offensive against the city
after Chen Chang-chieh, commander of the enemy garrison, refused to surrender.
The city was liberated after twenty-nine hours' fierce fighting, the enemy
garrison of over 130,000 men was wiped out and Chen Chang-chieh was captured.
As a result, more than 200,000 enemy troops garrisoning Peiping were tightly
surrounded by our troops and their fate was sealed. Owing to the efforts
we made to win it over, the enemy's Peiping garrison, commanded by General
Fu Tso-yi, accepted peaceful reorganization. On January 31, our troops entered
Peiping, the city was proclaimed peacefully liberated and the Peiping-Tientsin
campaign came to a victorious close. During this campaign, with the exception
of the enemy garrison of over 50,000 men in Tangku, which fled by sea, over
520,000 Kuomintang troops were put out of action and reorganized by our army.
In September 1949 the Kuomintang troops in Suiyuan Province declared by telegram
that they had revolted and come over to the people and that they would accept
reorganization.

2. This means the area southwest of Nankow.

3. In September 1948, to prevent the enemy forces in Ihsien,
Chinchow, Chinhsi, Hsingcheng, Suichung, Shanhaikuan, Luanhsien and Changli,
all points along the Peiping-Liaoning Railway, from shortening their lines
and concentrating, the Northeast Field Army, then operating along that railway,
adopted the method of first using part of its troops to encircle and cut
apart the enemy units at these points and then wiping them out one by one.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Carry the Revolution Through to the End 








CARRY THE REVOLUTION THROUGH TO THE END



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

CARRY THE REVOLUTION THROUGH TO THE END


December 30, 1948

[This New Year message for 1949 was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Hsinhua News Agency.] 
  

The Chinese people will win final victory in the great War of Liberation.
Even our enemy no longer doubts the outcome.

The war has followed a tortuous course. When the reactionary Kuomintang
government started the counter-revolutionary war, it had approximately three
and a half times as many troops as the People's Liberation Army; the equipment,
manpower and material resources of its army were far superior to those of
the People's Liberation Army; it had modern industries and modern means of
communication, which the People's Liberation Army lacked; it had received
large-scale military and economic aid from U.S. imperialism and had made
long preparations. Therefore, during the first year of the war (July 1946
-- June 1947) the Kuomintang was on the offensive and the People's Liberation
Army on the defensive. In 1946 in the Northeast, the Kuomintang occupied
Shenyang, Szepingkai, Changchun, Kirin, Antung and other cities and most
of Liaoning, Liaopei and Antung Provinces; [1]
south of the Yellow River, it occupied the cities of Huaiyin and Hotse and
most of the Hupeh-Honan-Anhwei, Kiangsu-Anhwei, Honan-Anhwei-Kiangsu and
Southwestern Shantung Liberated Areas; and north of the Great Wall, it occupied
the cities of Chengteh, Chining and Changchiakou and most of Jehol, Suiyuan
and Chahar Provinces. The Kuomintang blustered and swaggered like a conquering
hero. The People's Liberation Army adopted the correct strategy, which had
as its main objective to wipe out the Kuomintang's effective strength rather
than to hold territory, and in each month destroyed an average of some eight
brigades of the Kuomintang regular troops (the equivalent of eight present-day
divisions). As a result, the Kuomintang was finally compelled to abandon
its plan for the over-all offensive and by the first half of 1947 it had
to limit the major targets of its attack to the two wings of the southern
front, i.e., Shantung and northern Shensi. In the second year (July 1947
-- June 1948) a fundamental change took place in the war. Having wiped out
large numbers of Kuomintang regulars, the People's Liberation Army went over
from the defensive to the offensive on the southern and northern fronts,
while the Kuomintang had to turn from the offensive to the defensive. The
People's Liberation Army not only recovered most of the territories lost
in northeastern China, Shantung and northern Shensi but also extended the
battle front into the Kuomintang areas north of the Yangtse and Weishui Rivers.
Moreover, in the course of attacking and capturing Shihchiachuang, Yuncheng,
Szepingkai, Loyang, Yichuan, Paoki, Weihsien, Linfen and Kaifeng, our army
mastered the tactics of storming heavily fortified points.
[2] The People's Liberation Army formed its own
artillery and engineer corps. Don't forget that the People's Liberation Army
had neither aircraft nor tanks, but once it had formed an artillery and an
engineer corps superior to those of the Kuomintang army, the defensive system
of the Kuomintang, with all its aircraft and tanks, appeared negligible by
contrast. The People's Liberation Army was already able to conduct not only
mobile warfare but positional warfare as well. In the first half of the third
year of the war (July-December 1948), another fundamental change has occurred.
The People's Liberation Army, so long outnumbered, has gained numerical
superiority. It has been able not only to capture the Kuomintang's heavily
fortified cities but also to surround and destroy strong formations of Kuomintang
crack troops, a hundred thousand or several hundred thousand at a time. The
rate at which the People's Liberation Army is wiping out Kuomintang troops
has become much faster. Look at the statistics on the number of Kuomintang
regular units of battalion level and above which we have destroyed (including
enemy troops who have revolted and come over to our side). In the first year,
97 brigades, including 46 brigades entirely wiped out; in the second year,
94 brigades, including 50 brigades entirely wiped out; and in the first half
of the third year, according to incomplete figures, 147 divisions, including
111 divisions entirely wiped out.[3] In these six
months, the number of enemy divisions entirely wiped out was 15 more than
the grand total for the previous two years. The enemy front as a whole has
completely crumbled. The enemy troops in the Northeast have been entirely
wiped out, those in northern China will soon be entirely wiped out, and in
eastern China and the Central Plains only a few enemy forces are left. The
annihilation of the Kuomintang's main forces north of the Yangtse River greatly
facilitates the forthcoming crossing of the Yangtse by the People's Liberation
Army and its southward drive to liberate all China. Simultaneously with victory
on the military front, the Chinese people have scored tremendous victories
on the political and economic fronts. For this reason public opinion the
world over, including the entire imperialist press, no longer disputes the
certainty of the country-wide victory of the Chinese People's War of Liberation.

The enemy will not perish of himself. Neither the Chinese reactionaries nor
the aggressive forces of U.S. imperialism in China will step down from the
stage of history of their own accord. Precisely because they realize that
the country-wide victory of the Chinese People's War of Liberation can no
longer be prevented by purely military struggle, they are placing more and
more importance each day on political struggle. On the one hand, the Chinese
reactionaries and the U.S. aggressors are using the existing Kuomintang
government for their "peace" plot; on the other hand, they are scheming to
use certain persons who have connections both with them and with the
revolutionary camp, inciting and instigating these persons to work artfully,
strive to infiltrate the revolutionary camp and form a so-called opposition
faction within it. The purpose is to preserve the reactionary forces and
undermine the revolutionary forces. According to reliable information, the
U.S. government has decided on this scheme and begun to carry it out in China.
The U.S. government has changed its policy of simply backing the Kuomintang's
counter-revolutionary war to a policy embracing two forms of struggle:

  1. Organizing the remnants of the Kuomintang's armed forces and the so-called
  local forces to continue to resist the People's Liberation Army south of
  the Yangtse River and in the remote border provinces, and


  2. Organizing an opposition faction within the revolutionary camp to strive
  with might and main to halt the revolution where it is or, if it must advance,
  to moderate it and prevent it from encroaching too far on the interests of
  the imperialists and their running dogs.


  The British and French imperialists support this U.S. policy. Many people
  do not yet see this situation clearly, but it probably will not be long before
  they do.


The question now facing the Chinese people, all democratic parties and all
people's organizations is whether to carry the revolution through to the
end or to abandon it half-way. If the revolution is to be carried through
to the end, we must use the revolutionary method to wipe out all the forces
of reaction resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely; we must unswervingly
persist in overthrowing imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism;
and we must overthrow the reactionary rule of the Kuomintang on a country-wide
scale and set up a republic that is a people's democratic dictatorship under
the leadership of the proletariat and with the worker-peasant alliance as
its main body. In this way, the Chinese nation will completely throw off
the oppressor; the country will be transformed from a semi-colony into a
genuinely independent state; the Chinese people will be fully emancipated,
overthrowing once and for all both feudal oppression and oppression by
bureaucrat-capital (Chinese monopoly capital) and will thus achieve unity,
democracy and peace, create the prerequisites for transforming China from
an agricultural into an industrial country and make it possible for her to
develop from a society with exploitation of man by man into a socialist society.
If the revolution is abandoned half-way, it will mean going against the will
of the people, bowing to the will of the foreign aggressors and Chinese
reactionaries and giving the Kuomintang a chance to heal its wounds, so that
one day it may pounce suddenly to strangle the revolution and again plunge
the whole country into darkness. That is how clearly and sharply the question
is now posed. Which of these two roads to choose? Every democratic party,
every people's organization in China must consider this question, must choose
its road and clarify its stand. Whether China's democratic parties and people's
organizations can sincerely co-operate without parting company half-way depends
on whether they are agreed on this question and take unanimous action to
overthrow the common enemy of the Chinese people. What is needed here is
unanimity and co-operation, not the setting up of any "opposition faction"
or the pursuit of any "middle road".[4]

In the long period of more than twenty years from the counterrevolutionary
coup d'état of April 12, 1927 [5] to this
day, have the Chinese reactionaries headed by Chiang Kai-shek and his ilk
not given proof enough that they are a gang of blood-stained executioners,
who slaughter people without blinking? Have they not given proof enough that
they are a band of professional traitors and the running dogs of imperialism?
Think it over, everybody! How magnanimous the Chinese people have been towards
this gang of bandits in the hope of achieving internal peace with them, since
the Sian Incident of December 1936, since the Chungking negotiations of October
1945 and since the Political Consultative Conference of January 1946! But
has all this goodwill changed their class nature by one jot or little? In
their history not a single one of these bandits can be separated from U.S.
imperialism. Relying on U.S. imperialism, they have plunged 475 million of
our compatriots into a huge civil war of unprecedented brutality and slaughtered
millions upon millions of men and women, young and old, with bombers, fighter
planes, guns, tanks, rocket-launchers, automatic rifles, gasoline bombs,
gas projectiles and other weapons, all supplied by U.S. imperialism. And
relying on these criminals, U.S. imperialism on its part has seized China's
sovereign rights over her own territory, waters and air space, seized inland
navigation rights and special commercial privileges, seized special privileges
in China's domestic and foreign affairs and even seized the privilege of
killing people, beating them up, driving cars over them and raping women,
all with impunity. Can it be said that the Chinese people, who have been
compelled to fight such a long and bloody war, should still show affection
and tenderness towards these most vicious enemies and should not completely
destroy or expel them? Only by completely destroying the Chinese reactionaries
and expelling the aggressive forces of U.S. imperialism can China gain
independence, democracy and peace. Isn't this truth clear enough by now?

What deserves attention is that all of a sudden the enemies of the Chinese
people are doing their best to assume a harmless and even a pitiable look
(readers, please remember that in the future they will try to look pitiable
again). Didn't Sun Fo, who has now become president of the Kuomintang's Executive
Yuan, state in June last year that a "settlement will finally come, provided
militarily we fight to the end"? But this time, the moment he took office
he talked glibly about an "honourable peace" and said that "the Government
has been striving for peace and only resorted to fighting because peace could
not be realized, but the ultimate objective of fighting is still to restore
peace". Immediately afterwards, on December 21, a United Press dispatch from
Shanghai predicted that Sun Fo's statement would meet with widespread approval
in U.S. official quarters and among the Kuomintang liberals. At present,
U.S. officials have not only become deeply interested in "peace" in China
but also repeatedly assert that ever since the Moscow Conference of Foreign
Ministers of the Soviet Union, the United States and Britain in December
1945, the United States has adhered to a "policy of non-interference in China's
internal affairs". How are we to deal with these worthies from the "Land
of Gentlemen"? Here, it is fitting to quote an ancient Greek fable. One winter's
day, a farmhand found a snake frozen by the cold. Moved by compassion, he
picked it up and put it in his bosom. The snake was revived by the warmth,
its natural instincts returned, and it gave its benefactor a fatal bite.
The dying farmhand said, "I've got what I deserve for taking pity on an evil
creature."[6] Venomous snakes, foreign and Chinese,
hope that the Chinese people will die like the farmhand, that like him the
Chinese Communist Party and all Chinese revolutionary democrats will be
kind-hearted to them. But the Chinese people, the Chinese Communist Party
and the genuine revolutionary democrats of China have heard the labourer's
dying words and will well remember them. Moreover, the serpents infesting
most of China, big or small, black or white, baring their poisonous fangs
or assuming the guise of beautiful girls, are not yet frozen by the cold,
although they already sense the threat of winter.

The Chinese people will never take pity on snake-like scoundrels, and they
honestly believe that no one is their true friend who guilefully says that
pity should be shown these scoundrels and says that anything else would be
out of keeping with China's traditions, fall short of greatness, etc. Why
should one take pity on snake-like scoundrels? What worker, what peasant,
what soldier, says that such scoundrels should be pitied? True, there are
"Kuomintang liberals" or non-Kuomintang "liberals" who advise the Chinese
people to accept the "peace" offered by the United States and the Kuomintang,
that is, to enshrine and worship the remnants of imperialism, feudalism and
bureaucrat-capitalism so that these treasures shall not become extinct on
earth. But they are decidedly not workers, peasants or soldiers, nor are
they the friends of workers, peasants and soldiers.

We hold that the Chinese people's revolutionary camp must be expanded and
must embrace all who are willing to join the revolutionary cause at the present
stage. The Chinese people's revolution needs a main force and also needs
allies, for an army without allies cannot defeat the enemy. The Chinese people,
now at the high tide of revolution, need friends and they should remember
their friends and not forget them. In China there are undoubtedly many friends
faithful to the people's revolutionary cause, who try to protect the people's
interests and are opposed to protecting the enemy's interests, and undoubtedly
none of these friends should be forgotten or cold-shouldered. Also, we hold
that we must consolidate the Chinese people's revolutionary camp and not
allow bad elements to sneak in or wrong views to prevail. Besides keeping
their friends in mind, the Chinese people, now at the high tide of revolution,
should also keep their enemies and the friends of their enemies firmly in
mind. As we said above, since the enemy is cunningly using the method of
"peace" and the method of sneaking into the revolutionary camp to preserve
and strengthen his position, whereas the fundamental interests of the people
demand that all reactionary forces be destroyed thoroughly and that the
aggressive forces of U.S. imperialism be driven out of China, those who advise
the people to take pity on the enemy and preserve the forces of reaction
are not friends of the people, but friends of the enemy.

The raging tide of China's revolution is forcing all social strata to decide
their attitude. A new change is taking place in the balance of class forces
in China. Multitudes of people are breaking away from Kuomintang influence
and control and coming over to the revolutionary camp; and the Chinese
reactionaries have fallen into hopeless straits, isolated and abandoned.
As the People's War of Liberation draws closer and closer to final victory,
all the revolutionary people and all friends of the people will unite more
solidly and, led by the Communist Party of China, resolutely demand the complete
destruction of the reactionary forces and the thoroughgoing development of
the revolutionary forces until a people's democratic republic on a countrywide
scale is founded and a peace based on unity and democracy is achieved. The
U.S. imperialists, the Chinese reactionaries and their friends, on the contrary,
are incapable of uniting solidly and will indulge in endless squabbles, mutual
abuse, recrimination and betrayal. On one point, however, they will co-operate
-- in striving by every means to undermine the revolutionary forces and preserve
the reactionary forces. They will use every means, open and secret, direct
and indirect. But it can definitely be stated that their political intrigues
will meet with the same defeats as their military attacks. Having had plenty
of experience, the Chinese people and their general staff, the Communist
Party of China, are certain to smash the enemy's political intrigues, just
as they have shattered his military attacks, and to carry the great People's
War of Liberation through to the end.

In 1949, the Chinese People's Liberation Army will advance south of the Yangtse
River and will win even greater victories than in 1948.

In 1949, on the economic front we shall achieve even greater successes than
in 1948. Our agricultural and industrial production will rise to a higher
level than before, and rail and highway traffic will be completely restored.
In their operations the main formations of the People's Liberation Army will
discard certain survivals of guerrilla habits and reach a higher level of
regularization.

In 1949, the Political Consultative Conference, with no reactionaries
participating and having as its aim the fulfilment of the tasks of the people's
revolution, will be convened, the People's Republic of China will be proclaimed,
and the Central Government of the Republic will be established. This government
will be a democratic coalition government under the leadership of the Communist
Party of China, with the participation of appropriate persons representing
the democratic parties and people's organizations.

These are the main concrete tasks which the Chinese people, the Communist
Party of China and all the democratic parties and people's organizations
in China should strive to fulfil in 1949. We shall brave all difficulties
and unite as one to fulfil these tasks.

In our struggle we shall overthrow once and for all the feudal oppression
of thousands of years and the imperialist oppression of a hundred years.
The year 1949 will be a year of tremendous importance. We should redouble
our efforts.

NOTES


1. Following the Japanese surrender in 1945, the Kuomintang
government divided the three northeastern provinces of Liaoning, Kirin and
Heilungkiang into nine provinces, Liaoning, Liaopei, Antung, Kirin, Hokiang,
Sungkiang, Heilungkiang, Nunkiang and Hsingan. In 1949 our Northeast
Administrative Commission redivided the area into five provinces, Liaotung,
Liaohsi, Kirin, Heilungkiang and Sungkiang. Together with Jehol, these provinces
were then referred to as the six northeastern provinces. In 1954 the Central
People's Government Council merged the two provinces of Liaotung and Liaohsi
into the one province of Liaoning and the two provinces of Sungkiang and
Heilungkiang into the one province of Heilungkiang, while Kirin remained
unchanged. In 1955 Jehol Province was abolished and the area previously under
its jurisdiction was divided and incorporated into the provinces of Hopei
and Liaoning and the Inner Mongolian Autonomous Region.

2. The dates of the taking of these key points were:
Shihchiachuang, November 12, 1947; Yuncheng, December 28, 1947; Szepingkai,
March 13, 1948; Loyang, first on March 14, 1948, and again on April 5, 1948;
Yichuan, March 3, 1948; Paoki, April 26, 1948; Weihsien, April 27, 1948;
Linfen, May 17, 1948; and Kaifeng, June 22, 1948. All these cities were fortified
with many groups of blockhouses, and some had high, thick city walls; also,
they all had auxiliary defence works, including multiple lines of trenches,
barbed-wire entanglements and abatis. Our army at the time had neither planes
nor tanks, and little or no artillery. In attacking and taking these cities,
our army learned a complete set of tactics for taking strong fortifications.
These tactics were:

  (1) successive demolition -- using explosives to demolish the enemy's different
  defence installations in succession;


  (2) tunnel operations -- secretly digging tunnels to and under the enemy's
  blockhouses or city walls, then blowing them up with explosives and following
  up with fierce attacks;


  (3) approach trench operations -- digging trenches towards the enemy's
  fortifications, then approaching under cover to make sudden attacks;


  (4) explosive package projectors -- shooting packages of explosives from
  missile-projectors or mortars to destroy the enemy's defences;


  (5) "sharp knife" tactics -- concentrating manpower and firepower to effect
  a breakthrough and to cut up the enemy forces.


3. The brigades mentioned here were those designated as
brigades after the reorganization of the Kuomintang army, while the divisions
were pre-reorganization divisions (which were practically the same as the
reorganized brigades).

4. The "middle road" was also called the "third road".
See "The Present Situation and Our Tasks", Note 9, p. 176 of this volume.

5. See "The Situation and Our Policy After the Victory
in the War of Resistance Against Japan", Note 8, p. 23 of this volume.

6. "Evil for Good" in Aesop's Fables. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Turn the Army into a Working Force







TURN THE ARMY INTO A WORKING FORCE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

TURN THE ARMY INTO A WORKING FORCE


February 8, 1949

[This telegram was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Revolutionary
Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
in reply to one from the Second and Third Field Armies. It was sent also
to the other field armies concerned and to the bureaus of the Central Committee
concerned. Considering that the period of severe fighting had ended after
the three great campaigns of Liaohsi-Shenyang, Huai-Hai and Peiping-Tientsin,
Comrade Mao Tse-tung in this telegram pointed out in good time that the People's
Liberation Army was not only a fighting force but at the same time had to
be a working force and that under certain conditions it should function mainly
as a working force. This policy played a very important role in solving the
cadre problem of that period in the new Liberated Areas and in ensuring the
smooth development of the people's revolutionary cause. On the nature of
the People's Liberation Army as both a fighting and a working force, see
also "Report to the Second Plenary Session of the Seventh Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China", Section 2, pp. 362-63 of this volume.]

  

Your telegram of the 4th has been received. It is very good that you are
speeding training and consolidation and preparing to start moving one month
ahead of schedule. [1] Please proceed along these
lines and do not slacken. Actually, however, training and consolidation must
continue in March; the study of policy must be stressed and preparations
must be made to take over and administer the large cities. From now on, the
formula followed in the past twenty years, "first the rural areas, then the
cities", will be reversed and changed to the formula, "first the cities,
then the rural areas". The army is not only a fighting force, it is mainly
a working force. All army cadres should learn how to take over and administer
cities. In urban work they should learn how to be good at dealing with the
imperialists and Kuomintang reactionaries, good at dealing with the bourgeoisie,
good at leading the workers and organizing trade unions, good at mobilizing
and organizing the youth, good at uniting with and training cadres in the
new Liberated Areas, good at managing industry and commerce, good at running
schools, newspapers, news agencies and broadcasting stations, good at handling
foreign affairs, good at handling problems relating to the democratic parties
and people's organizations, good at adjusting the relations between the cities
and the rural areas and solving the problems of food, coal and other daily
necessities and good at handling monetary and financial problems. In short,
all urban problems, with which in the past our army cadres and fighters were
unfamiliar, should from now on be shouldered by them. You are to advance
and occupy four or five provinces, and in addition to the cities you will
have to attend to vast rural areas. Since in the south all the rural areas
will be newly liberated, the work will be fundamentally different from that
in the old Liberated Areas of the north. In the first year, the policy of
reducing rent and interest cannot be applied, and rent and interest will
have to be paid in roughly the same way as before. Our rural work will have
to proceed under these conditions. Therefore, rural work must also be learned
afresh. However, as compared with urban work, rural work is easy to learn.
Urban work is more difficult and is the main subject you are studying. If
our cadres cannot quickly master the administration of cities, we shall encounter
extreme difficulties. Consequently you must settle all other problems in
February and use the whole month of March to learn how to work in the cities
and in the new Liberated Areas. The Kuomintang has only one million several
hundred thousand troops, scattered over a huge territory. Of course, there
are still many battles to fight, but there is little possibility of such
large-scale fighting as in the Huai-Hai campaign, and it may even be said
that there is no such possibility and that the period of severe fighting
is over. The army is still a fighting force, and in this respect there must
be absolutely no relaxing; to relax would be a mistake. Nevertheless, the
time has come for us to set ourselves the task of turning the army into a
working force. If we do not now set ourselves this task and resolve to perform
it, we shall be making an extremely big mistake. We are preparing to send
53,000 cadres south with the army, but this is a very small number. The
occupation of eight or nine provinces and scores of big cities will require
a huge number of working cadres, and to solve this problem the army must
rely chiefly on itself. The army is a school. Our field armies of 2,100,000
are equivalent to several thousand universities and secondary schools. We
have to rely chiefly on the army to supply our working cadres. You must
understand this point clearly. Since severe fighting is basically over,
replenishment of the army's manpower and equipment should be kept within
suitable limits, and too much must not be demanded as regards quantity, quality
and completeness, lest this should cause financial crisis. That is another
point you should seriously consider. The above policies apply fully to the
Fourth Field Army, and Comrades Lin Piao and Lo Jung-huan are likewise asked
to pay attention to them. We have talked at length with Comrade Kang Sheng
and asked him to hurry to your place by the 12th to confer with you. After
conferring, please inform us promptly by telegram of your views and what
you propose to do. The Eastern China Bureau and the Eastern China Military
Area Headquarters should move at once to Hsuchow to work jointly with the
General Front Committee [2] and with the Front
Committee of the Third Field Army in a concentrated effort to plan the march
to the south. Turn all your rear-area work over to the Shantung Sub-Bureau.

NOTES


1. The Second and Third Field Armies had planned to advance
the date of crossing the Yangtse River from April to March 1949. The crossing
was postponed to late April because of the peace negotiations with the
reactionary Kuomintang government.

2. In order to meet the needs of the Huai-Hai campaign,
the Revolutionary Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China decided on November 16, 1948 to form a General Front Committee
consisting of Comrades Liu Po-cheng, Chen Yi, Teng Hsiao-ping, Su Yu and
Tan Chen-lin, with Comrade Teng Hsiao-ping as secretary, to assume unified
leadership of the Central Plains Field Army and the Eastern China Field Army
and to exercise command over military affairs and operations on the Huai-Hai
front. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Order to the Army for the Country-Wide Advance







ORDER TO THE ARMY FOR THE COUNTRY-WIDE ADVANCE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ORDER TO THE ARMY FOR THE COUNTRY-WIDE ADVANCE


April 21, 1949

[This order was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung. After the reactionary Kuomintang
government refused to sign the Agreement on Internal Peace, the People's
Liberation Army acted on this order issued by Chairman Mao Tse-tung and
Commander-in-Chief Chu Teh and embarked upon a general advance, unprecedented
in scale, into the vast areas which had not yet been liberated. On the morning
of April 21, 1949, the Second Field Army led by Liu Po-cheng, Teng Hsiao-ping
and other comrades and the Third Field Army led by Chen Yi, Su Yu, Tan Chen-lin
and other comrades, forced the Yangtse River on a front extending more than
five hundred kilometres from Hukou (northeast of Kiukiang) in the west to
Kiangyin in the east and completely destroyed the defence line along the
Yangtse which the enemy had painstakingly built in three and a half months.
On April 23 these forces liberated Nanking, which had been the centre of
the counter-revolutionary rule of the Kuomintang for twenty-two years, and
proclaimed the downfall of the reactionary Kuomintang regime. Then they thrust
south along separate routes, liberated Hangchow on May 3 and Nanchang on
May 22 and captured Shanghai, China's biggest city, on May 27. In June they
began their march into Fukien Province; they liberated Foochow on August
17 and Amoy on October 17. On May 14 the Fourth Field Army led by Lin Piao,
Lo Jung-huan and other comrades forced the Yangtse on a front of more than
one hundred kilometres in the Tuanfeng-Wuhsueh sector east of Wuhan. On May
16 and 17 it liberated Wuchang, Hanyang and Hankow, cities of strategic
importance in central China. Then it marched south into Hunan. Cheng Chien,
Kuomintang governor of Hunan Province, and Chen Mingjen, Commander of the
1st Army renounced their allegiance to the Kuomintang on August 4, and Hunan
Province was peacefully liberated. The Fourth Field Army fought the
Hengyang-Paoching campaign in September and October, wiped out the main force
of the Kuomintang troops under Pai Chung-hsi and then pushed on to Kwangtung
and Kwangsi Provinces. It liberated Canton on October 14, Kweilin on November
22 and Nanning on December 4. While the Second and Third Field Armies were
forcing the Yangtse River, the armies in northern China led by Nieh Jung-chen,
Hsu Hsiang-chien and other comrades captured Taiyuan on April 24, 1949. The
First Field Army led by Peng Teh-huai, Ho Lung and other comrades, after
liberating Sian on May 20, continued its march into the Kuomintang areas
in the Northwest together with two armies from northern China. They captured
Lanchow on August 26, liberated Sining on September 5 and Yinchuan on September
23 and completely annihilated the Kuomintang troops under Ma Pu-fang and
Ma Hung-kuei. Late in September Tao Chih-yueh, Kuomintang Garrison
Commander-in-Chief of Sinkiang Province, and Burhan, the governor, renounced
their allegiance to the Kuomintang, and Sinkiang was peacefully liberated.
At the beginning of November the Second Field Army led by Liu Po-cheng, Teng
Hsiao-ping and other comrades, together with the 18th Army of the Northern
China Field Army and part of the First Field Army led by Ho Lung, Li Ching-chuan
and other comrades, began their march into southwestern China. They liberated
Kweiyang on November 15 and Chungking on November 30. On December 9 Lu Han,
Kuomintang governor of Yunnan Province, Liu Wen-hui, Kuomintang governor
of Sikang Province, and Teng Hsi-hou and Pan Wen-hua, deputy directors of
the Kuomintang Bureau of Military and Administrative Affairs in the Southwest,
renounced their allegiance to the Kuomintang, and the two provinces of Yunnan
and Sikang were peacefully liberated. In late December the People's Liberation
Army which had entered the Southwest fought the Chengtu campaign, completely
wiped out the Kuomintang troops under Hu Tsung-nan and liberated Chengtu
on December 27. By the end of December 1949 the People's Liberation Army
had wiped out all the Kuomintang troops on China's mainland and liberated
the entire mainland except Tibet.]

  

Comrade commanders and fighters of all field armies, comrades of the People's
Liberation Army in the guerrilla areas of the south!

The Agreement on Internal Peace, drafted after long negotiations between
the delegation of the Communist Party of China and the delegation of the
Nanking Kuomintang government, has been rejected by that
government.[1] The responsible members of the Nanking
Kuomintang government have rejected the agreement because they are still
obeying the orders of U.S. imperialism and Chiang Kai-shek, the chieftain
of the Kuomintang bandit gang, and because they are trying to block the progress
of the cause of the Chinese people's liberation and prevent the internal
problem from being solved by peaceful means. The Agreement on Internal Peace,
comprising eight sections with twenty-four articles formulated by the two
delegations in the negotiations, is lenient on the problem of war criminals,
is lenient towards the Kuomintang officers, soldiers and government personnel
and provides appropriate solutions for other problems, all proceeding from
the interests of the nation and the people. The rejection of this agreement
shows that the Kuomintang reactionaries are determined to fight to the finish
the counter-revolutionary war which they started. The rejection of this agreement
shows that in proposing peace negotiations on January 1 of this year the
Kuomintang reactionaries were only trying to check the advance of the People's
Liberation Army and thus gain a breathing space for a later comeback to crush
the revolutionary forces. The rejection of this agreement shows that the
Li Tsung-jen government at Nanking was utterly hypocritical in professing
to accept the Chinese Communist Party's eight terms for peace as the basis
for negotiations. Inasmuch as the Li Tsung-jen government had already accepted
such fundamental terms as the punishment of war criminals, the reorganization
of all the reactionary Kuomintang troops on democratic principles and the
handing over of all power and authority by the Nanking government and its
subordinate governments at all levels, it had no reason to reject the specific
measures which were drawn up on the basis of these fundamental terms and
which are most lenient. In these circumstances, we order you as follows:


1. Advance bravely and annihilate resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely
all the Kuomintang reactionaries within China's borders who dare to resist.
Liberate the people of the whole country. Safeguard China's territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence.

2. Advance bravely and arrest all the incorrigible war criminals. No matter
where they may flee, they must be brought to justice and punished according
to law. Pay special attention to arresting the bandit chieftain Chiang Kai-shek.

3. Proclaim to all Kuomintang local governments and local military groups
the final amended version of the Agreement on Internal Peace. In accordance
with its general ideas, you may conclude local agreements with those who
are willing to cease hostilities and to settle matters by peaceful means.

4. After the People's Liberation Army has encircled Nanking, we are willing
to give the Li Tsung-jen government at Nanking another opportunity to sign
the Agreement on Internal Peace, if that government has not yet fled and
dispersed and desires to sign it. 

Mao Tse-tung

Chairman of the Chinese People's Revolutionary Military Commission

Chu Teh

Commander-in-Chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army 


NOTES


1. On April 1, 1949, the Kuomintang government delegation
headed by Chang Chih-chung arrived in Peiping to negotiate peace with the
delegation of the Communist Party of China. An Agreement on Internal Peace
was drafted after a half month of negotiations. The agreement (final amended
version) was handed to the Nanking government delegation by the delegation
of the Communist Party of China on April 15 and was rejected by the Nanking
government on April 20. The full text of the agreement (final amended version)
is as follows: 

In the 35th year of the Republic of China, the National Government at Nanking,
with the aid of the Government of the United States of America, defied the
will of the people, wrecked the truce agreement and the resolutions of the
Political Consultative Conference and, on the pretext of opposing the Communist
Party of China, launched a country-wide civil war against the Chinese people
and the Chinese People's Liberation Army. This war has lasted two years and
nine and a half months. It has brought untold disaster to the people throughout
the country. The country has suffered tremendous losses of financial and
material resources, and its sovereignty has been further infringed. The people
of the whole country have always expressed dissatisfaction with the National
Government at Nanking for its violation of Dr. Sun Yat-sen's revolutionary
Three People's Principles and of his correct policies of alliance with Russia,
co-operation with the Communist Party and assistance to the peasants and
workers, and for its violation of his revolutionary testament. In particular,
the whole people have voiced their opposition to the launching of the present
unprecedented large-scale civil war by the National Government at Nanking
and to the erroneous political, military, financial, economic, cultural and
foreign policies and measures which that government has adopted in its pursuit
of the civil war. The National Government at Nanking has completely forfeited
the confidence of the entire people. In the present civil war its troops
have already been defeated by the People's Liberation Army led by the Communist
Party of China and commanded by the Chinese People's Revolutionary Military
Commission. Finding itself in this situation, the National Government at
Nanking proposed to the Communist Party of China on January 1 of the 38th
year of the Republic of China that negotiations should be held for the cessation
of the civil war and the restoration of peace. On January 14 of the same
year, the Communist Party of China issued a statement agreeing to this proposal
of the Kuomintang government at Nanking and putting forward eight terms as
the basis for the peace negotiations between the two sides. These terms are
as follows: punish the war criminals; abolish the bogus constitution; abolish
the bogus "constituted authority"; reorganize all reactionary troops on
democratic principles; confiscate bureaucrat-capital; reform the land system;
abrogate treasonable treaties; convene a New Political Consultative Conference
without the participation of reactionary elements and form a democratic coalition
government to take over all the power and authority of the reactionary Nanking
Kuomintang government and of its subordinate governments at all levels. These
eight basic terms were agreed to by the National Government at Nanking.
Thereupon, the Communist Party of China and the National Government at Nanking
appointed their respective delegations, fully empowered to conduct negotiations
and to sign an agreement. The delegates of both parties met in Peiping, have
affirmed first of all that the National Government at Nanking should bear
the full responsibility for the present civil war and for all its erroneous
policies and have agreed to conclude this agreement. 

SECTION ONE 

Article 1. In order to distinguish between right and wrong and to establish
responsibility, the delegation of the Communist Party of China and the delegation
of the National Government at Nanking (hereinafter referred to as both sides)
affirm that, as a matter of principle, punishment shall be meted out to the
war criminals of the National Government at Nanking who are held responsible
for launching and prosecuting the present civil war, but that they will be
dealt with on the merits of each case in accordance with the following
conditions:

  Item 1. All war criminals, no matter who they are, may be cleared of the
  charge of being war criminals and treated with leniency, provided they show
  by actual deeds that they are really sincere in distinguishing right from
  wrong and are determined to make a clean break with their past, thus facilitating
  the progress of the cause of the Chinese people's liberation and the peaceful
  settlement of the internal problem.

  Item 2. All incorrigible war criminals, no matter who they are, shall be
  severely punished if they obstruct the progress of the cause of the people's
  liberation, hinder the peaceful settlement of the internal problem, or go
  so far as to instigate rebellion. The Chinese People's Revolutionary Military
  Commission will be responsible for suppressing the ringleaders of rebellion.

Article 2. Both sides affirm that the National Government at Nanking was
wrong in pronouncing General Yasuji Okamura, war criminal in the Japanese
aggression against China, not guilty and releasing him on January 26 of the
38th year of the Republic of China and in granting permission on January
31 of the same year for the repatriation to Japan of 260 other Japanese war
criminals. The cases of all these Japanese war criminals shall be reopened
as soon as the Democratic Coalition Government of China, the new central
government representing the people throughout China, is formed.

SECTION TWO 

Article 3. Both sides affirm that the "Constitution of the Republic of China",
adopted by the "National Assembly" convened by the National Government at
Nanking in November of the 35th year of the Republic of China, shall be
abolished.

Article 4. After the abolition of the "Constitution of the Republic of China",
the fundamental law to be observed by the state and the people shall be
determined in accordance with the resolutions of the New Political Consultative
Conference and the Democratic Coalition Government. 

SECTION THREE 

Article 5. Both sides affirm that the entire legally constituted authority
of the National Government at Nanking shall be abolished.

Article 6. After the Democratic Coalition Government is formed, the people's
democratic constituted authority shall be established, and all reactionary
laws and decrees shall be annulled in all places entered and taken over by
the People's Liberation Army. 


SECTION FOUR

Article 7. Both sides affirm that all armed forces under the Nanking National
Government (all the ground, naval and air forces, gendarmerie, communications
police corps, local troops, all military institutions, academies, factories,
rear-service establishments, etc.) shall be reorganized into the People's
Liberation Army on democratic principles. After the signing of the Agreement
on Internal Peace, a national reorganization committee shall be established
at once to take charge of this work of reorganization. The reorganization
committee is to consist of seven to nine members, four to five of whom shall
be appointed by the People's Revolutionary Military Commission, and three
to four by the National Government at Nanking, with one of the members appointed
by the People's Revolutionary Military Commission serving as chairman and
one of the members appointed by the National Government at Nanking serving
as vice-chairman. In places entered and taken over by the People's Liberation
Army, regional sub-committees of the reorganization committee may be established
as required. The proportion of the members of both sides in the sub-committees
and the allocation of the posts of chairmen and vice-chairmen shall be the
same as in the national reorganization committee. A reorganization committee
shall be established for the navy and another for the air force. All matters
relating to the People's Liberation Army's entry into, and taking over of,
the areas at present administered by the National Government at Nanking shall
be decided by orders issued by the Chinese People's Revolutionary Military
Commission. The armed forces of the National Government at Nanking must not
resist the entry of the People's Liberation Army.

Article 8. Both sides agree that the reorganization plan in each region shall
be carried out in two stages: 

  Item 1. The first stage -- assembling and regrouping.

  Point 1. All the armed forces under the Nanking National Government (ground,
  naval and air forces, gendarmerie, communications police corps, local troops,
  etc.) shall be assembled and regrouped. The principle of regrouping shall
  be as follows: the reorganization committee shall, on the basis of the actual
  local conditions, order such armed forces in the areas entered and taken
  over by the People's Liberation Army to move, area by area and stage by stage,
  to the designated places for assembling and regrouping, according to their
  original designations, formations and numerical strength.

  Point 2. Before the People's Liberation Army enters and takes over, all the
  armed forces under the Nanking National Government shall be held responsible
  for maintaining local order and preventing any acts of sabotage where they
  are stationed: in all large and small cities, along important lines of
  communication and rivers, at seaports and in the villages.

  Point 3. In the above-mentioned places, when the People's Liberation Army
  enters and takes over, the armed forces under the Nanking National Government
  shall, in accordance with the orders of the reorganization committee and
  its sub-committees, hand over peacefully and move to the designated places.
  While moving to the designated places and after arriving there, the armed
  forces under the Nanking National Government shall observe strict discipline
  and shall not disturb local order.

  Point 4. When, in compliance with the orders of the reorganization committee
  and its sub-committees, the armed forces under the Nanking National Government
  leave their original stations, the local police or peace preservation corps
  stationed in those places shall not withdraw, but shall be responsible for
  maintaining local peace and order and shall obey the directions and orders
  of the People's Liberation Army.

  Point 5. The reorganization committee, its sub-committees and the local
  governments shall be responsible for providing all the armed forces of the
  Nanking National Government which are being moved or assembled with necessary
  supplies, such as grain, fodder, bedding and clothing.

  Point 6. The reorganization committee and its sub-committees shall, according
  to the actual conditions in various areas, order the authorities of the Nanking
  National Government to hand over, area by area and stage by stage, all its
  military establishments (institutions, schools, factories, storehouses and
  the like, belonging to all its organizations ranging from the Ministry of
  National Defence to the Combined Rear-Service Headquarters), all its military
  installations (naval ports, forts, air bases and the like) and all its military
  supplies to the People's Liberation Army and the latter's Military Control
  Commissions in various places.

  Item 2. The second stage -- reorganization area by area.

  Point 1. After the ground forces under the Nanking National Government (infantry,
  cavalry, special arms, gendarmerie, communications police corps and local
  troops) have moved to the designated places and have been assembled and
  regrouped, area by area and stage by stage, the reorganization committee
  shall, according to the actual conditions in different areas, draw up plans
  for their reorganization area by area and carry out these plans at specified
  times. The principle of reorganization shall be that all the above-mentioned
  ground forces, after being assembled and regrouped, shall be reorganized
  into regular units of the People's Liberation Army in conformity with its
  democratic system and regular structure. The reorganization committee and
  its sub-committees shall be responsible for handling the cases of those soldiers
  who have been found eligible for retirement because of age or disability
  and who wish to retire, as well as the cases of those officers and
  non-commissioned officers who wish to retire or take up other occupations;
  the committees shall provide them with facilities to return home and with
  means of livelihood, so that everyone will be properly placed and no one
  will commit misdeeds because he lacks means of support.

  Point 2. After the naval and air forces under the Nanking National Government
  have moved to the designated places and been assembled and regrouped, area
  by area and stage by stage, they shall be reorganized according to their
  original designations, formations and numerical strength by the navy and
  air force reorganization committees, in conformity with the democratic system
  of the People's Liberation Army.

  Point 3. All the armed forces under the Nanking National Government, after
  being reorganized into the People's Liberation Army, must strictly observe
  the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for Attention of
  the People's Liberation Army and loyally abide by the military and political
  systems of the People's Liberation Army, without any violation,

  Point 4. The officers and men who have retired after reorganization must
  respect the local people's governments and obey the laws and decrees of the
  People's Government. The people's governments and the people of various
  localities shall be considerate of these retired officers and men and shall
  not discriminate against them.

Article 9. After the signing of the Agreement on Internal Peace, all the
armed forces under the Nanking National Government must cease conscripting
or recruiting soldiers or other personnel. They must be responsible for
protecting all their arms and ammunition, equipment, military institutions
and installations and military matériel, and must not destroy, conceal,
transfer or sell any of them.

Article 10. After the signing of the Agreement on Internal Peace, the National
Government at Nanking must, in case any of its armed forces refuses to carry
out the reorganization plan, assist the People's Liberation Army to enforce
the reorganization plan and ensure its thorough execution.

SECTION FIVE

Article 11. Both sides agree that all bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises and
property (including banks, factories, mines, vessels, companies and shops)
acquired or seized during the rule of the National Government at Nanking
through the use of political prerogatives and the influence of wealth and
position shall be confiscated and become the property of the state.

Article 12. In areas not yet entered and taken over by the People's Liberation
Army, the National Government at Nanking shall be held responsible for
supervising the bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises and property mentioned
in Article 11 so that no theft or concealment, damage, transfer or secret
sale shall occur. Assets which have already been moved shall be frozen wherever
found, and their being subsequently removed, transported abroad or damaged
shall not be permitted. Bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises and property located
abroad shall be declared the property of the state.

Article 13. In areas already entered and taken over by the People's Liberation
Army, the bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises and property mentioned in Article
11 shall be confiscated by the local Military Control Commissions or institutions
authorized by the Democratic Coalition Government. Private shares in them,
if any, shall be investigated, after they have been verified as being in
fact private and not secretly transferred bureaucrat-capital, they shall
be recognized, and their owners shall be permitted to remain shareholders
or to withdraw their shares.

Article 14. Bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises dating from the period prior
to the rule of the National Government at Nanking, as well as those dating
from the period of the rule of the National Government at Nanking, which
are neither large nor harmful to the national economy and the people's
livelihood, shall not be confiscated. But among these, the enterprises and
property of certain persons who have committed criminal offences, such as
reactionaries guilty of heinous crimes which have been reported by the people
and confirmed, shall be confiscated.

Article 15. In cities not yet entered and taken over by the People's Liberation
Army, the provincial, municipal and county governments under the National
Government at Nanking shall be responsible for protecting the people's democratic
forces and their activities in the locality and must not suppress or injure
them. 

SECTION SIX 

Article 16. Both sides affirm that the feudal system of landownership in
the rural areas of China shall be reformed step by step. After the entry
of the People's Liberation Army, reduction of rent and interest shall generally
be carried out first and distribution of land later.

Article 17. In areas not yet entered and taken over by the People's Liberation
Army, the local governments under the National Government at Nanking shall
be responsible for protecting the organizations of the peasant masses and
their activities and must not suppress or damage them.

SECTION SEVEN 

Article 18. Both sides agree that all treaties and agreements concluded with
foreign states during the rule of the National Government at Nanking and
other diplomatic documents and archives, open or secret, shall be handed
over by the National Government at Nanking to the Democratic Coalition Government
and examined by the Democratic Coalition Government. All treaties or agreements
which are detrimental to the Chinese people and their state, especially those
which are in the nature of selling out the rights of the state, shall be
either abrogated, or revised, or new treaties and agreements shall be concluded
instead, as the case may be. 

SECTION EIGHT

Article 19. Both sides agree that after the signing of the Agreement on Internal
Peace and before the formation of the Democratic Coalition Government, the
National Government at Nanking and its yuan, ministries, commissions
and other organs shall temporarily continue to function but must consult
the Chinese People's Revolutionary Military Commission in the conduct of
affairs and assist the People's Liberation Army in matters relating to the
taking over and handing over of the various areas. After the formation of
the Democratic Coalition Government, the National Government at Nanking shall
immediately hand over to the Democratic Coalition Government and proclaim
its own termination.

Article 20. Upon the handing over of the National Government at Nanking and
its local governments at various levels and all their subordinate organs,
the People's Liberation Army, the local people's governments and the Democratic
Coalition Government of China shall take care to enlist all the patriotic
and useful persons among the former's personnel, give them democratic education
and assign them to suitable posts so that they will not become destitute
and homeless.

Article 21. Before the People's Liberation Army enters and takes over, the
National Government at Nanking and its subordinate local governments in the
provinces, cities and counties shall be responsible for maintaining peace
and order in their respective areas, looking after and protecting all government
organizations and state-owned enterprises (including banks, factories, mines,
railways, postal and telegraph offices, aircraft, vessels, companies, warehouses
and all communications facilities) and other movable and immovable properties
belonging to the state; and no destruction, loss, removal, concealment, or
sale is permitted. Books, archives, antiques, valuables, bullion, foreign
currencies and all properties and assets which have been removed or concealed
shall be frozen at once wherever they are found, pending their take-over.
As for those properties which have been sent abroad or were originally abroad,
the National Government at Nanking shall be responsible for their recovery
and safekeeping and be prepared to hand them over.

Article 22. All the powers as well as the properties and assets of the state
in areas already entered and taken over by the People's Liberation Army shall
be taken over by the local Military Control Commissions, the local people's
governments or institutions authorized by the Coalition Government.

Article 23. After the Agreement on Internal Peace has been signed by the
delegation of the National Government at Nanking and carried out by that
government, the delegation of the Communist Party of China will take the
responsibility of proposing to the preparatory committee of the New Political
Consultative Conference that the National Government at Nanking should be
permitted to send a number of patriotic persons as representatives to the
Conference; after securing the approval of its preparatory committee, the
representatives of the National Government at Nanking may attend the New
Political Consultative Conference.

Article 24. After the National Government at Nanking has sent its representatives
to the New Political Consultative Conference, the Communist Party of China
will take the responsibility of proposing to the Conference that in the interests
of co-operation there should be included in the Democratic Coalition Government
a number of patriotic persons from the National Government at Nanking.

The delegations of both sides declare: We hereby assume the responsibility
of signing this agreement for the sake of the liberation of the Chinese people
and the independence and freedom of the Chinese nation and for the sake of
an early conclusion of the war and the restoration of peace so that the
commencement of the great task of production and construction on a nation-wide
scale will be facilitated and so that our country and people will steadily
attain prosperity, strength and well-being. It is hoped that the people of
the entire country will unite as one to struggle for the complete fulfilment
of this agreement. This agreement shall enter into force immediately upon
signature. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Proclamation of the Chinese People's Liberation Army







PROCLAMATION OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

PROCLAMATION OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY


April 25, 1949


The Kuomintang reactionaries have rejected the terms for peace and persist
in their stand of waging a criminal war against the nation and the people.
The people all over the country hope that the People's Liberation Army will
speedily wipe out the Kuomintang reactionaries. We have ordered the People's
Liberation Army to advance courageously, wipe out all reactionary Kuomintang
troops who dare to resist, arrest all the incorrigible war criminals, liberate
the people of the whole country, safeguard China's territorial integrity,
sovereignty and independence, and bring about the genuine unification of
the country, which the whole people long for. We earnestly hope that people
in all walks of life will assist the People's Liberation Army wherever it
goes. We hereby proclaim the following eight-point covenant by which we,
together with the whole people, shall abide.

1. Protect the lives and property of all the people. People in all walks
of life, irrespective of class, belief or occupation, are expected to maintain
order and adopt a co-operative attitude towards the People's Liberation Army.
The People's Liberation Army on its part will adopt a co-operative attitude
towards people in all walks of life. Counter-revolutionaries or other saboteurs
who seize the opportunity to create disturbances, loot or sabotage shall
be severely dealt with.

2. Protect the industrial, commercial, agricultural and livestock enterprises
of the national bourgeoisie. All privately owned factories, shops, banks,
warehouses, vessels, wharves, farms, livestock farms and other enterprises
will without exception be protected against any encroachment. It is hoped
that workers and employees in all occupations will maintain production as
usual and that all shops will remain open as usual.

3. Confiscate bureaucrat-capital. All factories, shops, banks and warehouses,
all vessels, wharves and railways, all postal, telegraph, electric light,
telephone and water supply services, and all farms, livestock farms and other
enterprises operated by the reactionary Kuomintang government and the big
bureaucrats shall be taken over by the People's Government. In such enterprises
the private shares held by national capitalists engaged in industry, commerce,
agriculture or livestock raising shall be recognized, after their ownership
is verified. All personnel working in bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises must
remain at their posts pending the take-over by the People's Government and
must assume responsibility for the safekeeping of all assets, machinery,
charts, account books, records, etc., in preparation for the check-up and
take-over. Those who render useful service in this connection will be rewarded;
those who obstruct or sabotage will be punished. Those desiring to go on
working after the take-over by the People's Government will be given employment
commensurate with their abilities so that they will not become destitute
and homeless.

4. Protect all public and private schools, hospitals, cultural and educational
institutions, athletic fields and other public welfare establishments. It
is hoped that all personnel in these institutions will remain at their posts;
the People's Liberation Army will protect them from molestation.

5. Except for the incorrigible war criminals and counter-revolutionaries
who have committed the most heinous crimes, the People's Liberation Army
and the People's Government will not hold captive, arrest or subject to indignity
any officials, whether high or low, in the Kuomintang's central, provincial,
municipal and county governments, deputies to the "National Assembly", members
of the Legislative and Control Yuans, members of the political consultative
councils, police officers and district, township, village and
pao-chia[1] officials, so long as they
do not offer armed resistance or plot sabotage. All these persons are enjoined,
pending the take-over, to stay at their posts, abide by the orders and decrees
of the People's Liberation Army and the People's Government and assume
responsibility for the safekeeping of all the assets and records of their
offices. The People's Government will permit the employment of those among
them who can make themselves useful in some kind of work and have not committed
any grave reactionary act or other flagrant misdeed. Punishment shall be
meted out to those who seize the opportunity to engage in sabotage, theft
or embezzlement, or abscond with public funds, assets or records, or refuse
to give an accounting.

6. In order to ensure peace and security in both cities and rural areas and
to maintain public order, all stragglers and disbanded soldiers are required
to report and surrender to the People's Liberation Army or the People's
Government in their localities. No action will be taken against those who
voluntarily do so and hand over their arms. Those who refuse to report or
who conceal their arms shall be arrested and investigated. Persons who shelter
stragglers and disbanded soldiers and do not report them to the authorities
shall be duly punished.

7. The feudal system of landownership in the rural areas is irrational and
should be abolished. To abolish it, however, preparations must be made and
the necessary steps taken. Generally speaking, the reduction of rent and
interest should come first and land distribution later; only after the People's
Liberation Army has arrived at a place and worked there for a considerable
time will it be possible to speak of solving the land problem in earnest.
The peasant masses should organize themselves and help the People's Liberation
Army to carry out the various initial reforms. They should also work hard
at their farming so as to prevent the present level of agricultural production
from falling and should then raise it step by step to improve their own
livelihood and supply the people of the cities with commodity grain. Urban
land and buildings cannot be dealt with in the same way as the problem of
rural land.

8. Protect the lives and property of foreign nationals. It is hoped
that all foreign nationals will follow their usual pursuits and observe order.
All foreign nationals must abide by the orders and decrees of the People's
Liberation Army and the People's Government and must not engage in espionage,
act against the cause of China's national independence and the people's
liberation, or harbour Chinese war criminals, counter-revolutionaries or
other law-breakers. Otherwise, they shall be dealt with according to law
by the People's Liberation Army and the People's Government.

The People's Liberation Army is highly disciplined; it is fair in buying
and selling and is not allowed to take even a needle or a piece of thread
from the people. It is hoped that the people throughout the country will
live and work in peace and will not give credence to rumours or raise false
alarms. This proclamation is hereby issued in all sincerity and earnestness.


Mao Tse-tung
Chairman of the Chinese People's Revolutionary Military Commission


Chu Teh
Commander-in-Chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army 

NOTES


1. Pao chia was the administrative system
by which the Kuomintang reactionary clique enforced its fascist rule at the
primary level. On August 1, 1932, Chiang Kai-shek promulgated the "Regulations
for the Organization of Pao and Chia and for a Population
Census in the Counties" covering the provinces of Honan, Hupeh and Anhwei.
The "Regulations" provided that "the pao and chia are to
be organized on the basis of households; there is to be a head of each household,
of each chia, which is made up of ten households, and of each pao,
which is made up of ten chia". Neighbours were required to
watch and report each other's activities to the authorities, and all were
punishable when one was found guilty; various counter-revolutionary measures
for exacting compulsory labour were also laid down. On November 7, 1934,
the Kuomintang government officially announced that this system of fascist
rule was to be established in all the provinces and municipalities under
its rule. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


