# Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Volume III

==========

## Table of contents









Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Vol. III




 Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Vol. III



The Period of the War of Resistance Against Japan (II)

Preface and Postscript to Rural Surveys
(March and April 1941)

Preface
Postscript


Reform our Study (May 1941)

Expose the Plot for a Far Eastern Munich (May
25, 1941)

On the International United Front Against Fascism
(June 23, 1941)

Speech at the Assembly of Representatives of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region (November 21, 1941)

Rectify the Party's Style of Work (February
1, 1942)

Oppose Stereotyped Party Writing (February
8, 1942)

Talks at the Yenan Forum on Literature and Art
(May 1942)

Introduction
Conclusion


A Most Important Policy (September 7, 1942)

The Turning Point in World War II (October
12, 1942)

In Celebration of the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the October Revolution (November 6, 1942)

Economic and Financial Problems in the Anti-Japanese War (December 1942)

Some Questions Concerning Methods of Leasership
(June 1, 1943)

Some Pointed Questions for the Kuomintang (July
12, 1943)

Spread the Campaigns to Reduce Rent, Increase Production and "Support the Government and Cherish the People" In the Base Areas
(October 1, 1943)

A Comment on the Sessions of the Kuomintang Central Executive Committee and the People's Political Council (October
5, 1943)

Get Organized! (November 29, 1943)

Our Study and the Current Situation (April
12, 1944)

Serve the People (September 8,1944)

On Chiang Kai-shek's Speech on the Double Tenth Festival (October 11, 1944)

The United Front in Cultural Work (October
30, 1944)

We Must Learn to Do Economic Work (January
10, 1945)

Production is Also Possible in the Guerilla Zone
(January 31, 1945)

China's Two Possible Destinies (April 23,
1945)

On Coalition Government (April 24, 1945)

I.  The Fundamental Demands of the Chinese People

II.  The International and the Domestic Situation

III  Two Lines in the Anti-Japanese War

The Key to China's Problems

History Follows a Tortuous Course

The People's War

Two Battle Fronts

China's Liberated Areas

The Kuomintang Areas

A Contrast

Who Is "Sabotaging the War of Resistance and
Endangering the State"?

"Disobedience to Governmental and Military
Orders"

The Danger of Civil War Negotiations

Two Prospects

IV.  The Policy of the Chinese Communist Party

Our General Programme

Our Specific Programme

    1.  Destroy the Japanese Aggressors Completely,
    Allow No Compromise Halfway

    2.  Abolish the Kuomintang One-Party Dictatorship,
    Establish a Democratic Coalition Government

    3.  Freedom for the People

    4.  Unity of the People

    5.  The People's Army

    6.  The Land Problem

    7.  The Problem of Industry

    8.  The Problem of Culture, Education and Tbe
    Intellectuals

    9.  The Problem of the Minority
    Nationalities

    10.  The Problem of Foreign Policy


The Tasks in the Kuomintang Areas

The Tasks in the Japanese-Occupied Areas

The Tasks in the Liberated Areas


V.  Let the Whole Party Unite and Fight to Accomplish
    Its Tasks!


The Foolish Old Man Who Removed the Mountains
(June 11, 1945)

On Production by the Army for Its Own Support and On the Importance of the Great Movements for Rectification and for Production (April 27, 1945)

The Hurley-Chiang Duet is a Flop (July 10,
1945)

On the Danger of the Hurley Policy (July 12,
1945)

Telegram to Comrade William Z. Foster (July
29, 1945)

The Last Round with the Japanese Invaders (August
9, 1945)


 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org
 

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung






==========

## Preface and Postscript to Rural Surveys







PREFACE AND POSTSCRIPT TO RURAL SURVEYS 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  PREFACE AND POSTSCRIPT TO RURAL SURVEYS


March and April 1941


PREFACE


March 17, 1941

The present rural policy of the Party is not one of Agrarian Revolution as
during the ten years' civil war, but is a rural policy for the National United
Front Against Japan. The whole Party should carry out the Central Committee's
directives of July 7 and December 25, 1940, [1]
and the directives of the forthcoming Seventh National Congress. The following
material is being published to help comrades find a method for studying problems.
Many of our comrades still have a crude and careless style of work, do not
seek to understand things thoroughly and may even be completely ignorant
of conditions at the lower levels, and yet they are responsible for directing
work. This is an extremely dangerous state of affairs. Without a really concrete
knowledge of the actual conditions of the classes in Chinese society there
can be no really good leadership.

The only way to know conditions is to make social investigations, to investigate
the conditions of each social class in real life. For those charged with
directing work, the basic method for knowing conditions is to concentrate
on a few cities and villages according to a plan, use the fundamental viewpoint
of Marxism, i.e., the method of class analysis, and make a number of thorough
investigations. Only thus can we acquire even the most rudimentary knowledge
of China's social problems.

To do this, first, direct your eyes downward, do not hold your head high
and gaze at the sky. Unless a person is interested in turning his eyes downward
and is determined to do so, he will never in his whole life really understand
things in China.

Second, hold fact-finding meetings. Certainly, no all-round knowledge can
be acquired merely by glancing this way and that and listening to hearsay.
Of the data I obtained through fact-finding meetings, those on Hunan Province
and on Chingkangshan have been lost. The materials published here consist
mainly of the "Survey of Hsingkuo", the "Survey of Changkang Township" and
the "Survey of Tsaihsi Township". Holding fact-finding meetings is the simplest,
most practicable and most reliable method, from which I have derived much
benefit; it is a better school than any university. Those attending such
meetings should be really experienced cadres of middle and lower ranks, or
ordinary people. In my investigations of five counties in Hunan Province
and two counties in Chingkangshan, I approached responsible cadres of middle
rank; in the Hsunwu investigation I approached cadres of the middle and lower
ranks, a poor hsiutsai, [2] a bankrupt
ex-president of the chamber of commerce and a petty official in charge of
county revenue who had lost his job. All of these people gave me a great
deal of information I had never even heard of. The man who for the first
time gave me a complete picture of the rottenness of Chinese jails was a
petty jailer I met during my investigation in Hengshan County, Hunan. In
my investigations of Hsingkuo County and Changkang and Tsaihsi townships,
I approached comrades working at the township level and ordinary peasants.
These cadres, the peasants, the hsiutsai, the jailer, the merchant
and the revenue clerk were all my esteemed teachers, and as their pupil I
had to be respectful and diligent and comradely in my attitude; otherwise
they would have paid no attention to me, and, though they knew, would not
have spoken or, if they spoke, would not have told all they knew. A fact-finding
meeting need not be large; from three to five or seven or eight people are
enough. Ample time must be allowed and an outline for the investigation must
be prepared; furthermore, one must personally ask questions, take notes and
have discussions with those at the meeting. Therefore one certainly cannot
make an investigation, or do it well, without zeal, a determination to direct
one's eyes downward and a thirst for knowledge, and without shedding the
ugly mantle of pretentiousness and becoming a willing pupil. It has to be
understood that the masses are the real heroes, while we ourselves are often
childish and ignorant, and without this understanding it is impossible to
acquire even the most rudimentary knowledge.

I should like to repeat that the main purpose of publishing this reference
material is to indicate a method for finding out the conditions prevailing
at the lower levels; it is not to have comrades memorize the specific material
and the conclusions drawn from it. Speaking generally, the infant bourgeoisie
of China has not been able, and never will be able, to provide relatively
comprehensive or even rudimentary material on social conditions, as the
bourgeoisie in Europe, America and Japan has done; we have therefore no
alternative but to collect it ourselves. Speaking specifically, people engaged
in practical work must at all times keep abreast of changing conditions,
and this is something for which no Communist Party in any country can depend
on others. Therefore, everyone engaged in practical work must investigate
conditions at the lower levels. Such investigation is especially necessary
for those who know theory but do not know the actual conditions, for otherwise
they will not be able to link theory with practice. Although my assertion,
"No investigation, no right to speak", has been ridiculed as "narrow empiricism",
to this day I do not regret having made it; what is more, I still insist
that without investigation there cannot possibly be any right to speak. There
are many people who "the moment they alight from the official carriage" make
a hullabaloo, spout opinions, criticize this and condemn that; but, in fact,
ten out of ten of them will meet with failure. For such views or criticisms,
which are not based on thorough investigation, are nothing but ignorant twaddle.
Countless times our Party suffered at the hands of these "imperial envoys",
who rushed here, there and everywhere. Stalin rightly says that "theory becomes
purposeless if it is not connected with revolutionary practice". And he rightly
adds that "practice gropes in the dark if its path is not illumined by
revolutionary theory". [3] Nobody should be labelled
a "narrow empiricist" except the "practical man" who gropes in the dark and
lacks perspective and foresight.

Today I still feel keenly the necessity for thorough research into Chinese
and world affairs; this is related to the scantiness of my own knowledge
of Chinese and world affairs and does not imply that I know everything and
that others are ignorant. It is my wish to go on being a pupil, learning
from the masses, together with all other Party comrades.

POSTSCRIPT


April 19, 1941

The experience of the period of the ten years' civil war is the best and
most pertinent for the present period, the War of Resistance Against Japan.
This refers to the aspect of how to link ourselves with the masses and mobilize
them against the enemy, but not to the aspect of the tactical line. The Party's
present tactical line is different in principle from that of the past. Formerly,
the Party's tactical line was to oppose the landlords and the
counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie; now, it is to unite with all those landlords
and members of the bourgeoisie who are not against resisting Japan. Even
in the latter stage of the ten years' civil war, it was incorrect not to
have adopted differing policies towards the reactionary government and political
party which were launching armed attacks on us on the one hand, and towards
all the social strata of a capitalist character under our own rule on the
other; it was also incorrect not to have adopted differing policies towards
the different groups within the reactionary government and political party.
At that time, a policy of "all struggle" was pursued towards every section
of society other than the peasantry and the lower strata of the urban petty
bourgeoisie, and this policy was undoubtedly wrong. In agrarian policy, it
was also wrong to repudiate the correct policy adopted in the early and middle
periods of the ten years' civil war, [4] whereby
the landlords were given the same allotment of land as the peasants so that
they could engage in farming and would not become displaced or go up into
the mountains as bandits and disrupt public order. The Party's policy is
now of necessity a different one; it is not "all struggle and no alliance",
neither is it "all alliance and no struggle" (like the Chen Tu-hsiuism of
1927). Instead, it is a policy of uniting with all social strata opposed
to Japanese imperialism, of forming a united front with and yet of waging
struggles against them, struggles that differ in form according to the different
degrees in which their vacillating or reactionary side manifests itself in
capitulation to the enemy and opposition to the Communist Party and the people.
The present policy is a dual policy which synthesizes "alliance" and "struggle".
In labour policy, it is the dual policy of suitably improving the workers'
livelihood and of not hampering the proper development of the capitalist
economy. In agrarian policy, it is the dual policy of requiring the landlords
to reduce rent and interest and of stipulating that the peasants should pay
this reduced rent and interest. In the sphere of political rights, it is
the dual policy of allowing all the anti-Japanese landlords and capitalists
the same rights of person and the same political and property rights as the
workers and peasants and yet of guarding against possible counter-revolutionary
activity on their part. State-owned and co-operative economy should be developed,
but the main economic sector in the rural base areas today consists not of
state but of private enterprises, and the sector of non-monopoly capitalism
in our economy should be given the opportunity to develop and be used against
Japanese imperialism and the semi-feudal system. This is the most revolutionary
policy for China today, and to oppose or impede its execution is undoubtedly
a mistake. To preserve the communist purity of Party members scrupulously
and resolutely, and to protect the useful part of the capitalist sector of
the social economy and enable it to develop appropriately, are both indispensable
tasks for us in the period of resisting Japan and building a democratic republic.
In this period it is possible that some Communists may be corrupted by the
bourgeoisie and that capitalist ideas may emerge among members of the Party,
and we must fight against these decadent ideas; however, we should not mistakenly
carry over the struggle against capitalist ideas within the Party to the
field of social economy and oppose the capitalist sector of the economy.
We must draw a clear line of demarcation between the two. The Communist Party
of China is working in a complicated environment, and every Party member
and especially every cadre, must temper himself to become a fighter who
understands Marxist tactics. A one-sided and over-simplified approach to
problems can never lead the revolution to victory.

NOTES


1. The Central Committee's directive of July 7, 1940 is
the "Decision of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on
the Present Situation and the Party's Policy". The Central Committee's directive
of December 25, 1940 is included in the Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung,
Vol. II, as the article "On Policy".

2. A hsiutsai was a holder of the lowest degree
in the imperial examinations.

3. J. V. Stalin, "The Foundations of Leninism", Problems
of Leninism, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1954, p. 31.

4. The first period of the ten years' civil war lasted
from late 1927 to late 1928 and is generally known as the Chingkangshan period;
the middle period ran from early 1929 to the autumn of 1931, that is, from
the establishment of the Central Red Base Area to the victorious conclusion
of the campaign against the third "encirclement and suppression"; and the
third period from late 1931 to late 1934, that is, from the victorious conclusion
of that campaign to the enlarged meeting of the Political Bureau at Tsunyi
in Kweichow Province called by the Central Committee of the Party. The Tsunyi
Meeting of January 1935 put an end to the domination of the "Left" opportunist
line in the Party, which had lasted from 1931 to 1934, and steered the Party
back to the correct line.

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Reform our Study







REFORM OUR STUDY 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  REFORM OUR STUDY


May 1941

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung made this report to a cadres' meeting in Yenan. The
report and the two articles, "Rectify the Party's Style of Work" and "Oppose
Stereotyped Party Writing", are Comrade Mao Tse-tung's basic works on the
rectification movement. In these he summed up, on the ideological plane,
past differences in the Party over the Party line and analysed the
petty-bourgeois ideology and style which, masquerading as Marxism-Leninism,
were prevalent in the Party, and which chiefly manifested themselves in
subjectivist and sectarian tendencies, their form of expression being stereotyped
Party writing. Comrade Mao Tse-tung called for a Party-wide movement of
Marxist-Leninist education to rectify style of work in accordance with the
ideological principles of Marxism-Leninism. His call very quickly led to
a great debate between proletarian and petty-bourgeois ideology inside and
outside the Party. This consolidated the position of proletarian ideology
inside and outside the Party, enabled the broad ranks of cadres to take a
great step forward ideologically and the Party to achieve unprecedented unity.]
  

I propose that we should reform the method and the system of study throughout
the Party. The reasons are as follows:

  I


The twenty years of the Communist Party of China have been twenty years in
which the universal truth of Marxism-Leninism has become more and more integrated
with the concrete practice of the Chinese revolution. If we recall how
superficial meagre our understanding of Marxism-Leninism and of the Chinese
revolution was during our Party's infancy, we can see how much deeper and
richer it is now. For a hundred years, the finest sons and daughters of the
disaster-ridden Chinese nation fought and sacrificed their lives, one stepping
into the breach as another fell, in quest of the truth that would save the
country and the people. This moves us to song and tears. But it was only
after World War I and the October Revolution in Russia that we found
Marxism-Leninism, the best of truths, the best of weapons for liberating
our nation. And the Communist Party of China has been the initiator, propagandist
and organizer in the wielding of this weapon. As soon as it was linked with
the concrete practice of the Chinese revolution, the universal truth of Marxism
Leninism gave an entirely new complexion to the Chinese revolution. Since
the outbreak of the War of Resistance Against Japan, our Party, basing itself
on the universal truth of Marxism-Leninism, has taken a further step in its
study of the concrete practice of this war and in its study of China and
the world today, and has also made a beginning in the study of Chinese history.
These are all very good signs.

  II


However, we still have shortcomings, and very big ones too. Unless we correct
these shortcomings, we shall not, in my opinion, be able to take another
step forward in our work and in our great cause of integrating the universal
truth of Marxism-Leninism with the concrete practice of the Chinese revolution.

First, take the study of current conditions. We have achieved some success
in our study of present domestic and international conditions, but for such
a large political party as ours, the material we have collected is fragmentary
and our research work unsystematic on each and every aspect of these subjects,
whether it be the political, military, economic or cultural aspect. Generally
speaking, in the last twenty years we have not done systematic and thorough
work in collecting and studying material on these aspects, and we are lacking
in a climate of investigation and study of objective reality. To behave like
"a blindfolded man catching sparrows", or "a blind man groping for fish",
to be crude and careless, to indulge in verbiage, to rest content with a
smattering of knowledge--such is the extremely bad style of work that still
exists among many comrades in our Party, a style utterly opposed to the
fundamental spirit of Marxism-Leninism. Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin have
taught us that it is necessary to study conditions conscientiously and to
proceed from objective reality and not from subjective wishes; but many of
our comrades act in direct violation of this truth.

Second, take the study of history. Although a few Party members and sympathizers
have undertaken this work, it has not been done in an organized way. Many
Party members are still in a fog about Chinese history, whether of the last
hundred years or of ancient times. There are many Marxist-Leninist scholars
who cannot open their mouths without citing ancient Greece; but as for their
own ancestors--sorry, they have been forgotten. There is no climate of serious
study either of current conditions or of past history.

Third, take the study of international revolutionary experience, the study
of the universal truth of Marxism-Leninism. Many comrades seem to study
Marxism-Leninism not to meet the needs of revolutionary practice, but purely
for the sake of study. Consequently, though they read, they cannot digest.
They can only cite odd quotations from Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin in
a one-sided manner, but are unable to apply the stand, viewpoint and method
of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin to the concrete study of China's present
conditions and her history or to the concrete analysis and solution of the
problems of the Chinese revolution. Such an attitude towards Marxism-Leninism
does a great deal of harm, particularly among cadres of the middle and higher
ranks.

The three aspects I have just mentioned, neglect of the study of current
conditions, neglect of the study of history and neglect of the application
of Marxism-Leninism, all constitute an extremely bad style of work. Its spread
has harmed many of our comrades.

There are indeed many comrades in our ranks who have been led astray by this
style of work. Unwilling to carry on systematic and thorough investigation
and study of the specific conditions inside and outside the country, the
province, county or district, they issue orders on no other basis than their
scanty knowledge and "It must be so because it seems so to me". Does not
this subjectivist style still exist among a great many comrades?

There are some who are proud, instead of ashamed, of knowing nothing or very
little of our own history. What is particularly significant is that very
few really know the history of the Communist Party of China and the history
of China in the hundred years since the Opium War. Hardly anyone has seriously
taken up the study of the economic, political, military and cultural history
of the last hundred years. Ignorant of their own country, some people can
only relate tales of ancient Greece and other foreign lands, and even this
knowledge is quite pathetic, consisting of odds and ends from old foreign
books.

For several decades, many of the returned students from abroad have suffered
from this malady. Coming home from Europe, America or Japan, they can only
parrot things foreign. They become gramophones and forget their duty to
understand and create new things. This malady has also infected the Communist
Party.

Although we are studying Marxism, the way many of our people study it runs
directly counter to Marxism. That is to say, they violate the fundamental
principle earnestly enjoined on us by Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, the
unity of theory and practice. Having violated this principle, they invent
an opposite principle of their own, the separation of theory from practice.
In the schools and in the education of cadres at work, teachers of philosophy
do not guide students to study the logic of the Chinese revolution; teachers
of economics do not guide them to study the characteristics of the Chinese
economy; teachers of political science do not guide them to study the tactics
of the Chinese revolution; teachers of military science do not guide them
to study the strategy and tactics adapted to China's special features; and
so on and so forth. Consequently, error is disseminated, doing people great
harm. A person does not know how to apply in Fuhsien
[1] what he has learned in Yenan. Professors of
economics cannot explain the relationship between the Border Region currency
and the Kuomintang currency, [2] so naturally the
students cannot explain it either. Thus a perverse mentality has been created
among many students; instead of showing an interest in China's problems and
taking the Party's directives seriously, they give all their hearts to the
supposedly eternal and immutable dogmas learned from their teachers.

Of course, what I have just said refers to the worst type in our Party, and
I am not saying that it is the general case. However, people of this type
do exist; what is more, there are quite a few of them and they cause a great
deal of harm. This matter should not be treated lightly.

  III


In order to explain this idea further, I should like to contrast two opposite
attitudes.

First, there is the subjectivist attitude.

With this attitude, a person does not make a systematic and thorough study
of the environment, but works by sheer subjective enthusiasm and has a blurred
picture of the face of China today. With this attitude, he chops up history,
knows only ancient Greece but not China and is in a fog about the China of
yesterday and the day before yesterday. With this attitude, a person studies
Marxist-Leninist theory in the abstract and without any aim. He goes to Marx,
Engels, Lenin and Stalin not to seek the stand, viewpoint and method with
which to solve the theoretical and tactical problems of the Chinese revolution
but to study theory purely for theory's sake. He does not shoot the arrow
at the target but shoots at random. Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin have taught
us that we should proceed from objective realities and that we should derive
laws from them to serve as our guide to action. For this purpose, we should,
as Marx has said, appropriate the material in detail and subject it to scientific
analysis and synthesis. [3] Many of our people
do not act in this way but do the opposite. A good number of them are doing
research work but have no interest in studying either the China of today
or the China of yesterday and confine their interest to the study of empty
"theories" divorced from reality. Many others are doing practical work, but
they too pay no attention to the study of objective conditions, often rely
on sheer enthusiasm and substitute their personal feelings for policy. Both
kinds of people, relying on the subjective, ignore the existence of objective
realities. When making speeches, they indulge in a long string of headings,
A, B, C, D, 1, 2, 3, 4, and when writing articles, they turn out a lot of
verbiage. They have no intention of seeking truth from facts, but only a
desire to curry favour by claptrap. They are flashy without substance, brittle
without solidity. They are always right, they are the Number One authority
under Heaven, "imperial envoys" who rush everywhere. Such is the style of
work of some comrades in our ranks. To govern one's own conduct by this style
is to harm oneself, to teach it to others is to harm others, and to use it
to direct the revolution is to harm the revolution. To sum up, this subjectivist
method which is contrary to science and Marxism-Leninism is a formidable
enemy of the Communist Party, the working class, the people and the nation;
it is a manifestation of impurity in Party spirit. A formidable enemy stands
before us, and we must overthrow him. Only when subjectivism is overthrown
can the truth of Marxism-Leninism prevail, can Party spirit be strengthened,
can the revolution be victorious. We must assert that the absence of a scientific
attitude, that is, the absence of the Marxist-Leninist approach of uniting
theory and practice, means that Party spirit is either absent or deficient.

There is a couplet which portrays this type of person. It runs:

The reed growing on the wall--top-heavy, thin-stemmed and shallow of
root;

The bamboo shoot in the hills--sharp-tongued, thick-skinned and hollow
inside.

Is this not an apt description of those who do not have a scientific attitude,
who can only recite words and phrases from the works of Marx, Engels, Lenin
and Stalin and who enjoy a reputation unwarranted by any real learning? If
anyone really wishes to cure himself of his malady, I advise him to commit
this couplet to memory or to show still more courage and paste it on the
wall of his room. Marxism-Leninism is a science, and science means honest,
solid knowledge; there is no room for playing tricks. Let us, then, be honest.

Secondly, there is the Marxist-Leninist attitude.

With this attitude, a person applies the theory and method of Marxism-Leninism
to the systematic and thorough investigation and study of the environment.
He does not work by enthusiasm alone but, as Stalin says, combines revolutionary
sweep with practicalness. [4] With this attitude
he will not chop up history. It is not enough for him to know ancient Greece,
he must know China; he must know the revolutionary history not only of foreign
countries but also of China, not only the China of today but also the China
of yesterday and of the day before yesterday. With this attitude, one studies
the theory of Marxism-Leninism with a purpose, that is, to integrate
Marxist-Leninist theory with the actual movement of the Chinese revolution
and to seek from this theory the stand, viewpoint and method with which to
solve the theoretical and tactical problems of the Chinese revolution. Such
an attitude is one of shooting the arrow at the target. The "target" is the
Chinese revolution, the "arrow" is Marxism-Leninism. We Chinese Communists
have been seeking this arrow because we want to hit the target of the Chinese
revolution and of the revolution of the East. To take such an attitude is
to seek truth from facts. "Facts" are all the things that exist objectively,
"truth" means their internal relations, that is, the laws governing them,
and "to seek" means to study. We should proceed from the actual conditions
inside and outside the country, the province, county or district, and derive
from them, as our guide to action, laws which are inherent in them and not
imaginary, that is, we should find the internal relations of the events occurring
around us. And in order to do that we must rely not on subjective imagination,
not on momentary enthusiasm, not on lifeless books, but on facts that exist
objectively; we must appropriate the material in detail and, guided by the
general principles of Marxism-Leninism, draw correct conclusions from it.
Such conclusions are not mere lists of phenomena in A, B, C, D order or writings
full of platitudes, but are scientific conclusions. Such an attitude is one
of seeking truth from facts and not of currying favour by claptrap. It is
the manifestation of Party spirit, the Marxist-Leninist style of uniting
theory and practice. It is the attitude every Communist Party member should
have at the very least. He who adopts this attitude will be neither "top-heavy,
thin-stemmed and shallow of root" nor "sharp-tongued, thick-skinned and hollow
inside".

  IV


In accordance with the above views, I would like to make the following proposals:

1. We should place before the whole Party the task of making a systematic
and thorough study of the situation around us. On the basis of the theory
and method of Marxism-Leninism, we should make a detailed investigation and
study of developments in the economic, financial, political, military, cultural
and party activities of our enemies, our friends and ourselves, and then
draw the proper and necessary conclusions. To this end, we should direct
our comrades' attention to the investigation and study of these practical
matters. We should get our comrades to understand that the twofold basic
task of the leading bodies of the Communist Party is to know conditions and
to master policy; the former means knowing the world and the latter changing
the world. We should get our comrades to understand that without investigation
there is no right to speak, and that bombastic twaddle and a mere list of
phenomena in 1, 2, 3, 4 order are of no use. Take propaganda work, for instance;
if we do not know the situation with regard to the propaganda of our enemies,
our friends and ourselves, we shall be unable to decide on a correct propaganda
policy. In the work of any department, it is necessary to know the situation
first and only then can the work be well handled. The fundamental link in
changing the Party's style of work is to carry out plans for investigation
and study throughout the Party.

2. As for China's history in the last hundred years, we should assemble qualified
persons to study it, in co-operation and with a proper division of labour,
and so overcome the present disorganized state of affairs. First it is necessary
to make analytical studies in the several fields of economic history, political
history, military history and cultural history, and only then will it be
possible to make synthetical studies.

3. As for education for cadres whether at work or in schools for cadres,
a policy should be established of focusing such education on the study of
the practical problems of the Chinese revolution and using the basic principles
of Marxism-Leninism as the guide, and the method of studying Marxism-Leninism
statically and in isolation should be discarded. Moreover, in studying
Marxism-Leninism, we should use the History of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks), Short Course as the principal material.
It is the best synthesis and summing-up of the world communist movement of
the past hundred years, a model of the integration of theory and practice,
and so far the only comprehensive model in the whole world. When we see how
Lenin and Stalin integrated the universal truth of Marxism with the concrete
practice of the Soviet revolution and thereby developed Marxism, we shall
know how we should work in China.

We have made many detours. But error is often the precursor of what is correct.
I am confident that in the context of the Chinese revolution and the world
revolution, which is so intensely alive and so richly varied, this reform
of our study will certainly yield good results.

NOTES


1. Fuhsien County is about seventy kilometres south of
Yenan.

2. The Border Region currency consisted of the currency
notes issued by the Bank of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region Government.
The Kuomintang currency was the paper currency issued by the four big Kuomintang
bureaucrat-capitalist banks from 1935 onwards with British and U.S. imperialist
support. Comrade Mao Tse-tung was referring to the fluctuations in the rates
of exchange between these two currencies.

3. See Karl Marx, "Afterword to the Second German Edition"
of Capital in which he wrote: "The latter [the method of inquiry]
has to appropriate the material in detail, to analyse its different forms
of development, to trace out their inner connexion. Only after this work
is done, can the actual movement be adequately described." (Capital,
Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, Vol. I, p. 19.)

4. See J. V. Stalin, "The Foundations of Leninism",
Problems of Leninism Russ. ed., Moscow, 1952, p. 80.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Expose the Plot for a Far Eastern Munich







EXPOSE THE PLOT FOR A FAR EASTERN MUNICH 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  EXPOSE THE PLOT FOR A FAR EASTERN MUNICH

May 25, 1941

[This inner-Party directive was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China.]
  

1. A compromise between Japan and the United States at the expense
of China and the creation of an Eastern Munich against communism and against
the Soviet Union--such is the new plot which is now being hatched by Japan,
the United States and Chiang Kai-shek. We must expose this plot and fight
it.

2. Now that the Japanese imperialists have ended their latest round of military
attacks, which was designed to force Chiang Kai-shek to capitulate, there
are bound to be moves to induce him to capitulate. This is a repeat performance
of the enemy's old policy of using the stick and the carrot, either alternately
or simultaneously. We must expose this policy and fight it.

3. Simultaneously with her military attacks, Japan has launched a
rumour-mongering campaign alleging that "the Eighth Route Army does not want
to fight in co-ordination with the Kuomintang Central Army", that "the Eighth
Route Army is seizing every opportunity to expand its territory", that "it
is opening up an international route", that "it is setting up another Central
Government", etc. This is a cunning Japanese scheme to foment discord between
the Kuomintang and the Communist Party and thus to make it easier for them
to induce the Kuomintang to capitulate. The Kuomintang Central News Agency
and the Kuomintang press are copying and spreading these rumours, showing
no qualms about echoing Japan's anti-Communist propaganda, and their intentions
are most dubious. This, too, we must expose and fight.

4. Although the New Fourth Army has been declared to be "in rebellion" and
the Eighth Route Army has not received a single bullet or a single copper
from the Kuomintang, they have never for a moment ceased fighting the enemy.
The Eighth Route Army, moreover, has taken the initiative in co-ordinating
its operations with those of the Kuomintang troops in the fighting in the
present campaign in southern Shansi, [1] and for
the last two weeks it has been launching attacks on all fronts in northern
China, where fierce battles are raging at this very moment. The armed forces
and the people led by the Communist Party have already become the mainstay
in the War of Resistance Against Japan. All the calumnies against the Communist
Party are aimed at sabotaging the War of Resistance and paving the way for
capitulation. We should extend the military successes of the Eighth Route
and New Fourth Armies and oppose all the defeatists and capitulationists.
NOTES

1. The Southern Shansi campaign refers to the campaign
of the Chungtiao Mountains. In May 1941, a Japanese invading force 50,000
strong attacked the Chungtiao Mountains area to the north of the Yellow River
in southern Shansi. Altogether seven Kuomintang corps were massed in that
area, and another four in the Kaoping area to the northeast, making a total
of 250,000 men. Since the fight against the Communists was the main job of
the Kuomintang troops north of the Yellow River, they had never prepared
themselves to fight the Japanese, and most of them tried to avoid combat
when the Japanese aggressors attacked. Therefore, in spite of vigorous efforts
by the Eighth Route Army to support the Kuomintang troops against the enemy
in this campaign, the Kuomintang troops were completely routed, losing more
than 50,000 men in three weeks, while the remainder fled to the south of
the Yellow River.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the International United Front Against Fascism







ON THE INTERNATIONAL UNITED FRONT AGAINST FASCISM 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON THE INTERNATIONAL UNITED FRONT AGAINST FASCISM

June 23, 1941

[This inner-party directive was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China.]
  

On June 22 the fascist rulers of Germany attacked the Soviet Union. This
is a perfidious crime of aggression not only against the Soviet Union but
against the freedom and independence of all nations. The Soviet Union's sacred
war of resistance against fascist aggression is being waged not only in its
own defence but in defence of all the nations struggling to liberate themselves
from fascist enslavement.

For Communists throughout the world the task now is to mobilize the people
of all countries and organize an international united front to fight fascism
and defend the Soviet Union, defend China, and defend the freedom and
independence of all nations. In the present period, every effort must be
concentrated on combating fascist enslavement.

For the Chinese Communist Party the tasks throughout the country are as follows:

1. Persevere in the National United Front Against Japan, persevere in
Kuomintang-Communist co-operation, drive the Japanese imperialists out of
China, and by these means assist the Soviet Union.

2. Resolutely combat all the anti-Soviet and anti-Communist activities of
the reactionaries among the big bourgeoisie.

3. In foreign relations, unite against the common foe with everybody in Britain,
the United States and other countries who is opposed to the fascist rulers
of Germany, Italy and Japan.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Speech at the Assembly of Representatives of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region







SPEECH AT THE ASSEMBLY OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SHENSI-KANSU-NINGSIA
  BORDER REGION 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  SPEECH AT THE ASSEMBLY OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SHENSI-KANSU-NINGSIA BORDER
  REGION

November 21, 1941


Members of the Assembly! Comrades! Today's inauguration of the Border Region
Assembly of Representatives is of great significance. The Assembly has but
one objective, the overthrow of Japanese imperialism and the building of
a China of New Democracy or, in other words, a China of the revolutionary
Three People's Principles. In the China of today there can be no other
objective. For our chief enemies now are not domestic, but are the Japanese
fascists and the German and Italian fascists. At this moment the Soviet Red
Army is fighting for the destiny of the Soviet Union and of the whole of
mankind, and we, for our part, are combating Japanese imperialism. Japanese
imperialism is continuing its aggression with the purpose of subjugating
China. The Communist Party of China stands for uniting all the anti-Japanese
forces throughout the country to overthrow Japanese imperialism, and for
co-operating with all anti-Japanese parties, classes and nationalities; everyone,
excepting traitors, must unite in the common struggle. This has been the
consistent stand of the Communist Party. For more than four years the Chinese
people have been heroically waging the War of Resistance, a war that has
been maintained through the co-operation of the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party and of all classes, parties and nationalities. But it is not yet won,
and to win it we have to fight on and ensure that the revolutionary Three
People's Principles are put into effect.

Why must we put the revolutionary Three People's Principles into effect?
Because up to the present time Dr. Sun Yat-sen's revolutionary Three People's
Principles have not been translated into reality in all parts of China. Why
don't we demand that socialism be put into effect now? Of course socialism
is a superior system and has long been in operation in the Soviet Union,
but in China today the conditions for it are still lacking. It is the
revolutionary Three People's Principles that have been put into effect in
our Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region. We have not gone beyond them in solving
any of our practical problems. As far as these principles are concerned,
today the Principle of Nationalism means overthrowing Japanese imperialism,
and the Principles of Democracy and People's Livelihood mean working in the
interests not of just one section but of all the people who are against Japan.
Throughout the country the people should enjoy freedom of the person, the
right to take part in political activity and the right to protection of property.
Throughout the country the people should have the opportunity of voicing
their opinions, and they should have clothes to wear, food to eat, work to
do and schools to attend; in short, some provision should be made for everyone.
Chinese society is small at both ends and big in the middle, that is, the
proletariat at one end and the landlord class and big bourgeoisie at the
other each constitute only a small minority, while the great majority of
the people consists of the peasants, the urban petty bourgeoisie and the
other intermediate classes. No political party that wants to run China's
affairs properly can do so unless its policy gives consideration to the interests
of these classes, unless some provision is made for the members of these
classes, and unless they have the right to voice their opinions. The policies
put forward by the Chinese Communist Party seek to unite all the people who
oppose Japan and take into account the interests of every class that does
so, and especially the interests of the peasants, the urban petty bourgeoisie
and the other intermediate classes. The policies of the Communist Party,
which give all sections of the people the opportunity to voice their opinions
and make sure they have work to do and food to eat, are policies embodying
the genuinely revolutionary Three People's Principles. In agrarian relations,
on the one hand we carry out reduction of rent and interest so that the peasants
will have food, and on the other we provide for the payment of the reduced
rent and interest so that the landlords, too, can live. In the relations
between labour and capital, on the one hand we help the workers so that they
have both work and food, and on the other we pursue a policy of developing
industry so that the capitalists may obtain some profit. In all this our
purpose is to unite the people of the whole country in the common endeavour
of resistance to Japan. This is what we call the policy of New Democracy.
It is the kind of policy that really suits the conditions in present-day
China, and we hope that its application will not be limited to the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, or to the anti-Japanese base areas in
the rear of the enemy, but will spread throughout the country.

We have pursued this policy with success and have won the approval of the
people all over China. But there have also been shortcomings. Some Communists
still do not know how to co-operate with non-Party people in a democratic
way and have an exclusive, "closed-door" or sectarian style of work; they
still do not understand the basic principle that Communists are in duty bound
to co-operate with people outside the Party who are against Japan, and have
no right to shut them out. This principle means that we should listen attentively
to the views of the masses, keep in close touch with them and not become
alienated from them. There is an article in the Administrative Programme
of the Shensi-Kansu-Mngsia Border Region which stipulates that Communists
should co-operate democratically with non-Party people and must not act
arbitrarily or keep everything in their own hands. It is directed precisely
at the comrades who still fail to understand the Party's policy. Communists
must listen attentively to the views of people outside the Party and let
them have their say. If what they say is right, we ought to welcome it, and
we should learn from their strong points; if it is wrong, we should let them
finish what they are saying and then patiently explain things to them. A
Communist must never be opinionated or domineering, or think that he is good
in everything while others are good in nothing; he must never shut himself
up in his little room, or brag and boast and lord it over others. Apart from
the die-hard reactionaries who are in league with the Japanese aggressors
and with the traitors and are sabotaging resistance and unity, and who of
course have no right to speak, everyone is entitled to freedom of speech,
and it does not matter even if what he says is wrong. Affairs of state are
the public affairs of the whole nation and not the private affairs of a single
party or group. Hence Communists have the duty to co-operate democratically
with non-Party people and have no right to exclude them and monopolize
everything. The Communist Party is a political party which works in the interests
of the nation and people and which has absolutely no private ends to pursue.
It should be supervised by the people and must never go against their will.
Its members should be among the people and with them and must not set themselves
above them. Members of the Assembly and Comrades, this Communist Party principle
of democratic co-operation with non-Party people is fixed and unalterable.
So long as parties exist, people who join them will always be a minority
while those outside them will always be the majority; hence our Party members
must always co-operate with non-Party people, and they should make a good
start right here in the Assembly. With this policy of ours, I believe that
Communist members of the Assembly will get very good training here and overcome
their "closed-doorism" and sectarianism. We are not a small opinionated sect
and we must learn how to open our doors and co-operate democratically with
non-Party people, and how to consult with others. Perhaps even now there
are Communists who may say, "If it is necessary to co-operate with others,
then leave me out." But I am sure there are very few. I can assure you that
the overwhelming majority of out members will certainly be able to carry
out the line of the Central Committee of our Party. At the same time I wish
to ask all non-Party comrades to realize what we stand for, to understand
that the Communist Party is not a small sect or clique pursuing private ends.
No! The Communist Party sincerely and honestly wishes to set the affairs
of state to rights. But we still have many failings. We are not afraid to
admit them and are determined to get rid of them. We shall do so by strengthening
education within the Party and by co-operating democratically with non-Party
people. It is only by subjecting our failings to such a crossfire, both from
within and from without, that we can remedy them and really set the affairs
of state to rights.

Members of the Assembly! You have taken the trouble to come here for this
meeting, and I am happy to greet this distinguished gathering and wish it
success.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Rectify the Party's Style of Work







RECTIFY THE PARTY'S STYLE OF WORK 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  RECTIFY THE PARTY'S STYLE OF WORK

February 1, 1942

[This speech was delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung at the opening of the
Party School of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.] 
  

The Party School opens today and I wish it every success.

I would like to say something about the problem of our Party's style of work.

Why must there be a revolutionary party? There must be a revolutionary party
because the world contains enemies who oppress the people and the people
want to throw off enemy oppression. In the era of capitalism and imperialism,
just such a revolutionary party as the Communist Party is needed. Without
such a party it is simply impossible for the people to throw off enemy
oppression. We are Communists, we want to lead the people in overthrowing
the enemy, and so we must keep our ranks in good order, we must march in
step, our troops must be picked troops and our weapons good weapons. Without
these conditions the enemy cannot be overthrown.

What is the problem now facing our Party? The general line of the Party is
correct and presents no problem, and the Party's work has been fruitful.
The Party has several hundred thousand members who are leading the people
in extremely hard and bitter struggles against the enemy. This is plain to
everybody and beyond all doubt.

Then is there or is there not any problem still facing our Party? I say there
is and, in a certain sense, the problem is quite serious.

What is the problem? It is the fact that there is something in the minds
of a number of our comrades which strikes one as not quite right, not quite
proper.

In other words, there is still something wrong with our style of study, with
our style in the Party's internal and external relations and with our style
of writing. By something wrong with the style of study we mean the malady
of subjectivism. By something wrong with our style in Party relations we
mean the malady of sectarianism. By something wrong with the style of writing
we mean the malady of stereotyped Party writing.
[1] All these are wrong, they are ill winds, but
they are not like the wintry north winds that sweep across the whole sky.
Subjectivism, sectarianism and stereotyped Party writing are no longer the
dominant styles, but merely gusts of contrary wind, ill winds from the air-raid
tunnels. (Laugher.) It is bad, however, that such winds should still
be blowing in the Party. We must seal off the passages which produce them.
Our whole Party should undertake the job of sealing off these passages, and
so should the Party School. These three ill winds, subjectivism, sectarianism
and stereotyped Party writing, have their historical origins. Although no
longer dominant in the whole Party, they still constantly create trouble
and assail us. Therefore, it is necessary to resist them and to study, analyse
and elucidate them.

Fight subjectivism in order to rectify the style of study, fight sectarianism
in order to rectify the style in Party relations, and fight Party stereotypes
in order to rectify the style of writing--such is the task before us.

To accomplish the task of overthrowing the enemy, we must accomplish the
task of rectifying these styles within the Party. The style of study and
the style of writing are also the Party's style of work. Once our Party's
style of work is put completely right, the people all over the country will
learn from our example. Those outside the Party who have the same kind of
bad style will, if they are good and honest people, learn from our example
and correct their mistakes, and thus the whole nation will be influenced.
So long as our Communist ranks are in good order and march in step, so long
as our troops are picked troops and our weapons are good weapons, any enemy,
however powerful, can be overthrown.

Let me speak now about subjectivism.

Subjectivism is an improper style of study; it is opposed to Marxism-Leninism
and is incompatible with the Communist Party. What we want is the
Marxist-Leninist style of study. What we call style of study means not just
style of study in the schools but in the whole Party. It is a question of
the method of thinking of comrades in our leading bodies, of all cadres and
Party members, a question of our attitude towards Marxism-Leninism, of the
attitude of all Party comrades in their work. As such, it is a question of
extraordinary, indeed of primary, importance.

Certain muddled ideas find currency among many people. There are, for instance,
muddled ideas about what is a theorist, what is an intellectual and what
is meant by linking theory and practice.

Let us first ask, is the theoretical level of our Party high or low? Recently
more Marxist-Leninist works have been translated and more people have been
reading them. That is a very good thing. But can we therefore say that the
theoretical level of our Party has been greatly raised? True, the level is
now somewhat higher than before. But our theoretical front is very much out
of harmony with the rich content of the Chinese revolutionary movement, and
a comparison of the two shows that the theoretical side is lagging far behind.
Generally speaking, our theory cannot as yet keep pace with our revolutionary
practice, let alone lead the way as it should. We have not yet raised our
rich and varied practice to the proper theoretical plane. We have not yet
examined all the problems of revolutionary practice--or even the important
ones--and raised them to a theoretical plane. Just think, how many of us
have created theories worthy of the name on China's economics, politics,
military affairs or culture, theories which can be regarded as scientific
and comprehensive, and not crude and sketchy? Especially in the field of
economic theory: Chinese capitalism has had a century of development since
the Opium War, and yet not a single theoretical work has been produced which
accords with the realities of China's economic development and is genuinely
scientific. Can we say that in the study of China's economic problems, for
instance, the theoretical level is already high? Can we say that our Party
already has economic theorists worthy of the name? Certainly not. We have
read a great many Marxist-Leninist books, but can we claim, then, that we
have theorists? We cannot. For Marxism-Leninism is the theory created by
Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin on the basis of practice, their general conclusion
drawn from historical and revolutionary reality. If we merely read their
works but do not proceed to study the realities of China's history and revolution
in the light of their theory or do not make any effort to think through China's
revolutionary practice carefully in terms of theory, we should not be so
presumptuous as to call ourselves Marxist theorists. Our achievements on
the theoretical front will be very poor indeed if, as members of the Communist
Party of China, we close our eyes to China's problems and can only memorize
isolated conclusions or principles from Marxist writings. If all a person
can do is to commit Marxist economics or philosophy to memory, reciting glibly
from Chapter I to Chapter X, but is utterly unable to apply them, can he
be considered a Marxist theorist? No! He cannot. What kind of theorists do
we want? We want theorists who can, in accordance with the Marxist-Leninist
stand, viewpoint and method, correctly interpret the practical problems arising
in the course of history and revolution and give scientific explanations
and theoretical elucidations of China's economic, political, military, cultural
and other problems. Such are the theorists we want. To be a theorist of this
kind, a person must have a true grasp of the essence of Marxism-Leninism,
of the Marxist-Leninist stand, viewpoint and method and of the theories of
Lenin and Stalin on the colonial revolution and the Chinese revolution, and
he must be able to apply them in a penetrating and scientific analysis of
China's practical problems and discover the laws of development of these
problems. Such are the theorists we really need.

The Central Committee of our Party has now made a decision calling upon our
comrades to learn how to apply the Marxist-Leninist stand, viewpoint and
method in the serious study of China's history, and of China's economics,
politics, military affairs and culture, and to analyse every problem concretely
on the basis of detailed material and then draw theoretical conclusions.
This is the responsibility we must shoulder.

Our comrades in the Party School should not regard Marxist theory as lifeless
dogma. It is necessary to master Marxist theory and apply it, master it for
the sole purpose of applying it. If you can apply the Marxist-Leninist viewpoint
in elucidating one or two practical problems, you should be commended and
credited with some achievement. The more problems you elucidate and the more
comprehensively and profoundly you do so, the greater will be your achievement.
Our Party School should also lay down the rule to grade students good or
poor according to how they look at China's problems after they have studied
Marxism-Leninism, according to whether or not they see the problems clearly
and whether or not they see them at all.

Next let us talk about the question of the "intellectuals". Since China is
a semi-colonial, semi-feudal country and her culture is not well developed,
intellectuals are particularly treasured. On this question of the intellectuals,
the Central Committee of the Party made the decision
[2] over two years ago that we should win over
the great numbers of intellectuals and, insofar as they are revolutionary
and willing to take part in the resistance to Japan, welcome them one and
all. It is entirely right for us to esteem intellectuals, for without
revolutionary intellectuals the revolution cannot triumph. But we all know
there are many intellectuals who fancy themselves very learned and assume
airs of erudition without realizing that such airs are bad and harmful and
hinder their own progress. They ought to be aware of the truth that actually
many so-called intellectuals are, relatively speaking, most ignorant and
the workers and peasants sometimes know more than they do. Here some will
say, "Ha! You are turning things upside down and talking nonsense." (Laughter.)
But, comrades, don't get excited; there is some sense in what I am saying.

What is knowledge? Ever since class society came into being the world has
had only two kinds of knowledge, knowledge of the struggle for production
and knowledge of the class struggle. Natural science and social science are
the crystallization of these two kinds of knowledge, and philosophy is the
generalization and summation of the knowledge of nature and the knowledge
of society. Is there any other kind of knowledge? No. Now let us take a look
at certain students, those brought up in schools that are completely cut
off from the practical activities of society. What about them? A person goes
from a primary school of this kind all the way through to a university of
the same kind, graduates and is reckoned to have a stock of learning. But
all he has is book-learning; he has not yet taken part in any practical
activities or applied what he has learned to any field of life. Can such
a person be regarded as a completely developed intellectual? Hardly so, in
my opinion, because his knowledge is still incomplete. What then is relatively
complete knowledge? All relatively complete knowledge is formed in two stages:
the first stage is perceptual knowledge, the second is rational knowledge,
the latter being the development of the former to a higher stage. What sort
of knowledge is the students' book-learning? Even supposing all their knowledge
is truth, it is still not knowledge acquired through their own personal
experience, but consists of theories set down by their predecessors in
summarizing experience of the struggle for production and of the class struggle.
It is entirely necessary that students should acquire this kind of knowledge,
but it must be understood that as far as they are concerned such knowledge
is in a sense still one-sided, something which has been verified by others
but not yet by themselves. What is most important is to be good at applying
this knowledge in life and in practice. Therefore, I advise those who have
only book-learning but as yet no contact with reality, and also those with
little practical experience, to realize their own shortcomings and become
a little more modest.

How can those who have only book-learning be turned into intellectuals in
the true sense? The only way is to get them to take part in practical work
and become practical workers, to get those engaged in theoretical work to
study important practical problems. In this way our aim can be attained.

What I have said will probably make some people angry. They will say, "According
to your explanation, even Marx would not be regarded as an intellectual."
I say they are wrong. Marx took part in the practice of the revolutionary
movement and also created revolutionary theory. Beginning with the commodity,
the simplest element of capitalism, he made a thorough study of the economic
structure of capitalist society. Millions of people saw and handled commodities
every day but were so used to them that they took no notice. Marx alone studied
commodities scientifically. He carried out a tremendous work of research
into their actual development and derived a thoroughly scientific theory
from what existed universally. He studied nature, history and proletarian
revolution and created dialectical materialism, historical materialism and
the theory of proletarian revolution. Thus Marx became a most completely
developed intellectual, representing the acme of human wisdom; he was
fundamentally different from those who have only book-learning. Marx undertook
detailed investigations and studies in the course of practical struggles,
formed generalizations and then verified his conclusions by testing them
in practical struggles--this is what we call theoretical work. Our Party
needs a large number of comrades who will learn how to do such work. In our
Party there are many comrades who can learn to do this kind of theoretical
research; most of them are intelligent and promising and we should value
them. But they must follow correct principles and not repeat the mistake
of the past. They must discard dogmatism and not confine themselves to ready-made
phrases in books.

There is only one kind of true theory in this world, theory that is drawn
from objective reality and then verified by objective reality; nothing else
is worthy of the name of theory in our sense. Stalin said that theory becomes
aimless when it is not connected with practice.
[3] Aimless theory is useless and false and should
be discarded. We should point the finger of scorn at those who are fond of
aimless theorizing. Marxism-Leninism is the most correct, scientific and
revolutionary truth, born out of and verified by objective reality, but many
who study Marxism-Leninism take it as lifeless dogma, thus impeding the
development of theory and harming themselves as well as other comrades.

On the other hand, our comrades who are engaged in practical work will also
come to grief if they misuse their experience. True, these people are often
rich in experience, which is very valuable, but it is very dangerous if they
rest content with their own experience. They must realize that their knowledge
is mostly perceptual and partial and that they lack rational and comprehensive
knowledge; in other words, they lack theory and their knowledge, too, is
relatively incomplete. Without comparatively complete knowledge it is impossible
to do revolutionary work well.

Thus, there are two kinds of incomplete knowledge, one is ready-made knowledge
found in books and the other is knowledge that is mostly perceptual and partial;
both are one-sided. Only an integration of the two can yield knowledge that
is sound and relatively complete.

In order to study theory, however, our cadres of working-class and peasant
origin must first acquire an elementary education. Without it they cannot
learn Marxist-Leninist theory. Having acquired it, they can study
Marxism-Leninism at any time. In my childhood I never attended a Marxist-Leninist
school and was taught only such things as, "The Master said: 'How pleasant
it is to learn and constantly review what one has
learned.'"[4] Though this teaching material was
antiquated, it did me some good because from it I learned to read. Nowadays
we no longer study the Confucian classics but such new subjects as modern
Chinese, history, geography and elementary natural science, which, once learned,
are useful everywhere. The Central Committee of our Party now emphatically
requires that our cadres of working-class and peasant origin should obtain
an elementary education because they can then take up any branch of
study--politics, military science or economics. Otherwise, for all their
rich experience they will never be able to study theory.

It follows that to combat subjectivism we must enable people of each of these
two types to develop in whichever direction they are deficient and to merge
with the other type. Those with booklearning must develop in the direction
of practice; it is only in this way that they will stop being content with
books and avoid committing dogmatist errors. Those experienced in work must
take up the study of theory and must read seriously; only then will they
be able to systematize and synthesize their experience and raise it to the
level of theory, only then will they not mistake their partial experience
for universal truth and not commit empiricist errors. Dogmatism and empiricism
alike are subjectivism, each originating from an opposite pole.

Hence there are two kinds of Subjectivism in our Party, dogmatism and empiricism.
Each sees only a part and not the whole. If people are not on guard, do not
realize that such one-sidedness is a shortcoming and do not strive to overcome
it, they are liable to go astray.

However, of the two kinds of subjectivism, dogmatism is still the greater
danger in our Party. For dogmatists can easily assume a Marxist guise to
bluff, capture and make servitors of cadres of working-class and peasant
origin who cannot easily see through them; they can also bluff and ensnare
the naive youth. If we overcome dogmatism, cadres with book-learning will
readily join with those who have experience and will take to the study of
practical things, and then many good cadres who integrate theory with experience,
as well as some real theorists, will emerge. If we overcome dogmatism, the
comrades with practical experience will have good teachers to help them raise
their experience to the level of theory and so avoid empiricist errors.

Besides muddled ideas about the "theorist" and the "intellectual", there
is a muddled idea among many comrades about "linking theory and practice",
a phrase they have on their lips every day. They talk constantly about "linking",
but actually they mean "separating", because they make no effort at linking.
How is Marxist-Leninist theory to be linked with the practice of the Chinese
revolution? To use a common expression, it is by "shooting the arrow at the
target". As the arrow is to the target, so is Marxism-Leninism to the Chinese
revolution. Some comrades, however, are "shooting without a target", shooting
at random, and such people are liable to harm the revolution. Others merely
stroke the arrow fondly, exclaiming, "What a fine arrow! What a fine arrow!",
but never want to shoot it. These people are only connoisseurs of curios
and have virtually nothing to do with the revolution. The arrow of
Marxism-Leninism must be used to shoot at the target of the Chinese revolution.
Unless this point is made clear, the theoretical level of our Party can never
be raised and the Chinese revolution can never be victorious.

Our comrades must understand that we study Marxism-Leninism not for display,
nor because there is any mystery about it, but solely because it is the science
which leads the revolutionary cause of the proletariat to victory. Even now,
there are not a few people who still regard odd quotations from Marxist-Leninist
works as a ready-made panacea which, once acquired, can easily cure all maladies.
These people show childish ignorance, and we should enlighten them. It is
precisely such ignorant people who take Marxism-Leninism as a religious dogma.
To them we should say bluntly, "Your dogma is worthless." Marx, Engels, Lenin
and Stalin have repeatedly stated that our theory is not a dogma but a guide
to action. But such people prefer to forget this statement which is of the
greatest, indeed the utmost, importance. Chinese Communists can be regarded
as linking theory with practice only when they become good at applying the
Marxist-Leninist stand, viewpoint and method and the teachings of Lenin and
Stalin concerning the Chinese revolution and when, furthermore, through serious
research into the realities of China's history and revolution, they do creative
theoretical work to meet China's needs in different spheres. Merely talking
about linking theory and practice without actually doing anything about it
is of no use, even if one goes on talking for a hundred years. To oppose
the subjectivist, one-sided approach to problems, we must demolish dogmatist
subjectiveness and one-sidedness.

So much for today about combating subjectivism in order to rectify the style
of study throughout the Party.

Let me now speak about the question of sectarianism.

Having been steeled for twenty years, our Party is no longer dominated by
sectarianism. Remnants of sectarianism, however, are still found both in
the Party's internal relations and in its external relations. Sectarian
tendencies in internal relations lead to exclusiveness towards comrades inside
the Party and hinder inner-Party unity and solidarity, while sectarian tendencies
in external relations lead to exclusiveness towards people outside the Party
and hinder the Party in its task of uniting the whole people. Only by uprooting
this evil in both its aspects can the Party advance unimpeded in its great
task of achieving unity among all Party comrades and among all the people
of our country.

What are the remnants of inner-Party sectarianism? They are mainly as follows:

First, the assertion of "independence". Some comrades see only the interests
of the part and not the whole; they always put undue stress on that part
of the work for which they themselves are responsible and always wish to
subordinate the interests of the whole to the interests of their own part.
They do not understand the Party's system of democratic centralism; they
do not realize that the Communist Party not only needs democracy but needs
centralization even more. They forget the system of democratic centralism
in which the minority is subordinate to the majority, the lower level to
the higher level, the part to the whole and the entire membership to the
Central Committee. Chang Kuo-tao [5] asserted his
"independence" of the Central Committee of the Party and as a result "asserted"
himself into betraying the Party and became a Kuomintang agent. Although
the sectarianism we are now discussing is not of this extremely serious kind,
it must still be guarded against and we must do away completely with all
manifestations of disunity. We should encourage comrades to take the interests
of the whole into account. Every Party member, every branch of work, every
statement and every action must proceed from the interests of the whole Party;
it is absolutely impermissible to violate this principle.

Those who assert this kind of "independence" are usually wedded to the doctrine
of "me first" and are generally wrong on the question of the relationship
between the individual and the Party. Although in words they profess respect
for the Party, in practice they put themselves first and the Party second.
What are these people after? They are after fame and position and want to
be in the limelight. Whenever they are put in charge of a branch of work,
they assert their "independence". With this aim, they draw some people in,
push others out and resort to boasting, flattery and touting among the comrades,
thus importing the vulgar style of the bourgeois political parties into the
Communist Party. It is their dishonesty that causes them to come to grief.
I believe we should do things honestly, for without an honest attitude it
is absolutely impossible to accomplish anything in this world. Which are
the honest people? Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin are honest, men of science
are honest. Which are the dishonest people? Trotsky, Bukharin, Chen Tu-hsiu
and Chang Kuo-tao are extremely dishonest; and those who assert "independence"
out of personal or sectional interest are dishonest too. All sly people,
all those who do not have a scientific attitude in their work, fancy themselves
resourceful and clever, but in fact they are most stupid and will come to
no good. Students in our Party School must pay attention to this problem.
We must build a centralized, unified Party and make a clean sweep of all
unprincipled factional struggles. We must combat individualism and sectarianism
so as to enable our whole Party to march in step and fight for one common
goal.

Cadres from the outside and those from the locality must unite and combat
sectarian tendencies. Very careful attention must be given to the relations
between outside and local cadres because many anti-Japanese base areas were
established only after the arrival of the Eighth Route Army or the New Fourth
Army and much of the local work developed only after the arrival of outside
cadres. Our comrades must understand that in these conditions it is possible
for our base areas to be consolidated and for our Party to take root there
only when the two kinds of cadres unite as one and when a large number of
local cadres develop and are promoted; otherwise it is impossible. Both the
outside and the local cadres have their strong and weak points, and to make
any progress they must overcome their own weak points by learning from each
other's strong points. The outside cadres are generally not up to the local
cadres in familiarity with local conditions and links with the masses. Take
me for instance. Although I have been in northern Shensi five or six years,
I am far behind the local comrades in understanding local conditions and
in links with the people here. Our comrades going to the anti-Japanese base
areas in Shansi, Hopei, Shantung and other provinces must pay attention to
this. Moreover, even within the same base area, owing to the fact that some
districts develop earlier and others later, there is a difference between
the local cadres of a district and those from outside it. Cadres who come
from a more developed to a less developed district are also outside cadres
in relation to that locality, and they, too, should pay great attention to
fostering and helping local cadres. Generally speaking, in places where outside
cadres are in charge, it is they who should bear the main responsibility
if their relations with the local cadres are not good. And the chief comrades
in charge should bear greater responsibility. The attention paid to this
problem in some places is still very inadequate. Some people look down on
the local cadres and ridicule them, saying, "What do these locals know?
Clodhoppers!" Such people utterly fail to understand the importance of local
cadres; they know neither the latter's strong points nor their own weaknesses
and adopt an incorrect, sectarian attitude. All outside cadres must cherish
the local cadres and give them constant help and must not be permitted to
ridicule or attack them. Of course, the local cadres on their part must learn
from the strong points of the outside cadres and rid themselves of inappropriate,
narrow views so that they and the outside cadres become as one, with no
distinction between "them" and "us", and thus avoid sectarian tendencies.

The same applies to the relationship between cadres in army service and other
cadres working in the locality. They must be completely united and must oppose
sectarian tendencies. The army cadres must help the local cadres, and vice
versa. If there is friction between them, each should make allowance for
the other and carry out proper self-criticism. Generally speaking, in places
where army cadres are actually in positions of leadership, it is they who
should bear the main responsibility if their relations with the local cadres
are not good. Only when the army cadres understand their own responsibility
and are modest in their attitude towards the local cadres can the conditions
be created for the smooth progress of our war effort and our work of construction
in the base areas.

The same applies to the relationship among different army units, different
localities and different departments. We must oppose the tendency towards
selfish departmentalism by which the interests of one's own unit are looked
after to the exclusion of those of others. Whoever is indifferent to the
difficulties of others, refuses to transfer cadres to other units on request,
or releases only the inferior ones, "using the neighbour's field as an outlet
for his overflow", and does not give the slightest consideration to other
departments, localities or people--such a person is a selfish departmentalist
who has entirely lost the spirit of communism. Lack of consideration for
the whole and complete indifference to other departments, localities and
people are characteristics of a selfish departmentalist. We must intensify
our efforts to educate such persons and to make them understand that selfish
departmentalism is a sectarian tendency which will become very dangerous,
if allowed to develop.

Another problem is the relationship between old and new cadres. Since the
beginning of the War of Resistance, our Party has grown enormously, and large
numbers of new cadres have emerged; that is a very good thing. In his report
to the Eighteenth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (B.),
Comrade Stalin said, "... there are never enough old cadres, there are far
less than required, and they are already partly going out of commission owing
to the operation of the laws of nature." Here he was discussing the cadres
situation and not only the laws of nature. If our Party does not have a great
many new cadres working in unity and co-operation with the old cadres, our
cause will come to a stop. All old cadres, therefore, should welcome the
new ones with the utmost enthusiasm and show them the warmest solicitude.
True, new cadres have their shortcomings. They have not been long in the
revolution and lack experience, and unavoidably some have brought with them
vestiges of the unwholesome ideology of the old society, remnants of the
ideology of petty-bourgeois individualism. But such shortcomings can be gradually
eliminated through education and tempering in the revolution. The strong
point of the new cadres, as Stalin has said, is that they are acutely sensitive
to what is new and are therefore enthusiastic and active to a high degree--the
very qualities which some of the old cadres lack.
[6] Cadres, new and old, should respect each other,
learn from each other and overcome their own shortcomings by learning from
each other's strong points, so as to unite as one in the common cause and
guard against sectarian tendencies. Generally speaking, in places where the
old cadres are mainly in charge, it is they who should bear the chief
responsibility if relations with the new cadres are not good.

All the above--relations between the part and the whole, relations between
the individual and the Party, relations between outside and local cadres,
relations between army cadres and other cadres working in the locality, relations
between this and that army unit, between this and that locality, between
this and that department and relations between old and new cadres--are relations
within the Party. In all these relations it is necessary to enhance the spirit
of communism and guard against sectarian tendencies, so that the ranks of
our Party will be in good order, march in step and therefore fight well.
This is a very important problem which we must solve thoroughly in rectifying
the Party's style of work. Sectarianism is an expression of subjectivism
in organizational relations; if we want to get rid of subjectivism and promote
the Marxist-Leninist spirit of seeking truth from facts, we must sweep the
remnants of sectarianism out of the Party and proceed from the principle
that the Party's interests are above personal or sectional interests, so
that the Party can attain complete solidarity and unity.

The remnants of sectarianism must be eliminated from the Party's external
as well as its internal relations. The reason is this: we cannot defeat the
enemy by merely uniting the comrades throughout the Party, we can defeat
the enemy only by uniting the people throughout the country. For twenty years
the Communist Party of China has done great and arduous work in the cause
of uniting the people of the whole country, and the achievements in this
work since the outbreak of the War of Resistance are even greater than in
the past. This does not mean, however, that all our comrades already have
a correct style in dealing with the masses and are free from sectarian
tendencies. No. In fact, sectarian tendencies still exist among a number
of comrades, and in some cases to a very serious degree. Many of our comrades
tend to be overbearing in their relations with non-Party people, look down
upon them, despise or refuse to respect them or appreciate their strong points.
This is indeed a sectarian tendency. After reading a few Marxist books, such
comrades become more arrogant instead of more modest, and invariably dismiss
others as no good without realizing that in fact their own knowledge is only
half-baked. Our comrades must realize the truth that Communist Party members
are at all times a minority as compared with non-Party people. Supposing
one out of every hundred persons were a Communist, then there would be 4,500,000
Communists among China's population of 450,000,000. Yet, even if our membership
reached this huge figure, Communists would still form only one per cent of
the whole population, while 99 per cent would be non-Party people. What reason
can we then have for not co-operating with non-Party people? As regards all
those who wish to co-operate with us or might co-operate with us, we have
only the duty of co-operating and absolutely no right to shut them out. But
some Party members do not understand this and look down upon, or even shut
out, those who wish to co-operate with us. There are no grounds whatsoever
for doing so. Have Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin given us any grounds? They
have not. On the contrary, they have always earnestly enjoined us to form
close ties with the masses and not divorce ourselves from them. Or has the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China given us any grounds? No.
Among all its resolutions there is not a single one that says we may divorce
ourselves from the masses and so isolate ourselves. On the contrary, the
Central Committee has always told us to form close ties with the masses and
not to divorce ourselves from them. Thus any action divorcing us from the
masses has no justification at all and is simply the mischievous result of
the sectarian ideas some of our comrades have themselves concocted. As such
sectarianism remains very serious among some of our comrades and still obstructs
the application of the Party line, we should carry out extensive education
within the Party to meet this problem. Above all, we should make our cadres
really understand how serious the problem is and how utterly impossible it
is to overthrow the enemy and attain the goal of the revolution unless Party
members unite with the non-Party cadres and with non-Party people.

All sectarian ideas are subjectivist and are incompatible with the real needs
of the revolution; hence the struggle against sectarianism and the struggle
against subjectivism should go on simultaneously.

There is no time today to talk about the question of stereotyped Party writing;
I shall discuss it at another meeting. Stereotyped Party writing is a vehicle
for filth, a form of expression for subjectivism and sectarianism. It does
people harm and damages the revolution, and we must get rid of it completely.

To combat subjectivism we must propagate materialism and dialectics. However,
there are many comrades in our Party who lay no stress on the propaganda
either of materialism or of dialectics. Some tolerate subjectivist propaganda
and regard it with equanimity. They think they believe in Marxism, but make
no effort to propagate materialism and do not give it a thought or express
any opinion when they hear or read subjectivist stuff. This is not the attitude
of a Communist. It allows many of our comrades to be poisoned by subjectivist
ideas, which numb their sensitivity. We should therefore launch a campaign
of enlightenment within the Party to free the minds of our comrades from
the fog of subjectivism and dogmatism and should call upon them to boycott
subjectivism, sectarianism and stereotyped Party writing. Such evils are
like Japanese goods, for only our enemy wishes us to preserve them and continue
to befuddle ourselves with them; so we should advocate a boycott against
them, just as we boycott Japanese goods. [7] We
should boycott all the wares of subjectivism, sectarianism and stereotyped
Party writing, make their sale difficult, and not allow their purveyors to
ply their trade by exploiting the low theoretical level in the Party. Our
comrades must develop a good nose for this purpose; they should take a sniff
at everything and distinguish the good from the bad before they decide whether
to welcome it or boycott it. Communists must always go into the whys and
wherefores of anything, use their own heads and carefully think over whether
or not it corresponds to reality and is really well founded; on no account
should they follow blindly and encourage slavishness.

Finally, in opposing subjectivism, sectarianism and stereotyped Party writing
we must have in mind two purposes: first, "learn from past mistakes to avoid
future ones", and second, "cure the sickness to save the patient". The mistakes
of the past must be exposed without sparing anyone's sensibilities; it is
necessary to analyse and criticize what was bad in the past with a scientific
attitude so that work in the future will be done more carefully and done
better. This is what is meant by "learn from past mistakes to avoid future
ones". But our aim in exposing errors and criticizing shortcomings, like
that of a doctor curing a sickness, is solely to save the patient and not
to doctor him to death. A person with appendicitis is saved when the surgeon
removes his appendix. So long as a person who has made mistakes does not
hide his sickness for fear of treatment or persist in his mistakes until
he is beyond cure, so long as he honestly and sincerely wishes to be cured
and to mend his ways, we should welcome him and cure his sickness so that
he can become a good comrade. We can never succeed if we just let ourselves
go, and lash out at him. In treating an ideological or a political malady,
one must never be rough and rash but must adopt the approach of "curing the
sickness to save the patient", which is the only correct and effective method.

I have taken this occasion of the opening of the Party School to speak at
length, and I hope comrades will think over what I have said. (Enthusiastic
applause.)
NOTES

1. Stereotyped writing, or the "eight-legged essay", was
the special form of essay prescribed in the imperial examinations under China's
feudal dynasties from the 15th to the 19th centuries; it consisted in juggling
with words, concentrated only on form and was devoid of content. Structurally
the main body of the essay had eight parts--presentation, amplification,
preliminary exposition, initial argument, inceptive paragraphs, middle
paragraphs, rear paragraphs and concluding paragraphs, and the fifth to eighth
parts each had to have two "legs", i.e., two antithetical paragraphs, hence
the name "eight-legged essay". The "eight-legged essay" became a byword in
China denoting stereotyped formalism and triteness. Thus "stereotyped Party
writing", characterizes the writings of certain people in the revolutionary
ranks who piled up revolutionary phrases and terms higgledy-piggledy instead
of analysing the facts. Like the "eight-legged essay", their writings were
nothing but verbiage.

2. This was the decision on recruiting intellectuals adopted
by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China in December 1939,
which is printed under the title "Recruit Large Numbers of Intellectuals"
in the Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. II.

3. See J. V. Stalin, "The Foundations of Leninism",
Problems of Leninism, Eng. ed., FLPH Moscow, 1954. p. 31.

4. This is the opening sentence of the Confucian Analects,
a record of the dialogues of Confucius and his disciples.

5. Chang Kuo-tao was a renegade from the Chinese revolution.
In early life, speculating on the revolution he joined the Chinese Communist
Party. In the Party he made many mistakes resulting in serious crimes. The
most notorious of these was his opposition in 1935 to the Red Army's northward
march and his defeatism and liquidationism in advocating withdrawal by the
Red Army to the minority-nationality areas on the Szechuan-Sikang borders;
what is more, he openly carried out traitorous activities against the Party
and the Central Committee, established his own bogus central committee, disrupted
the unity of the Party and the Red Army, and caused heavy losses to the Fourth
Front Army of the Red Army. But thanks to patient education by Comrade Mao
Tse-tung and the Central Committee, the Fourth Front Army and its numerous
cadres soon returned to the correct leadership of the Central Committee of
the Party and played a glorious role in subsequent struggles. Chang Kuo-tao,
however, proved incorrigible and in the spring of 1938 he slipped out of
the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and joined the Kuomintang secret police.

6. See J. V. Stalin, "Report to the Eighteenth Congress
of the C.P.S.U. (B.) on the Work of the Central Committee", Problems
of Leninism, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1954, pp. 784-86.

7. Boycotting Japanese goods was a method of struggle
frequently used by the Chinese people against Japanese imperialist aggression
in the first half of the 20th century, as in the patriotic May 4th Movement
of 1919, after the September 18th Incident of 1931, and during the War of
Resistance Against Japan.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Oppose Stereotyped Party Writing







OPPOSE STEREOTYPED PARTY WRITING 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  OPPOSE STEREOTYPED PARTY WRITING

February 8, 1942

[This speech was delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung at a cadres' meeting in
Yenan.]
  

Comrade Kai-feng has just stated the purpose of today's meeting. I now want
to discuss the ways subjectivism and sectarianism use stereotyped Party writing
(or the Party "eight-legged essay") [1] as their
instrument of propaganda or form of expression. We are fighting against
subjectivism and sectarianism, but they will still have a hiding-place to
lurk in if at the same time we do not get rid of stereotyped Party writing.
If we destroy that too, we shall "checkmate" subjectivism and sectarianism
and make both these monsters show themselves in their true colours, and then
we shall easily be able to annihilate them, like "rats running across the
street with everyone yelling: Kill them! Kill them!"

It does not matter much if a person produces stereotyped Party writings only
for himself to read. If he passes them on to someone else, the number of
readers is doubled, and already no small harm is done. If he has them posted
up, mimeographed, printed in newspapers or published in book form, then the
problem becomes indeed a big one, for they can influence many people. And
those who produce stereotyped Party writing always seek large audiences.
Thus it has become imperative to expose and destroy it.

Stereotyped Party writing is, moreover, one brand of the "foreign stereotype",
which was attacked by Lu Hsun a long time
ago.[2] Why then do we call it the Party "eight-legged
essay"? Because, besides its foreign flavour, it has some smell of native
soil. Perhaps it too can be counted as creative work of a sort! Who says
our people have not produced any creative works? Here is one! (Loud
laughter.)

Stereotyped Party writing has a long history in our Party; particularly during
the Agrarian Revolution, it sometimes became quite rampant.

Viewed historically, stereotyped Party writing is a reaction to the May 4th
Movement.

During the May 4th Movement, modern-minded people opposed the use of the
classical Chinese language and advocated vernacular Chinese, opposed the
traditional dogmas and advocated science and democracy, all of which was
quite right. The movement then was vigorous and lively, progressive and
revolutionary. In those days the ruling classes indoctrinated students with
Confucian teachings and compelled the people to venerate all the trappings
of Confucianism as religious dogma, and all writers used the classical language.
In short, what was written and taught by the ruling classes and their hangers-on
was in the nature of stereotyped writing and dogma, both in content and in
form. That was the old stereotype and the old dogma. A tremendous achievement
of the May 4th Movement was its public exposure of the ugliness of the old
stereotype and the old dogma and its call to the people to rise against them.
Another great and related achievement was its fight against imperialism,
but the struggle against the old stereotype and the old dogma remains one
of the great achievements of the May 4th Movement. Later on, however, foreign
stereotyped writing and foreign dogma came into being. Running counter to
Marxism, certain people in our Party developed the foreign stereotype and
dogma into subjectivism, sectarianism and stereotyped Party writing. These
are the new stereotype and the new dogma. They have become so deeply ingrained
in the minds of many comrades that today we still have a very strenuous job
of remoulding to do. Thus we see that the lively, vigorous, progressive and
revolutionary movement of the May 4th period which fought the old feudal
stereotyped writing and dogma was later turned by some people into its very
opposite, giving rise to the new stereotyped writing and dogma. The latter
are not lively and vigorous but dead and stiff, not progressive but
retrogressive, not revolutionary but obstacles to revolution. That is to
say, the foreign stereotyped writing, or stereotyped Party writing, is a
reaction to the original nature of the May 4th Movement. The May 4th Movement,
however, had its own weaknesses. Many of the leaders lacked the critical
spirit of Marxism, and the method they used was generally that of the
bourgeoisie, that is, the formalist method. They were quite right in opposing
the old stereotype and the old dogma and in advocating science and democracy.
But in dealing with current conditions, with history, and with things foreign,
they lacked the critical spirit of historical materialism and regarded what
was bad as absolutely and wholly bad and what was good as absolutely and
wholly good. This formalist approach to problems affected the subsequent
course of the movement. In its development, the May 4th Movement divided
into two currents. One section inherited its scientific and democratic spirit
and transformed it on the basis of Marxism; this is what the Communists and
some non-Party Marxists did. Another section took the road of the bourgeoisie;
this was the development of formalism towards the Right. But within the Communist
Party too the situation was not uniform; there, too, some members deviated
and, lacking a firm grasp of Marxism, committed errors of formalism, namely,
the errors of subjectivism, sectarianism and stereotyped Party writing. This
was the development of formalism towards the "Left". So it can be seen that
stereotyped Party writing is no accident, but is, on the one hand, a reaction
to the positive elements of the May 4th Movement and, on the other, a legacy,
a continuation or development of its negative elements. It is useful for
us to understand this point. Just as it was revolutionary and necessary to
fight the old stereotyped writing and the old dogmatism during the period
of the May 4th Movement, so it is revolutionary and necessary today for us
to use Marxism to criticize the new stereotyped writing and the new dogmatism.
If there had been no fight against the old stereotype and the old dogmatism
during the May 4th period, the minds of the Chinese people would not have
been freed from bondage to them, and China would have no hope of freedom
and independence. This task was merely begun in the period of the May 4th
Movement, and a very great effort--a huge job of work on the road of
revolutionary remoulding--is still necessary to enable the whole people to
free themselves completely from the domination of the old stereotype and
dogmatism. If today we do not oppose the new stereotyped writing and the
new dogmatism, the minds of the Chinese people will be fettered by formalism
of another kind. If we do not get rid of the poison of stereotyped Party
writing and the error of dogmatism found among a section (only a section,
of course) of Party comrades, then it will be impossible to arouse a vigorous
and lively revolutionary spirit, to eradicate the bad habit of taking a wrong
attitude towards Marxism and to disseminate and develop true Marxism;
furthermore, it will be impossible to conduct an energetic struggle against
the influence of the old stereotyped writing and dogma among the whole people,
and against that of foreign stereotyped among many of the people, and impossible
to attain the purpose of demolishing and sweeping away these influences.

Subjectivism, sectarianism and stereotyped Party writing--all three are
anti-Marxist and meet the needs not of the proletariat but of the exploiting
classes. They are a reflection of petty-bourgeois ideology in our Party.
China is a country with a very large petty bourgeoisie and our Party is
surrounded by this enormous class; a great number of our Party members come
from this class, and when they join the Party they inevitably drag in with
them a petty-bourgeois tail, be it long or short. Unless checked and transformed,
the fanaticism and one-sidedness of petty-bourgeois revolutionaries can easily
engender subjectivism and sectarianism, of which foreign stereotyped writing,
or stereotyped Party writing, is one form of expression.

It is not easy to clean out these things and sweep them away. It must be
done properly, that is, by taking pains to reason with people. If we reason
earnestly and properly, it will be effective. The first thing to do in this
reasoning process is to give the patient a good shake-up by shouting at him,
"You are ill!" so as to administer a shock and make him break out in a sweat,
and then to give him sincere advice on getting treatment.

Let us now analyse stereotyped Party writing and see where its evils lie.
Using poison as an antidote to poison, we shall imitate the form of the
stereotyped eight-section essay and set forth the following "eight legs",
which might be called the eight major indictments.

The first indictment against stereotyped Party writing is that it fills endless
pages with empty verbiage. Some of our comrades love to write long articles
with no substance, very much like the "foot-bindings of a slattern, long
as well as smelly". Why must they write such long and empty articles? There
can be only one explanation; they are determined the masses shall not read
them. Because the articles are long and empty, the masses shake their heads
at the very sight of them. How can they be expected to read them? Such writings
are good for nothing except to bluff the naive, among whom they spread bad
influences and foster bad habits. On June 22 last year the Soviet Union began
waging a gigantic war against aggression, and yet Stalin's speech on July
3 was only the length of an editorial in our Liberation Daily. Had
any of our gentlemen written that speech, just imagine! It would have run
to tens of thousands of words at a minimum. We are in the midst of a war,
and we should learn how to write shorter and pithier articles. Although there
is as yet no fighting here in Yenan, our troops at the front are daily engaged
in battle, and the people in the rear are busy at work. If articles are too
long, who will read them? Some comrades at the front, too, like to write
long reports. They take pains over writing them and send them here for us
to read. But who has the hardihood to read them? If long and empty articles
are no good, are short and empty ones any better? They are no good either.
We should forbid all empty talk. But the first and foremost task is to throw
the long, smelly foot-bindings of the slattern into the dustbin. Some may
ask, "Isn't Capital very long? What are we to do about that?" The
answer is simple, just go on reading it. There is a proverb, "Sing different
songs on different mountains"; another runs, "Fit the appetite to the dishes
and the dress to the figure". Whatever we do must be done according to actual
circumstances, and it is the same with writing articles and making speeches.
What we oppose is long-winded and empty stereotyped writing, but we do not
mean that everything must necessarily be short in order to be good. True,
we need short articles in war time, but above all we need articles that have
substance. Articles devoid of substance are the least justifiable and the
most objectionable. The same applies to speechmaking; we must put an end
to all empty, long-winded speeches.

The second indictment against stereotyped Party writing is that it strikes
a pose in order to intimidate people. Some stereotyped Party writing is not
only long and empty, but also pretentious with the deliberate intention of
intimidating people; it carries the worst kind of poison. Writing long-winded
and empty articles may be set down to immaturity, but striking a pose to
overawe people is not merely immature but downright knavish. Lu Hsun once
said in criticism of such people, "Hurling insults and threats is certainly
not fighting."[3] What is scientific never fears
criticism, for science is truth and fears no refutation. But those who write
subjectivist and sectarian articles and speeches in the form of Party stereotypes
fear refutation, are very cowardly, and therefore rely on pretentiousness
to overawe others, believing that they can thereby silence people and "win
the day". Such pretentiousness cannot reflect truth but is an obstacle to
truth. Truth does not strike a pose to overawe people but talks and acts
honestly and sincerely. Two terms used to appear in the articles and speeches
of many comrades, one being "ruthless struggle" and the other "merciless
blows". Measures of that kind are entirely necessary against the enemy or
against enemy ideology, but to use them against our own comrades is wrong.
It often happens that enemies and enemy ideology infiltrate into the Party,
as is discussed in Item 4 of the Conclusion of the History of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks), Short Course. Against these
enemies, we must undoubtedly resort to ruthless struggle and merciless blows,
because the scoundrels use these very measures against the Party; if we were
tolerant of them, we should fall right into their trap. But the same measures
should not be used against comrades who occasionally make mistakes; to them
we should apply the method of criticism and self-criticism, the method indicated
in Item 5 of the Conclusion of the History of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks), Short Course. The comrades who in the
past loudly advocated "ruthless struggle" and "merciless blows" against comrades
who occasionally made mistakes did so because, for one thing, they failed
to make any analysis of the persons they were dealing with and, for another,
they were striking a pose in an effort to intimidate. This method is no good,
no matter whom you are dealing with. Against the enemy this tactic of
intimidation is utterly useless, and with our own comrades it can only do
harm. It is a tactic which the exploiting classes and the lumper-proletariat
habitually practice, but for which the proletariat has no use. For the
proletariat the sharpest and most effective weapon is a serious and militant
scientific attitude. The Communist Party lives by the truth of Marxism-Leninism,
by seeking truth from facts, by science, and not by intimidating people.
Needless to say, the idea of attaining fame and position for oneself by
pretentiousness is even more contemptible. In short, when organizations make
decisions and issue instructions and when comrades write articles and make
speeches, they must without exception depend on Marxist-Leninist truth and
seek to serve a useful purpose. This is the only basis on which victory in
the revolution can be achieved; all else is of no avail.

The third indictment against stereotyped Party writing is that it shoots
at random, without considering the audience. A few years ago a slogan appeared
on the Yenan city wall which read, "Working men and peasants, unite and strive
for victory in the War of Resistance Against Japan!" The idea of the slogan
was not at all bad, but the character
 [kung, meaning working]
in  [kung jen, meaning
working men], was written as ,
with its perpendicular stroke twisted into a zigzag. How about the character
 [jen, meaning men]?
It became , with three slanting
strokes added to its right leg. The comrade who wrote this was no doubt a
disciple of the ancient scholars, but it is rather baffling why he should
have written such characters in such a place, on the Yenan city wall, at
the time of the War of Resistance. Perhaps he had taken a vow that the common
people should not read them; it is difficult to explain otherwise. Communists
who really want to do propaganda must consider their audience and bear in
mind those who will read their articles and slogans or listen to their speeches
and their talk; otherwise they are in effect resolving not to be read or
listened to by anyone. Many people often take it for granted that what they
write and say can be easily understood by everybody, when it is not so at
all. How can people understand them when they write and speak in Party
stereotypes? The saying "to play the lute to a cow" implies a gibe at the
audience. If we substitute the idea of respect for the audience, the gibe
is turned against the player. Why should he strum away without considering
his audience? What is worse, he is producing a Party stereotype as raucous
as a crow, and yet he insists on cawing at the masses. When shooting an arrow,
one must aim at the target; when playing the lute, one must consider the
listener; how, then, can one write articles or make speeches without taking
the reader or the audience into account? Suppose we want to make friends
with a person, whoever he may be, can we become bosom friends if we do not
understand each other's hearts, do not know each other's thoughts? It simply
will not do for our propaganda workers to rattle on without investigating,
studying and analysing their audience.

The fourth indictment against stereotyped Party writing is its drab language
that reminds one of a piehsan. Like our stereotyped Party writing,
the creatures known in Shanghai as "little piehsan" are wizened
and ugly. If an article or a speech merely rings the changes on a few terms
in a classroom tone without a shred of vigour or spirit, is it not rather
like a piehsan, drab of speech and repulsive in appearance? If someone
enters primary school at seven, goes to middle school in his teens, graduates
from college in his twenties and never has contact with the masses of the
people, he is not to blame if his language is poor and monotonous. But we
are revolutionaries working for the masses, and if we do not learn the language
of the masses, we cannot work well. At present many of our comrades doing
propaganda work make no study of language. Their propaganda is very dull,
and few people care to read their articles or listen to their talk.

Why do we need to study language and, what is more, spend much effort on
it? Because the mastery of language is not easy and requires painstaking
effort. First, let us learn language from the masses. The people's vocabulary
is rich, vigorous, vivid and expressive of real life. It is because many
of us have not mastered language that our articles and speeches contain few
vigorous, vivid and effective expressions and resemble not a hale and healthy
person, but an emaciated piehsan, a mere bag of bones. Secondly,
let us absorb what we need from foreign languages. We should not import foreign
expressions mechanically or use them indiscriminately, but should absorb
what is good and suits our needs. Our current vocabulary has already incorporated
many foreign expressions, because the old Chinese vocabulary was inadequate.
For instance, today we are holding a meeting of kanpu [cadres],
and the term kanpu is derived from a foreign word. We should continue
to absorb many fresh things from abroad, not only progressive ideas but new
expressions as well. Thirdly, let us also learn whatever is alive in the
classical Chinese language. Since we have not studied classical Chinese hard
enough, we have not made full and proper use of much that is still alive
in it. Of course, we are resolutely opposed to the use of obsolete expressions
or allusions, and that is final; but what is good and still useful should
be taken over. Those who are badly infected by stereotyped Party writing
do not take pains to study what is useful in the language of the people,
in foreign languages, or in classical Chinese, so the masses do not welcome
their dry and dull propaganda, and we too have no need for such poor and
incompetent propagandists. Who are our propagandists? They include not only
teachers, journalists, writers and artists, but all our cadres. Take the
military commanders, for instance. Though they make no public statements,
they have to talk to the soldiers and have dealings with the people. What
is this if not propaganda? Whenever a man speaks to others, he is doing
propaganda work. Unless he is dumb, he always has a few words to say. It
is therefore imperative that our comrades should all study language.

The fifth indictment against stereotyped Party writing is that it arranges
items under a complicated set of headings, as if starting a Chinese pharmacy.
Go and take a look at any Chinese pharmacy, and you will see cabinets with
numerous drawers, each bearing the name of a drug--toncal, foxglove, rhubarb,
saltpetre ... indeed, everything that should be there. This method has been
picked up by our comrades. In their articles and speeches, their books and
reports, they use first the big Chinese numerals, second the small Chinese
numerals, third the characters for the ten celestial stems, fourth the characters
for the twelve earthly branches, and then capital A, B, C, D, then small
a, b, c, d, followed by the Arabic numerals, and what not! How fortunate
that the ancients and the foreigners created all these symbols for us so
that we can start a Chinese pharmacy without the slightest effort. For all
its verbiage, an article that bristles with such symbols, that does not pose,
analyse or solve problems and that does not take a stand for or against anything
is devoid of real content and nothing but a Chinese pharmacy. I am not saying
that such symbols as the ten celestial stems, etc., should not be used, but
that this kind of approach to problems is wrong. The method borrowed from
the Chinese pharmacy, which many of our comrades are very fond of, is really
the most crude, infantile and philistine of all. It is a formalist method,
classifying things according to their external features instead of their
internal relations. If one takes a conglomeration of concepts that are not
internally related and arranges them into an article, speech or report simply
according to the external features of things, then one is juggling with concepts
and may also lead others to indulge in the same sort of game, with the result
that they do not use their brains to think over problems and probe into the
essence of things, but are satisfied merely to list phenomena in ABCD order.
What is a problem? A problem is the contradiction in a thing. Where one has
an unresolved contradiction, there one has a problem. Since there is a problem,
you have to be for one side and against the other, and you have to pose the
problem. To pose the problem, you must first make a preliminary investigation
and study of the two basic aspects of the problem or contradiction before
you can understand the nature of the contradiction. This is the process of
discovering the problem. Preliminary investigation and study can discover
the problem, can pose the problem, but cannot as yet solve it. In order to
solve the problem it is necessary to make a systematic and thorough investigation
and study. This is the process of analysis. In posing the problem too, analysis
is needed; otherwise, faced with a chaotic and bewildering mass of phenomena,
you will not be able to discern where the problem or contradiction lies.
But here, by the process of analysis we mean a process of systematic and
thorough analysis. It often happens that although a problem has been posed
it cannot be solved because the internal relations of things have not yet
been revealed, because this process of systematic and thorough analysis has
not yet been carried out; consequently we still cannot see the contours of
the problem clearly, cannot make a synthesis and so cannot solve the problem
well. If an article or speech is important and meant to give guidance, it
ought to pose a particular problem, then analyse it and then make a synthesis
pointing to the nature of the problem and providing the method for solving
it; in all this, formalist methods are useless. Since infantile, crude,
philistine and lazy-minded formalist methods are prevalent in our Party,
we must expose them; only thus can everybody learn to use the Marxist method
to observe, pose, analyse and solve problems; only thus can we do our work
well and only thus can our revolutionary cause triumph.

The sixth indictment against stereotyped Party writing is that it is
irresponsible and harms people wherever it appears. All the offenses mentioned
above are due partly to immaturity and partly to an insufficient sense of
responsibility. Let us take washing the face to illustrate the point. We
all wash our faces every day, many of us more than once, and inspect ourselves
in the mirror afterwards by way of "investigation and study" (loud laughter),
for fear that something may not be quite right. What a great sense of
responsibility! If we wrote articles and made speeches with the same sense
of responsibility, we would not be doing badly. Do not present what is not
presentable. Always bear in mind that it may influence the thoughts and actions
of others. If a man happens not to wash his face for a day or two, that of
course is not good, and if after washing he leaves a smudge or two, that
too is not so pleasing, but there is no serious danger. It is different with
writing articles or making speeches; they are intended solely to influence
others. Yet our comrades go about this task casually; this means putting
the trivial above the important. Many people write articles and make speeches
without prior study or preparation, and after writing an article, they do
not bother to go over it several times in the same way as they would examine
their faces in the mirror after washing, but instead offhandedly send it
to be published. Often the result is "A thousand words from the pen in a
stream, but ten thousand li away from the theme". Talented though these writers
may appear, they actually harm people. This bad habit, this weak sense of
responsibility, must be corrected.

The seventh indictment against stereotyped Party writing is that it poisons
the whole Party and jeopardizes the revolution. The eighth indictment is
that its spread would wreck the country and ruin the people. These two
indictments are self-evident and require no elaboration. In other words,
if stereotyped Party writing is not transformed but is allowed to develop
unchecked, the consequences will be very serious indeed. The poison of
subjectivism and sectarianism is hidden in stereotyped Party writing, and
if this poison spreads it will endanger both the Party and the country.

The aforesaid eight counts are our call to arms against stereotyped Party
writing.

As a form, the Party stereotype is not only unsuitable for expressing the
revolutionary spirit but is apt to stifle it. To develop the revolutionary
spirit it is necessary to discard stereotyped Party writing and instead to
adopt the Marxist-Leninist style of writing, which is vigorous, lively, fresh
and forceful. This style of writing has existed for a long time, but is yet
to be enriched and spread widely among us. When we have destroyed foreign
stereotyped writing and stereotyped Party writing, we can enrich our new
style of writing and spread it widely, thereby advancing the Party's
revolutionary cause.

The Party stereotype is not only confined to articles and speeches, but is
also found in the conduct of meetings. "1. Opening announcement; 2. report;
3. discussion; 4. conclusions; and 5. adjournment." If this rigid procedure
is followed at every meeting, large or small, everywhere and every time,
is not that another Party stereotype? When "reports" are made at meetings
they often go as follows: "1. the international situation; 2. the domestic
situation; 3. the Border Region; and 4. our own department"; and the meetings
often last from morning till night, with even those having nothing to say
taking the floor, as though they would let the others down unless they spoke.
In short, there is a disregard for actual conditions and deadly adherence
to rigid old forms and habits. Should we not correct all these things too?

Nowadays many people are calling for a transformation to a national, scientific
and mass style. That is very good. But "transformation" means thorough change,
from top to bottom and inside out. Yet some people who have not made even
a slight change are calling for a transformation. I would therefore advise
these comrades to begin by making just a little change before they go on
to "transform", or else they will remain entangled in dogmatism and stereotyped
Party writing. This can be described as having grandiose aims but puny abilities,
great ambition but little talent, and it will accomplish nothing. So whoever
talks glibly about "transformation to a mass style" while in fact he is stuck
fast in his own small circle had better watch out, or some day one of the
masses may bump into him along the road and say, "What about all this
'transformation', sir? Can I see a bit of it, please?" and he will be in
a fix. If he is not just prating but sincerely wants to transform to a mass
style, he must really go among the common people and learn from them, otherwise
his "transformation" will remain up in the air. There are some who keep
clamouring for transformation to a mass style but cannot speak three sentences
in the language of the common people. It shows they are not really determined
to learn from the masses. Their minds are still confined to their own small
circles.

At this meeting copies of A Guide to Propaganda, a pamphlet containing
four articles, have been distributed, and I advise our comrades to read and
re-read it.

The first piece, composed of excerpts from the History of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks), Short Course, deals with the
way Lenin did propaganda work. It describes, among other things, how Lenin
wrote leaflets:

  Under Lenin's guidance, the St. Petersburg League of Struggle for the
  Emancipation of the Working Class was the first body in Russia that began
  to unite Socialism with the working-class movement. When a strike
  broke out in some factory, the League of Struggle, which through the members
  of its circles was kept well posted on the state of affairs in the factories,
  immediately responded by issuing leaflets and Socialist proclamations. These
  leaflets exposed the oppression of the workers by the manufacturers, explained
  how the workers should fight for their interests, and set forth the workers'
  demands. The leaflets told the plain truth about the ulcers of capitalism,
  the poverty of the workers, their intolerably hard working day of 12 to 14
  hours, and their utter lack of rights. They also put forward appropriate
  political demands.


Take note, "well posted" and "told the plain truth"! Again:

  With the collaboration of the worker Babushkin, Lenin at the end of 1894
  wrote the first agitational leaflet of this kind and an appeal to the workers
  of the Semyannikov Works in St. Petersburg who were on strike.


To write a leaflet, you must consult with comrades who are well posted on
the state of affairs. It was on the basis of such investigation and study
that Lenin wrote and worked.

  Every leaflet greatly helped to stiffen the spirit of the workers. They saw
  that the Socialists were helping and defending
  them.[4]


Do we agree with Lenin? If we do, we must work in the spirit of Lenin. That
is, we must do as Lenin did and not fill endless pages with verbiage, or
shoot at random without considering the audience, or become self-opinionated
and bombastic.

The second piece is composed of excerpts from Dimitrov's statements at the
Seventh World Congress of the Communist International. What did Dimitrov
say? He said:
 
  We must learn to talk to the masses, not in the language of book formulas,
  but in the language of fighters for the cause of the masses, whose every
  word, whose every idea reflects the innermost thoughts and sentiments of
  millions.[5]

  And again:

... the masses cannot assimilate our decisions unless we learn to speak
  the language which the masses understand.


   We do not always know how to speak simply, concretely, in images
  which are familiar and intelligible to the masses. We are still unable to
  refrain from abstract formulas which we have learned by rote. As a matter
  of fact, if you look through our leaflets, newspapers, resolutions and theses,
  you will find that they are often written in a language and style so heavy
  that they are difficult for even our Party functionaries to understand, let
  alone the rank-and-file workers.[6]


Well? Does not Dimitrov put his finger on our weak spot? Apparently, stereotyped
Party writing exists in foreign countries as well as in China, so you can
see it is a common disease. (Laughter.) In any case, we should cure
our own disease quickly in accordance with Comrade Dimitrov's injunction.

  Every one of us must make this a law, a Bolshevik law, an elementary rule:


 When writing or speaking always have in mind the rank-and-file worker
  who must understand you, must believe in your appeal and be ready to follow
  you! You must have in mind those for whom you rewrite, to whom you
  speak.[7]


This is the prescription made out for us by the Communist International,
a prescription that must be followed. Let it be a law for us!

The third article, selected from the Complete Works of Lu Hsun, is
the author's reply to the magazine The
Dipper,[8] discussing how to write.
What did Lu Hsun say? Altogether he set forth eight rules of writing, some
of which I shall pick out for comment here.

  Rule l: "Pay close attention to all manner of things; observe more, and if
  you have observed only a little, then do not write."


What he says is, "pay close attention to all manner of things", not just
to one thing or half a thing. He says "observe more", not just take a look
or half a look. How about us? Don't we often do exactly the opposite and
write after having observed only a little?

  Rule 2: "Do not force yourself to write when you have nothing to say."


What about us? Don't we often force ourselves to write a great deal when
it is all too clear that there is nothing in our heads? It is sheer
irresponsibility to pick up the pen and "force ourselves to write" without
investigation or study.

  Rule 4: "After writing something, read it over twice at least, and do your
  utmost to strike out non-essential words, sentences and paragraphs, without
  the slightest compunction. Rather condense the material for a novel into
  a sketch, never spin out the material for a sketch into a novel."


Confucius advised, "Think twice",[9] and Han Yu
said, "A deed is accomplished through taking
thought."[10] That was in ancient times. Today
matters have become very complicated, and sometimes it is not even enough
to think them over three or four times. Lu Hsun said, "Read it over twice
at least." And at most? He did not say, but in my opinion it does no harm
to go over an important article more than ten times and to revise it
conscientiously before it is published. Articles are the reflection of objective
reality, which is intricate and complex and must be studied over and over
again before it can be properly reflected; to be slipshod in this respect
is to be ignorant of the rudiments of writing.

  Rule 6: "Do not coin adjectives or other terms that are intelligible to nobody
  but yourself."


We have "coined" too many expressions that are "intelligible to nobody".
Sometimes a single clause runs to forty or fifty words and is packed with
"adjectives or other terms that are intelligible to nobody". Many who never
tire of professing to follow Lu Hsun are the very ones who turn their backs
on him!

The last piece is taken from the report on how to develop a national style
of propaganda, which was adopted at the Sixth Plenary Session of the Sixth
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. At that session held in
1938, we said that "any talk about Marxism apart from China's specific
characteristics is only Marxism in the abstract, Marxism in a vacuum". That
is to say, we must oppose all empty talk about Marxism, and Communists living
in China must study Marxism by linking it with the realities of the Chinese
revolution.

The report said:

  Foreign stereotypes must be abolished, there must be less singing of empty,
  abstract tunes, and dogmatism must be laid to rest; they must be replaced
  by the fresh, lively Chinese style and spirit which the common people of
  China love. To separate internationalist content from national form is the
  practice of those who do not understand the first thing about internationalism.
  We, on the contrary, must link the two closely. In this matter there are
  serious errors in our ranks which should be conscientiously overcome.


The abolition of foreign stereotypes was demanded in that report, yet some
comrades are still promoting them. Less singing of empty, abstract tunes
was demanded, yet some comrades are obstinately singing more. The demand
was made that dogmatism be laid to rest, yet some comrades are telling it
to get out of bed. In short, many people have let this report which was adopted
at the Sixth Plenary Session go in one ear and out of the other, as if wilfully
opposed to it.

The Central Committee has now made the decision that we must discard stereotyped
Party writing, dogmatism and the like once and for all, and that is why I
have come and talked at some length. I hope that comrades will think over
and analyse what I have said and that each comrade will also analyse his
own particular case. Everyone should carefully examine himself, talk over
with his close friends and the comrades around him whatever he has clarified
and really get rid of his own defects.
NOTES

1. For stereotyped Party writing, see "Rectify the Party's
Style of Work", Note 1, p. 50 of this volume.

2. Opposition to stereotyped writing, whether old or new,
runs all through Lu Hsun's works. The foreign stereotype was developed after
the May 4th Movement by some shallow bourgeois and petty-bourgeois intellectuals
and, disseminated by them, existed for a long time among revolutionary cultural
workers. In a number of essays, Lu Hsun fought against the foreign stereotype
as found in their ranks and condemned it in these terms:

  A clean sweep should be made of all stereotyped writings, whether old or
  new.... For instance, it is also a kind of stereotype if all one can do is
  to "hurl insults", "threaten" or even "pass sentence" and merely copy old
  formulas and apply these indiscriminately to every fact, instead of specifically
  and concretely using formulas derived from science to interpret the new facts
  and phenomena which emerge every day. ("A Reply to Chu Hsiu-hsia's Letter",
  appended to "Giving the Show Away".)


3. "Hurling Insults and Threats Is Certainly Not Fighting"
was the title of an essay written in 1932 and included in the collection
Mixed Dialects (Lu Hsun, Complete Works, Chin. ed., 1957,
Vol. V).

4. See History of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union (Bolsheviks), Short Course, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1951, pp.
36-37.

5. Georgi Dimitrov, "Unity of the Working Class Against
Fascism", Selected Articles and Speeches, Eng. ed., Lawrence &
Wishart, London, 1951, pp. 116-17.

6. Ibid., pp. 132-33.

7. Ibid., p. 135.

8. The Dipper was a monthly published in 1931
and 1932 by the League of Chinese Left-Wing Writers. "In Reply to the Question
Put by The Dipper" is included in the collection Two
Hearts (Lu Hsun, Complete Works, Chin. ed., Vol. IV).

9. From Confucian Analects, Book V, "Kungyeh Chang".

10. Han Yu (768-824) was a famous Chinese writer of the
Tang Dynasty. In his essay "The Scholar's Apologia" he wrote, "A deed is
accomplished through taking thought and fails through lack of thought."


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Talks at the Yenan Forum on Literature and Art







TALKS AT THE YENAN FORUM ON LITERATURE AND ART 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  TALKS AT THE YENAN FORUM ON LITERATURE AND ART

May 1942


INTRODUCTION


May 2, 1942

Comrades! You have been invited to this forum today to exchange ideas and
examine the relationship between work in the literary and artistic fields
and revolutionary work in general. Our aim is to ensure that revolutionary
literature and art follow the correct path of development and provide better
help to other revolutionary work in facilitating the overthrow of our national
enemy and the accomplishment of the task of national liberation.

In our struggle for the liberation of the Chinese people there are various
fronts, among which there are the fronts of the pen and of the gun, the cultural
and the military fronts. To defeat the enemy we must rely primarily on the
army with guns. But this army alone is not enough; we must also have a cultural
army, which is absolutely indispensable for uniting our own ranks and defeating
the enemy. Since the May 4th Movement such a cultural army has taken shape
in China, and it has helped the Chinese revolution, gradually reduced the
domain of China's feudal culture and of the comprador culture which serves
imperialist aggression, and weakened their influence. To oppose the new culture
the Chinese reactionaries can now only "pit quantity against quality". In
other words, reactionaries have money, and though they can produce nothing
good, they can go all out and produce in quantity. Literature and art have
been an important and successful part of the cultural front since the May
4th Movement. During the ten years' civil war, the revolutionary literature
and art movement grew greatly. That movement and the revolutionary war both
headed in the same general direction, but these two fraternal armies were
not linked together in their practical work because the reactionaries had
cut them off from each other. It is very good that since the outbreak of
the War of Resistance Against Japan, more and more revolutionary writers
and artists have been coming to Yenan and our other anti-Japanese base areas.
But it does not necessarily follow that, having come to the base areas, they
have already integrated themselves completely with the masses of the people
here. The two must be completely integrated if we are to push ahead with
our revolutionary work. The purpose of our meeting today is precisely to
ensure that literature and art fit well into the whole revolutionary machine
as a component part, that they operate as powerful weapons for uniting and
educating the people and for attacking and destroying the enemy, and that
they help the people fight the enemy with one heart and one mind. What are
the problems that must be solved to achieve this objective? I think they
are the problems of the class stand of the writers and artists, their attitude,
their audience, their work and their study.

The problem of class stand. Our stand is that of the proletariat and of the
masses. For members of the Communist Party, this means keeping to the stand
of the Party, keeping to Party spirit and Party policy. Are there any of
our literary and art workers who are still mistaken or not clear in their
understanding of this problem? I think there are. Many of our comrades have
frequently departed from the correct stand.

The problem of attitude. From one's stand there follow specific attitudes
towards specific matters. For instance, is one to extol or to expose? This
is a question of attitude. Which attitude is wanted? I would say both. The
question is, whom are you dealing with? There are three kinds of persons,
the enemy, our allies in the united front and our own people; the last are
the masses and their vanguard. We need to adopt a different attitude towards
each of the three. With regard to the enemy, that is, Japanese imperialism
and all the other enemies of the people, the task of revolutionary writers
and artists is to expose their duplicity and cruelty and at the same time
to point out the inevitability of their defeat, so as to encourage the
anti-Japanese army and people to fight staunchly with one heart and one mind
for their overthrow. With regard to our different allies in the united front,
our attitude should be one of both alliance and criticism, and there should
be different kinds of alliance and different kinds of criticism. We support
them in their resistance to Japan and praise them for any achievement. But
if they are not active in the War of Resistance, we should criticize them.
If anyone opposes the Communist Party and the people and keeps moving down
the path of reaction, we will firmly oppose him. As for the masses of the
people, their toil and their struggle, their army and their Party, we should
certainly praise them. The people, too, have their shortcomings. Among the
proletariat many retain petty-bourgeois ideas, while both the peasants and
the urban petty bourgeoisie have backward ideas; these are burdens hampering
them in their struggle. We should be patient and spend a long time in educating
them and helping them to get these loads off their backs and combat their
own shortcomings and errors, so that they can advance with great strides.
They have remoulded themselves in struggle or are doing so, and our literature
and art should depict this process. As long as they do not persist in their
errors, we should not dwell on their negative side and consequently make
the mistake of ridiculing them or, worse still, of being hostile to them.
Our writings should help them to unite, to make progress, to press ahead
with one heart and one mind, to discard what is backward and develop what
is revolutionary, and should certainly not do the opposite.

The problem of audience, i.e., the people for whom our works of literature
and art are produced. In the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the
anti-Japanese base areas of northern and central China, this problem differs
from that in the Kuomintang areas, and differs still more from that in Shanghai
before the War of Resistance. In the Shanghai period, the audience for works
of revolutionary literature and art consisted mainly of a section of the
students, office workers and shop assistants. After the outbreak of the War
of Resistance the audience in the Kuomintang areas became somewhat wider,
but it still consisted mainly of the same kind of people because the government
there prevented the workers, peasants and soldiers from having access to
revolutionary literature and art. In our base areas the situation is entirely
different. Here the audience for works of literature and art consists of
workers, peasants, soldiers and revolutionary cadres. There are students
in the base areas, too, but they are different from students of the old type;
they are either former or future cadres. The cadres of all types, fighters
in the army, workers in the factories and peasants in the villages all want
to read books and newspapers once they become literate, and those who are
illiterate want to see plays and operas, look at drawings and paintings,
sing songs and hear music; they are the audience for our works of literature
and art. Take the cadres alone. Do not think they are few; they far outnumber
the readers of any book published in the Kuomintang areas. There, an edition
usually runs to only 2,000 copies, and even three editions add up to only
6,000; but as for the cadres in the base areas, in Yenan alone there are
more than 10,000 who read books. Many of them, moreover, are tempered
revolutionaries of long standing, who have come from all parts of the country
and will go out to work in different places, so it is very important to do
educational work among them. Our literary and art workers must do a good
job in this respect.

Since the audience for our literature and art consists of workers, peasants
and soldiers and of their cadres, the problem arises of understanding them
and knowing them well. A great deal of work has to be done in order to understand
them and know them well, to understand and know well all the different kinds
of people and phenomena in the Party and government organizations, in the
villages and factories and in the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies. Our
writers and artists have their literary and art work to do, but their primary
task is to understand people and know them well. In this regard, how have
matters stood with our writers and artists? I would say they have been lacking
in knowledge and understanding; they have been like "a hero with no place
to display his prowess". What does lacking in knowledge mean? Not knowing
people well. The writers and artists do not have a good knowledge either
of those whom they describe or of their audience; indeed they may hardly
know them at all. They do not know the workers or peasants or soldiers well,
and do not know the cadres well either. What does lacking in understanding
mean? Not understanding the language, that is, not being familiar with the
rich, lively language of the masses. Since many writers and artists stand
aloof from the masses and lead empty lives, naturally they are unfamiliar
with the language of the people. Accordingly, their works are not only insipid
in language but often contain nondescript expressions of their own coining
which run counter to popular usage. Many comrades like to talk about "a mass
style". But what does it really mean? It means that the thoughts and feelings
of our writers and artists should be fused with those of the masses of workers,
peasants and soldiers. To achieve this fusion, they should conscientiously
learn the language of the masses. How can you talk of literary and artistic
creation if you find the very language of the masses largely incomprehensible?
By "a hero with no place to display his prowess", we mean that your collection
of great truths is not appreciated by the masses. The more you put on the
airs of a veteran before the masses and play the "hero", the more you try
to peddle such stuff to the masses, the less likely they are to accept it.
If you want the masses to understand you, if you want to be one with the
masses, you must make up your mind to undergo a long and even painful process
of tempering. Here I might mention the experience of how my own feelings
changed. I began life as a student and at school acquired the ways of a student;
I then used to feel it undignified to do even a little manual labour, such
as carrying my own luggage in the presence of my fellow students, who were
incapable of carrying anything, either on their shoulders or in their hands.
At that time I felt that intellectuals were the only clean people in the
world, while in comparison workers and peasants were dirty. I did not mind
wearing the clothes of other intellectuals, believing them clean, but I would
not put on clothes belonging to a worker or peasant, believing them dirty.
But after I became a revolutionary and lived with workers and peasants and
with soldiers of the revolutionary army, I gradually came to know them well,
and they gradually came to know me well too. It was then, and only then,
that I fundamentally changed the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois feelings implanted
in me in the bourgeois schools. I came to feel that compared with the workers
and peasants the unremoulded intellectuals were not clean and that, in the
last analysis, the workers and peasants were the cleanest people and, even
though their hands were soiled and their feet smeared with cow-dung, they
were really cleaner than the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois intellectuals.
That is what is meant by a change in feelings, a change from one class to
another. If our writers and artists who come from the intelligentsia want
their works to be well received by the masses, they must change and remould
their thinking and their feelings. Without such a change, without such
remoulding, they can do nothing well and will be misfits.

The last problem is study, by which I mean the study of Marxism-Leninism
and of society. Anyone who considers himself a revolutionary Marxist writer,
and especially any writer who is a member of the Communist Party, must have
a knowledge of Marxism-Leninism. At present, however, some comrades are lacking
in the basic concepts of Marxism. For instance, it is a basic Marxist concept
that being determines consciousness, that the objective realities of class
struggle and national struggle determine our thoughts and feelings. But some
of our comrades turn this upside down and maintain that everything ought
to start from "love". Now as for love, in a class society there can be only
class love; but these comrades are seeking a love transcending classes, love
in the abstract and also freedom in the abstract, truth in the abstract,
human nature in the abstract, etc. This shows that they have been very deeply
influenced by the bourgeoisie. They should thoroughly rid themselves of this
influence and modestly study Marxism-Leninism. It is right for writers and
artists to study literary and artistic creation, but the science of
Marxism-Leninism must be studied by all revolutionaries, writers and artists
not excepted. Writers and artists should study society, that is to say, should
study the various classes in society, their mutual relations and respective
conditions, their physiognomy and their psychology. Only when we grasp all
this clearly can we have a literature and art that is rich in content and
correct in orientation.

I am merely raising these problems today by way of introduction; I hope all
of you will express your views on these and other relevant problems.

CONCLUSION


May 23, 1942

Comrades! Our forum has had three meetings this month. In the pursuit of
truth we have carried on spirited debates in which scores of Party and non-Party
comrades have spoken, laying bare the issues and making them more concrete.
This, I believe, will very much benefit the whole literary and artistic
movement.

In discussing a problem, we should start from reality and not from definitions.
We would be following a wrong method if we first looked up definitions of
literature and art in textbooks and then used them to determine the guiding
principles for the present-day literary and artistic movement and to judge
the different opinions and controversies that arise today. We are Marxists,
and Marxism teaches that in our approach to a problem we should start from
objective facts, not from abstract definitions, and that we should derive
our guiding principles, policies and measures from an analysis of these facts.
We should do the same in our present discussion of literary and artistic
work.

What are the facts at present? The facts are: the War of Resistance Against
Japan which China has been fighting for five years; the world-wide anti-fascist
war; the vacillations of China's big landlord class and big bourgeoisie in
the War of Resistance and their policy of high-handed oppression of the people;
the revolutionary movement in literature and art since the May 4th Movement--its
great contributions to the revolution during the last twenty-three years
and its many shortcomings; the anti-Japanese democratic base areas of the
Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies and the integration of large numbers of
writers and artists with these armies and with the workers and peasants in
these areas; the difference in both environment and tasks between the writers
and artists in the base areas and those in the Kuomintang areas; and the
controversial issues concerning literature and art which have arisen in Yenan
and the other anti-Japanese base areas. These are the actual, undeniable
facts in the light of which we have to consider our problems.

What then is the crux of the matter? In my opinion, it consists fundamentally
of the problems of working for the masses and how to work for the masses.
Unless these two problems are solved, or solved properly, our writers and
artists will be ill-adapted to their environment and their tasks and will
come up against a series of difficulties from without and within. My concluding
remarks will centre on these two problems and also touch upon some related
ones.

  I


The first problem is: literature and art for whom?

This problem was solved long ago by Marxists, especially by Lenin. As far
back as 1905 Lenin pointed out emphatically that our literature and art should
"serve . . . the millions and tens of millions of working
people".[1] For comrades engaged in literary and
artistic work in the anti-Japanese base areas it might seem that this problem
is already solved and needs no further discussion. Actually, that is not
the case. Many comrades have not found a clear solution. Consequently their
sentiments, their works, their actions and their views on the guiding principles
for literature and art have inevitably been more or less at variance with
the needs of the masses and of the practical struggle. Of course, among the
numerous men of culture, writers, artists and other literary and artistic
workers engaged in the great struggle for liberation together with the Communist
Party and the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies, a few may be careerists
who are with us only temporarily, but the overwhelming majority are working
energetically for the common cause. By relying on these comrades, we have
achieved a great deal in our literature, drama, music and fine arts. Many
of these writers and artists have begun their work since the outbreak of
the War of Resistance; many others did much revolutionary work before the
war, endured many hardships and influenced broad masses of the people by
their activities and works. Why do we say, then, that even among these comrades
there are some who have not reached a clear solution of the problem of whom
literature and art are for? Is it conceivable that there are still some who
maintain that revolutionary literature and art are not for the masses of
the people but for the exploiters and oppressors?

Indeed literature and art exist which are for the exploiters and oppressors.
Literature and art for the landlord class are feudal literature and art.
Such were the literature and art of the ruling class in China's feudal era.
To this day such literature and art still have considerable influence in
China. Literature and art for the bourgeoisie are bourgeois literature and
art. People like Liang Shih-chiu, [2] whom Lu Hsun
criticized, talk about literature and art as transcending classes, but in
fact they uphold bourgeois literature and art and oppose proletarian literature
and art. Then literature and art exist which serve the imperialists--for
example, the works of Chou Tsojen, Chang Tzu-ping
[3] and their like--which we call traitor literature
and art. With us, literature and art are for the people, not for any of the
above groups. We have said that China's new culture at the present stage
is an anti-imperialist, anti-feudal culture of the masses of the people under
the leadership of the proletariat. Today, anything that is truly of the masses
must necessarily be led by the proletariat. Whatever is under the leadership
of the bourgeoisie cannot possibly be of the masses. Naturally, the same
applies to the new literature and art which are part of the new culture.
We should take over the rich legacy and the good traditions in literature
and art that have been handed down from past ages in China and foreign countries,
but the aim must still be to serve the masses of the people. Nor do we refuse
to utilize the literary and artistic forms of the past, but in our hands
these old forms, remoulded and infused with new content, also become something
revolutionary in the service of the people.

Who, then, are the masses of the people? The broadest sections of the people,
constituting more than 90 per cent of our total population, are the workers,
peasants, soldiers and urban petty bourgeoisie. Therefore, our literature
and art are first for the workers, the class that leads the revolution. Secondly,
they are for the peasants, the most numerous and most steadfast of our allies
in the revolution. Thirdly, they are for the armed workers and peasants,
namely, the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies and the other armed units
of the people, which are the main forces of the revolutionary war. Fourthly,
they are for the labouring masses of the urban petty bourgeoisie and for
the petty-bourgeois intellectuals, both of whom are also our allies in the
revolution and capable of long-term co-operation with us. These four kinds
of people constitute the overwhelming majority of the Chinese nation, the
broadest masses of the people.

Our literature and art should be for the four kinds of people we have enumerated.
To serve them, we must take the class stand of the proletariat and not that
of the petty bourgeoisie. Today, writers who cling to an individualist,
petty-bourgeois stand cannot truly serve the masses of revolutionary workers,
peasants and soldiers. Their interest is mainly focused on the small number
of petty-bourgeois intellectuals. This is the crucial reason why some of
our comrades cannot correctly solve the problem of "for whom?" In saying
this I am not referring to theory. In theory, or in words, no one in our
ranks regards the masses of workers, peasants and soldiers as less important
than the petty-bourgeois intellectuals. I am referring to practice, to action.
In practice, in action, do they regard petty-bourgeois intellectuals as more
important than workers, peasants and soldiers? I think they do. Many comrades
concern themselves with studying the petty-bourgeois intellectuals and analysing
their psychology, and they concentrate on portraying these intellectuals
and excusing or defending their shortcomings, instead of guiding the
intellectuals to join with them in getting closer to the masses of workers,
peasants and soldiers, taking part in the practical struggles of the masses,
portraying and educating the masses. Coming from the petty bourgeoisie and
being themselves intellectuals, many comrades seek friends only among
intellectuals and concentrate on studying and describing them. Such study
and description are proper if done from a proletarian position. But that
is not what they do, or not what they do fully. They take the petty-bourgeois
stand and produce works that are the self-expression of the petty bourgeoisie,
as can be seen in quite a number of literary and artistic products. Often
they show heartfelt sympathy for intellectuals of petty-bourgeois origin,
to the extent of sympathizing with or even praising their shortcomings. On
the other hand, these comrades seldom come into contact with the masses of
workers, peasants and soldiers, do not understand or study them, do not have
intimate friends among them and are not good at portraying them; when they
do depict them, the clothes are the clothes of working people but the faces
are those of petty-bourgeois intellectuals. In certain respects they are
fond of the workers, peasants and soldiers and the cadres stemming from them;
but there are times when they do not like them and there are some respects
in which they do not like them: they do not like their feelings or their
manner or their nascent literature and art (the wall newspapers, murals,
folk songs, folk tales, etc.). At times they are fond of these things too,
but that is when they are hunting for novelty, for something with which to
embellish their own works, or even for certain backward features. At other
times they openly despise these things and are partial to what belongs to
the petty-bourgeois intellectuals or even to the bourgeoisie. These comrades
have their feet planted on the side of the petty-bourgeois intellectuals;
or, to put it more elegantly, their innermost soul is still a kingdom of
the petty-bourgeois intelligentsia. Thus they have not yet solved, or not
yet clearly solved, the problem of "for whom?" This applies not only to newcomers
to Yenan; even among comrades who have been to the front and worked for a
number of years in our base areas and in the Eighth Route and New Fourth
Armies, many have not completely solved this problem. It requires a long
period of time, at least eight or ten years, to solve it thoroughly. But
however long it takes, solve it we must and solve it unequivocally and
thoroughly. Our literary and art workers must accomplish this task and shift
their stand; they must gradually move their feet over to the side of the
workers, peasants and soldiers, to the side of the proletariat, through the
process of going into their very midst and into the thick of practical struggles
and through the process of studying Marxism and society. Only in this way
can we have a literature and art that are truly for the workers, peasants
and soldiers, a truly proletarian literature and art.

This question of "for whom?" is fundamental; it is a question of principle.
The controversies and divergences, the opposition and disunity arising among
some comrades in the past were not on this fundamental question of principle
but on secondary questions, or even on issues involving no principle. On
this question of principle, however, there has been hardly any divergence
between the two contending sides and they have shown almost complete agreement;
to some extent, both tend to look down upon the workers, peasants and soldiers
and divorce themselves from the masses. I say "to some extent" because, generally
speaking, these comrades do not look down upon the workers, peasants and
soldiers or divorce themselves from the masses in the same way as the Kuomintang
does. Nevertheless, the tendency is there. Unless this fundamental problem
is solved, many other problems will not be easy to solve. Take, for instance,
the sectarianism in literary and art circles. This too is a question of
principle, but sectarianism can only be eradicated by putting forward and
faithfully applying the slogans, "For the workers and peasants!", "For the
Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies!" and "Go among the masses!" Otherwise
the problem of sectarianism can never be solved. Lu Hsun once said:

  A common aim is the prerequisite for a united front.... The fact that our
  front is not united shows that we have not been able to unify our aims, and
  that some people are working only for small groups or indeed only for themselves.
  If we all aim at serving the masses of workers and peasants, our front will
  of course be united.[4]


The problem existed then in Shanghai; now it exists in Chungking too. In
such places the problem can hardly be solved thoroughly, because the rulers
oppress the revolutionary writers and artists and deny them the freedom to
go out among the masses of workers, peasants and soldiers. Here with us the
situation is entirely different. We encourage revolutionary writers and artists
to be active in forming intimate contacts with the workers, peasants and
soldiers, giving them complete freedom to go among the masses and to create
a genuinely revolutionary literature and art. Therefore, here among us the
problem is nearing solution. But nearing solution is not the same as a complete
and thorough solution. We must study Marxism and study society, as we have
been saying, precisely in order to achieve a complete and thorough solution.
By Marxism we mean living Marxism which plays an effective role in the life
and struggle of the masses, not Marxism in words. With Marxism in words
transformed into Marxism in real life, there will be no more sectarianism.
Not only will the problem of sectarianism be solved, but many other problems
as well.

  II


Having settled the problem of whom to serve, we come to the next problem,
how to serve. To put it in the words of some of our comrades: should we devote
ourselves to raising standards, or should we devote ourselves to popularization?

In the past, some comrades, to a certain or even a serious extent, belittled
and neglected popularization and laid undue stress on raising standards.
Stress should be laid on raising standards, but to do so one-sidedly and
exclusively, to do so excessively, is a mistake. The lack of a clear solution
to the problem of "for whom?", which I referred to earlier, also manifests
itself in this connection. As these comrades are not clear on the problem
of "for whom?", they have no correct criteria for the "raising of standards"
and the "popularization" they speak of, and are naturally still less able
to find the correct relationship between the two. Since our literature and
art are basically for the workers, peasants and soldiers, "popularization"
means to popularize among the workers, peasants and soldiers, and "raising
standards" means to advance from their present level. What should we popularize
among them? Popularize what is needed and can be readily accepted by the
feudal landlord class? Popularize what is needed and can be readily accepted
by the bourgeoisie? Popularize what is needed and can be readily accepted
by the petty-bourgeois intellectuals? No, none of these will do. We must
popularize only what is needed and can be readily accepted by the workers,
peasants and soldiers themselves. Consequently, prior to the task of educating
the workers, peasants and soldiers, there is the task of learning from them.
This is even more true of raising standards. There must be a basis from which
to raise. Take a bucket of water, for instance; where is it to be raised
from if not from the ground? From mid-air? From what basis, then, are literature
and art to be raised? From the basis of the feudal classes? From the basis
of the bourgeoisie? From the basis of the petty-bourgeois intellectuals?
No, not from any of these; only from the basis of the masses of workers,
peasants and soldiers. Nor does this mean raising the workers, peasants and
soldiers to the "heights" of the feudal classes, the bourgeoisie or the
petty-bourgeois intellectuals; it means raising the level of literature and
art in the direction in which the workers, peasants and soldiers are themselves
advancing, in the direction in which the proletariat is advancing. Here again
the task of learning from the workers, peasants and soldiers comes in. Only
by starting from the workers, peasants and soldiers can we have a correct
understanding of popularization and of the raising of standards and find
the proper relationship between the two.

In the last analysis, what is the source of all literature and art? Works
of literature and art, as ideological forms, are products of the reflection
in the human brain of the life of a given society. Revolutionary literature
and art are the products of the reflection of the life of the people in the
brains of revolutionary writers and artists. The life of the people is always
a mine of the raw materials for literature and art, materials in their natural
form, materials that are crude, but most vital, rich and fundamental; they
make all literature and art seem pallid by comparison; they provide literature
and art with an inexhaustible source, their only source. They are the only
source, for there can be no other. Some may ask, is there not another source
in books, in the literature and art of ancient times and of foreign countries?
In fact, the literary and artistic works of the past are not a source but
a stream; they were created by our predecessors and the foreigners out of
the literary and artistic raw materials they found in the life of the people
of their time and place. We must take over all the fine things in our literary
and artistic heritage, critically assimilate whatever is beneficial, and
use them as examples when we create works out of the literary and artistic
raw materials in the life of the people of our own time and place. It makes
a difference whether or not we have such examples, the difference between
crudeness and refinement, between roughness and polish, between a low and
a high level, and between slower and faster work. Therefore, we must on no
account reject the legacies of the ancients and the foreigners or refuse
to learn from them, even though they are the works of the feudal or bourgeois
classes. But taking over legacies and using them as examples must never replace
our own creative work; nothing can do that. Uncritical transplantation or
copying from the ancients and the foreigners is the most sterile and harmful
dogmatism in literature and art. China's revolutionary writers and artists,
writers and artists of promise, must go among the masses; they must for a
long period of time unreservedly and whole-heartedly go among the masses
of workers, peasants and soldiers, go into the heat of the struggle, go to
the only source, the broadest and richest source, in order to observe,
experience, study and analyse all the different kinds of people, all the
classes, all the masses, all the vivid patterns of life and struggle, all
the raw materials of literature and art. Only then can they proceed to creative
work. Otherwise, you will have nothing to work with and you will be nothing
but a phoney writer or artist, the kind that Lu Hsun in his will so earnestly
cautioned his son never to become.[5]

Although man's social life is the only source of literature and art and is
incomparably livelier and richer in content, the people are not satisfied
with life alone and demand literature and art as well. Why? Because, while
both are beautiful, life as reflected in works of literature and art can
and ought to be on a higher plane, more intense, more concentrated, more
typical, nearer the ideal, and therefore more universal than actual everyday
life. Revolutionary literature and art should create a variety of characters
out of real life and help the masses to propel history forward. For example,
there is suffering from hunger, cold and oppression on the one hand, and
exploitation and oppression of man by man on the other. These facts exist
everywhere and people look upon them as commonplace. Writers and artists
concentrate such everyday phenomena, typify the contradictions and struggles
within them and produce works which awaken the masses, fire them with enthusiasm
and impel them to unite and struggle to transform their environment. Without
such literature and art, this task could not be fulfilled, or at least not
so effectively and speedily.

What is meant by popularizing and by raising standards in works of literature
and art? What is the relationship between these two tasks? Popular works
are simpler and plainer, and therefore more readily accepted by the broad
masses of the people today. Works of a higher quality, being more polished,
are more difficult to produce and in general do not circulate so easily and
quickly among the masses at present. The problem facing the workers, peasants
and soldiers is this: they are now engaged in a bitter and bloody struggle
with the enemy but are illiterate and uneducated as a result of long years
of rule by the feudal and bourgeois classes, and therefore they are eagerly
demanding enlightenment, education and works of literature and art which
meet their urgent needs and which are easy to absorb, in order to heighten
their enthusiasm in struggle and confidence in victory, strengthen their
unity and fight the enemy with one heart and one mind. For them the prime
need is not "more flowers on the brocade" but "fuel in snowy weather". In
present conditions, therefore, popularization is the more pressing task.
It is wrong to belittle or neglect popularization.

Nevertheless, no hard and fast line can be drawn between popularization and
the raising of standards. Not only is it possible to popularize some works
of higher quality even now, but the cultural level of the broad masses is
steadily rising. If popularization remains at the same level for ever, with
the same stuff being supplied month after month and year after year, always
the same "Little Cowherd" [6] and the same "man,
hand, mouth, knife, cow, goat", [7] will not the
educators and those being educated be six of one and half a dozen of the
other? What would be the sense of such popularization? The people demand
popularization and, following that, higher standards; they demand higher
standards month by month and year by year. Here popularization means popularizing
for the people and raising of standards means raising the level for the people.
And such raising is not from mid-air, or behind closed doors, but is actually
based on popularization. It is determined by and at the same time guides
popularization. In China as a whole the development of the revolution and
of revolutionary culture is uneven and their spread is gradual. While in
one place there is popularization and then raising of standards on the basis
of popularization, in other places popularization has not even begun. Hence
good experience in popularization leading to higher standards in one locality
can be applied in other localities and serve to guide popularization and
the raising of standards there, saving many twists and turns along the road.
Internationally, the good experience of foreign countries, and especially
Soviet experience, can also serve to guide us. With us, therefore, the raising
of standards is based on popularization, while popularization is guided by
the raising of standards. Precisely for this reason, so far from being an
obstacle to the raising of standards, the work of popularization we are speaking
of supplies the basis for the work of raising standards which we are now
doing on a limited scale, and prepares the necessary conditions for us to
raise standards in the future on a much broader scale.

Besides such raising of standards as meets the needs of the masses directly,
there is the kind which meets their needs indirectly, that is, the kind which
is needed by the cadres. The cadres are the advanced elements of the masses
and generally have received more education; literature and art of a higher
level are entirely necessary for them. To ignore this would be a mistake.
Whatever is done for the cadres is also entirely for the masses, because
it is only through the cadres that we can educate and guide the masses. If
we go against this aim, if what we give the cadres cannot help them educate
and guide the masses, our work of raising standards will be like shooting
at random and will depart from the fundamental principle of serving the masses
of the people.

To sum up: through the creative labour of revolutionary writers and artists,
the raw materials found in the life of the people are shaped into the ideological
form of literature and art serving the masses of the people. Included here
are the more advanced literature and art as developed on the basis of elementary
literature and art and as required by those sections of the masses whose
level has been raised, or, more immediately, by the cadres among the masses.
Also included here are elementary literature and art which, conversely, are
guided by more advanced literature and art and are needed primarily by the
overwhelming majority of the masses at present. Whether more advanced or
elementary, all our literature and art are for the masses of the people,
and in the first place for the workers, peasants and soldiers; they are created
for the workers, peasants and soldiers and are for their use.

Now that we have settled the problem of the relationship between the raising
of standards and popularization, that of the relationship between the specialists
and the popularizers can also be settled. Our specialists are not only for
the cadres, but also, and indeed chiefly, for the masses. Our specialists
in literature should pay attention to the wall newspapers of the masses and
to the reportage written in the army and the villages. Our specialists in
drama should pay attention to the small troupes in the army and the villages.
Our specialists in music should pay attention to the songs of the masses.
Our specialists in the fine arts should pay attention to the fine arts of
the masses. All these comrades should make close contact with comrades engaged
in the work of popularizing literature and art among the masses. On the one
hand, they should help and guide the popularizers, and on the other, they
should learn from these comrades and, through them, draw nourishment from
the masses to replenish and enrich themselves so that their specialities
do not become "ivory towers", detached from the masses and from reality and
devoid of content or life. We should esteem the specialists, for they are
very valuable to our cause. But we should tell them that no revolutionary
writer or artist can do any meaningful work unless he is closely linked with
the masses, gives expression to their thoughts and feelings and serves them
as a loyal spokesman. Only by speaking for the masses can he educate them
and only by being their pupil can he be their teacher. If he regards himself
as their master, as an aristocrat who lords it over the "lower orders", then,
no matter how talented he may be, he will not be needed by the masses and
his work will have no future.

Is this attitude of ours utilitarian? Materialists do not oppose utilitarianism
in general but the utilitarianism of the feudal, bourgeois and petty-bourgeois
classes; they oppose those hypocrites who attack utilitarianism in words
but in deeds embrace the most selfish and short-sighted utilitarianism. There
is no "ism" in the world that transcends utilitarian considerations; in class
society there can be only the utilitarianism of this or that class. We are
proletarian revolutionary utilitarians and take as our point of departure
the unity of the present and future interests of the broadest masses, who
constitute over 90 per cent of the population; hence we are revolutionary
utilitarians aiming for the broadest and the most long-range objectives,
not narrow utilitarians concerned only with the partial and the immediate.
If, for instance, you reproach the masses for their utilitarianism and yet
for your own utility, or that of a narrow clique, force on the market and
propagandize among the masses a work which pleases only the few but is useless
or even harmful to the majority, then you are not only insulting the masses
but also revealing your own lack of self-knowledge. A thing is good only
when it brings real benefit to the masses of the people. Your work may be
as good as "The Spring Snow", but if for the time being it caters only to
the few and the masses are still singing the "Song of the Rustic Poor",
[8] you will get nowhere by simply scolding them
instead of trying to raise their level. The question now is to bring about
a unity between "The Spring Snow" and the "Song of the Rustic Poor", between
higher standards and popularization. Without such a unity, the highest art
of any expert cannot help being utilitarian in the narrowest sense; you may
call this art "pure and lofty" but that is merely your own name for it which
the masses will not endorse.

Once we have solved the problems of fundamental policy, of serving the workers,
peasants and soldiers and of how to serve them, such other problems as whether
to write about the bright or the dark side of life and the problem of unity
will also be solved. If everyone agrees on the fundamental policy, it should
be adhered to by all our workers, all our schools, publications and organizations
in the field of literature and art and in all our literary and artistic
activities. It is wrong to depart from this policy and anything at variance
with it must be duly corrected.

  III


Since our literature and art are for the masses of the people, we can proceed
to discuss a problem of inner-Party relations, i.e., the relation
between the Party's work in literature and art and the Party's work as a
whole, and in addition a problem of the Party's external relations, i.e.,
the relation between the Party's work in literature and art and the
work of non-Party people in this field, a problem of the united front in
literary and art circles.

Let us consider the first problem. In the world today all culture, all literature
and art belong to definite classes and are geared to definite political lines.
There is in fact no such thing as art for art's sake, art that stands above
classes or art that is detached from or independent of politics. Proletarian
literature and art are part of the whole proletarian revolutionary cause;
they are, as Lenin said, cogs and wheels [9] in
the whole revolutionary machine. Therefore, Party work in literature and
art occupies a definite and assigned position in Party revolutionary work
as a whole and is subordinated to the revolutionary tasks set by the Party
in a given revolutionary period. Opposition to this arrangement is certain
to lead to dualism or pluralism, and in essence amounts to "politics--Marxist,
art--bourgeois", as with Trotsky. We do not favour overstressing the importance
of literature and art, but neither do we favour underestimating their importance.
Literature and art are subordinate to politics, but in their turn exert a
great influence on politics. Revolutionary literature and art are part of
the whole revolutionary cause, they are cogs and wheels in it, and though
in comparison with certain other and more important parts they may be less
significant and less urgent and may occupy a secondary position, nevertheless,
they are indispensable cogs and wheels in the whole machine, an indispensable
part of the entire revolutionary cause. If we had no literature and art even
in the broadest and most ordinary sense, we could not carry on the revolutionary
movement and win victory. Failure to recognize this is wrong. Furthermore,
when we say that literature and art are subordinate to politics, we mean
class politics, the politics of the masses, not the politics of a few so-called
statesmen. Politics, whether revolutionary or counter-revolutionary, is the
struggle of class against class, not the activity of a few individuals. The
revolutionary struggle on the ideological and artistic fronts must be subordinate
to the political struggle because only through politics can the needs of
the class and the masses find expression in concentrated form. Revolutionary
statesmen, the political specialists who know the science or art of revolutionary
politics, are simply the leaders of millions upon millions of statesmen--the
masses. Their task is to collect the opinions of these mass statesmen, sift
and refine them, and return them to the masses, who then take them and put
them into practice. They are therefore not the kind of aristocratic "statesmen"
who work behind closed doors and fancy they have a monopoly of wisdom. Herein
lies the difference in principle between proletarian statesmen and decadent
bourgeois statesmen. This is precisely why there can be complete unity between
the political character of our literary and artistic works and their
truthfulness. It would be wrong to fail to realize this and to debase the
politics and the statesmen of the proletariat.

Let us consider next the question of the united front in the world of literature
and art. Since literature and art are subordinate to politics and since the
fundamental problem in China's politics today is resistance to Japan, our
Party writers and artists must in the first place unite on this issue of
resistance to Japan with all non-Party writers and artists (ranging from
Party sympathizers and petty-bourgeois writers and artists to all those writers
and artists of the bourgeois and landlord classes who are in favour of resistance
to Japan). Secondly, we should unite with them on the issue of democracy.
On this issue there is a section of anti-Japanese writers and artists who
do not agree with us, so the range of unity will unavoidably be somewhat
more limited. Thirdly, we should unite with them on issues peculiar to the
literary and artistic world, questions of method and style in literature
and art; here again, as we are for socialist realism and some people do not
agree, the range of unity will be narrower still. While on one issue there
is unity, on another there is struggle, there is criticism. The issues are
at once separate and interrelated, so that even on the very ones which give
rise to unity, such as resistance to Japan, there are at the same time struggle
and criticism. In a united front, "all unity and no struggle" and "all struggle
and no unity" are both wrong policies--as with the Right capitulationism
and tailism, or the "Left" exclusivism and sectarianism, practiced by some
comrades in the past. This is as true in literature and art as in politics.

The petty-bourgeois writers and artists constitute an important force among
the forces of the united front in literary and art circles in China. There
are many shortcomings in both their thinking and their works, but, comparatively
speaking, they are inclined towards the revolution and are close to the working
people. Therefore, it is an especially important task to help them overcome
their shortcomings and to win them over to the front which serves the working
people.

  IV


Literary and art criticism is one of the principal methods of struggle in
the world of literature and art. It should be developed and, as comrades
have rightly pointed out, our past work in this respect has been quite
inadequate. Literary and art criticism is a complex question which requires
a great deal of special study. Here I shall concentrate only on the basic
problem of criteria in criticism. I shall also comment briefly on a few specific
problems raised by some comrades and on certain incorrect views.

In literary and art criticism there are two criteria, the political and the
artistic. According to the political criterion, everything is good that is
helpful to unity and resistance to Japan, that encourages the masses to be
of one heart and one mind, that opposes retrogression and promotes progress;
on the other hand, everything is bad that is detrimental to unity and resistance
to Japan, foments dissension and discord among the masses and opposes progress
and drags people back. How can we tell the good from the bad--by the motive
(the subjective intention) or by the effect (social practice)? Idealists
stress motive and ignore effect, while mechanical materialists stress effect
and ignore motive. In contradistinction to both, we dialectical materialists
insist on the unity of motive and effect. The motive of serving the masses
is inseparably linked with the effect of winning their approval; the two
must be united. The motive of serving the individual or a small clique is
not good, nor is it good to have the motive of serving the masses without
the effect of winning their approval and benefiting them. In examining the
subjective intention of a writer or artist, that is, whether his motive is
correct and good, we do not judge by his declarations but by the effect of
his actions (mainly his works) on the masses in society. The criterion for
judging subjective intention or motive is social practice and its effect.
We want no sectarianism in our literary and art criticism and, subject to
the general principle of unity for resistance to Japan, we should tolerate
literary and art works with a variety of political attitudes. But at the
same time, in our criticism we must adhere firmly to principle and severely
criticize and repudiate all works of literature and art expressing views
in opposition to the nation, to science, to the masses and to the Communist
Party, because these so-called works of literature and art proceed from the
motive and produce the effect of undermining unity for resistance to Japan.
According to the artistic criterion, all works of a higher artistic quality
are good or comparatively good, while those of a lower artistic quality are
bad or comparatively bad. Here, too, of course, social effect must be taken
into account. There is hardly a writer or artist who does not consider his
own work beautiful, and our criticism ought to permit the free competition
of all varieties of works of art; but it is also entirely necessary to subject
these works to correct criticism according to the criteria of the science
of aesthetics, so that art of a lower level can be gradually raised to a
higher and art which does not meet the demands of the struggle of the broad
masses can be transformed into art that does.

There is the political criterion and there is the artistic criterion; what
is the relationship between the two? Politics cannot be equated with art,
nor can a general world outlook be equated with a method of artistic creation
and criticism. We deny not only that there is an abstract and absolutely
unchangeable political criterion, but also that there is an abstract and
absolutely unchangeable artistic criterion; each class in every class society
has its own political and artistic criteria. But all classes in all class
societies invariably put the political criterion first and the artistic criterion
second. The bourgeoisie always shuts out proletarian literature and art,
however great their artistic merit. The proletariat must similarly distinguish
among the literary and art works of past ages and determine its attitude
towards them only after examining their attitude to the people and whether
or not they had any progressive significance historically. Some works which
politically are downright reactionary may have a certain artistic quality.
The more reactionary their content and the higher their artistic quality,
the more poisonous they are to the people, and the more necessary it is to
reject them. A common characteristic of the literature and art of all exploiting
classes in their period of decline is the contradiction between their reactionary
political content and their artistic form. What we demand is the unity of
politics and art, the unity of content and form, the unity of revolutionary
political content and the highest possible perfection of artistic form. Works
of art which lack artistic quality have no force, however progressive they
are politically. Therefore, we oppose both the tendency to produce works
of art with a wrong political viewpoint and the tendency towards the "poster
and slogan style" which is correct in political viewpoint but lacking in
artistic power. On questions of literature and art we must carry on a struggle
on two fronts.

Both these tendencies can be found in the thinking of many comrades. A good
number of comrades tend to neglect artistic technique; it is therefore necessary
to give attention to the raising of artistic standards. But as I see it,
the political side is more of a problem at present. Some comrades lack elementary
political knowledge and consequently have all sorts of muddled ideas. Let
me cite a few examples from Yenan.

"The theory of human nature." Is there such a thing as human nature? Of course
there is. But there is only human nature in the concrete, no human nature
in the abstract. In class society there is only human nature of a class
character; there is no human nature above classes. We uphold the human nature
of the proletariat and of the masses of the people, while the landlord and
bourgeois classes uphold the human nature of their own classes, only they
do not say so but make it out to be the only human nature in existence. The
human nature boosted by certain petty-bourgeois intellectuals is also divorced
from or opposed to the masses; what they call human nature is in essence
nothing but bourgeois individualism, and so, in their eyes, proletarian human
nature is contrary to human nature. "The theory of human nature" which some
people in Yenan advocate as the basis of their so-called theory of literature
and art puts the matter in just this way and is wholly wrong.

"The fundamental point of departure for literature and art is love, love
of humanity." Now love may serve as a point of departure, but there is a
more basic one. Love as an idea is a product of objective practice.
Fundamentally, we do not start from ideas but from objective practice. Our
writers and artists who come from the ranks of the intellectuals love the
proletariat because society has made them feel that they and the proletariat
share a common fate. We hate Japanese imperialism because Japanese imperialism
oppresses us. There is absolutely no such thing in the world as love or hatred
with out reason or cause. As for the so-called love of humanity, there has
been no such all-inclusive love since humanity was divided into classes.
All the ruling classes of the past were fond of advocating it, and so were
many so-called sages and wise men, but nobody has ever really practiced it,
because it is impossible in class society. There will be genuine love of
humanity--after classes are eliminated all over the world. Classes have split
society into many antagonistic groupings; there will be love of all humanity
when classes are eliminated, but not now. We cannot love enemies, we cannot
love social evils, our aim is to destroy them. This is common sense; can
it be that some of our writers and artists still do not understand this?

"Literary and artistic works have always laid equal stress on the bright
and the dark, half and half." This statement contains many muddled ideas.
It is not true that literature and art have always done this. Many
petty-bourgeois writers have never discovered the bright side. Their works
only expose the dark and are known as the "literature of exposure". Some
of their works simply specialize in preaching pessimism and world-weariness.
On the other hand, Soviet literature in the period of socialist construction
portrays mainly the bright. It, too, describes shortcomings in work and portrays
negative characters, but this only serves as a contrast to bring out the
brightness of the whole picture and is not on a so-called half-and-half basis.
The writers and artists of the bourgeoisie in its period of reaction depict
the revolutionary masses as mobs and themselves as saints, thus reversing
the bright and the dark. Only truly revolutionary writers and artists can
correctly solve the problem of whether to extol or to expose. All the dark
forces harming the masses of the people must be exposed and all the revolutionary
struggles of the masses of the people must be extolled; this is the fundamental
task of revolutionary writers and artists.

"The task of literature and art has always been to expose." This assertion,
like the previous one, arises from ignorance of the science of history.
Literature and art, as we have shown, have never been devoted solely to exposure.
For revolutionary writers and artists the targets for exposure can never
be the masses, but only the aggressors, exploiters and oppressors and the
evil influence they have on the people. The masses too have shortcomings,
which should be overcome by criticism and self-criticism within the people's
own ranks, and such criticism and self-criticism is also one of the most
important tasks of literature and art. But this should not be regarded as
any sort of "exposure of the people". As for the people, the question is
basically one of education and of raising their level. Only counter-revolutionary
writers and artists describe the people as "born fools" and the revolutionary
masses as "tyrannical mobs".

"This is still the period of the satirical essay, and Lu Hsun's style of
writing is still needed." Living under the rule of the dark forces and deprived
of freedom of speech, Lu Hsun used burning satire and freezing irony, cast
in the form of essays, to do battle; and he was entirely right. We, too,
must hold up to sharp ridicule the fascists, the Chinese reactionaries and
everything that harms the people; but in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border
Region and the anti-Japanese base areas behind the enemy lines, where democracy
and freedom are granted in full to the revolutionary writers and artists
and withheld only from the counter-revolutionaries, the style of the essay
should not simply be like Lu Hsun's. Here we can shout at the top of our
voices and have no need for veiled and roundabout expressions, which are
hard for the people to understand. When dealing with the people and not with
their enemies, Lu Hsun never ridiculed or attacked the revolutionary people
and the revolutionary Party in his "satirical essay period", and these essays
were entirely different in manner from those directed against the enemy.
To criticize the people's shortcomings is necessary, as we have already said,
but in doing so we must truly take the stand of the people and speak out
of whole-hearted eagerness to protect and educate them. To treat comrades
like enemies is to go over to the stand of the enemy. Are we then to abolish
satire? No. Satire is always necessary. But there are several kinds of satire,
each with a different attitude, satire to deal with our enemies, satire to
deal with our allies and satire to deal with our own ranks. We are not opposed
to satire in general; what we must abolish is the abuse of satire.

"I am not given to praise and eulogy. The works of people who eulogize what
is bright are not necessarily great and the works of those who depict the
dark are not necessarily paltry." If you are a bourgeois writer or artist,
you will eulogize not the proletariat but the bourgeoisie, and if you are
a proletarian writer or artist, you will eulogize not the bourgeoisie but
the proletariat and working people: it must be one or the other. The works
of the eulogists of the bourgeoisie are not necessarily great, nor are the
works of those who show that the bourgeoisie is dark necessarily paltry;
the works of the eulogists of the proletariat are not necessarily not great,
but the works of those who depict the so-called "darkness" of the proletariat
are bound to be paltry--are these not facts of history as regards literature
and art? Why should we not eulogize the people, the creators of the history
of mankind? Why should we not eulogize the proletariat, the Communist Party,
New Democracy and socialism? There is a type of person who has no enthusiasm
for the people's cause and looks coldly from the side-lines at the struggles
and victories of the proletariat and its vanguard; what he is interested
in, and will never weary of eulogizing, is himself, plus perhaps a few figures
in his small coterie. Of course, such petty-bourgeois individualists are
unwilling to eulogize the deeds and virtues of the revolutionary people or
heighten their courage in struggle and their confidence in victory. Persons
of this type are merely termites in the revolutionary ranks; of course, the
revolutionary people have no need for these "singers".

"It is not a question of stand; my class stand is correct, my intentions
are good and I understand all right, but I am not good at expressing myself
and so the effect turns out bad." I have already spoken about the dialectical
materialist view of motive and effect. Now I want to ask, is not the question
of effect one of stand? A person who acts solely by motive and does not inquire
what effect his action will have is like a doctor who merely writes prescriptions
but does not care how many patients die of them. Or take a political party
which merely makes declarations but does not care whether they are carried
out. It may well be asked, is this a correct stand? And is the intention
here good? Of course, mistakes may occur even though the effect has been
taken into account beforehand, but is the intention good when one continues
in the same old rut after facts have proved that the effect is bad? In judging
a party or a doctor, we must look at practice, at the effect. The same applies
in judging a writer. A person with truly good intentions must take the effect
into account, sum up experience and study the methods or, in creative work,
study the technique of expression. A person with truly good intentions must
criticize the shortcomings and mistakes in his own work with the utmost candour
and resolve to correct them. This is precisely why Communists employ the
method of self-criticism. This alone is the correct stand. Only in this process
of serious and responsible practice is it possible gradually to understand
what the correct stand is and gradually obtain a good grasp of it. If one
does not move in this direction in practice, if there is simply the complacent
assertion that one "understands all right", then in fact one has not understood
at all.

"To call on us to study Marxism is to repeat the mistake of the dialectical
materialist creative method, which will harm the creative mood." To study
Marxism means to apply the dialectical materialist and historical materialist
viewpoint in our observation of the world, of society and of literature and
art; it does not mean writing philosophical lectures into our works of literature
and art. Marxism embraces but cannot replace realism in literary and artistic
creation, just as it embraces but cannot replace the atomic and electronic
theories in physics. Empty, dry dogmatic formulas do indeed destroy the creative
mood; not only that, they first destroy Marxism. Dogmatic "Marxism" is not
Marxism, it is anti-Marxism. Then does not Marxism destroy the creative mood?
Yes, it does. It definitely destroys creative moods that are feudal, bourgeois,
petty-bourgeois, liberalistic, individualist, nihilist, art-for-art's sake,
aristocratic, decadent or pessimistic, and every other creative mood that
is alien to the masses of the people and to the proletariat. So far as
proletarian writers and artists are concerned, should not these kinds of
creative moods be destroyed? I think they should; they should be utterly
destroyed. And while they are being destroyed, something new can be constructed.

  
  V


The problems discussed here exist in our literary and art circles in Yenan.
What does that show? It shows that wrong styles of work still exist to a
serious extent in our literary and art circles and that there are still many
defects among our comrades, such as idealism, dogmatism, empty illusions,
empty talk, contempt for practice and aloofness from the masses, all of which
call for an effective and serious campaign of rectification.

We have many comrades who are still not very clear on the difference between
the proletariat and the petty bourgeoisie. There are many Party members who
have joined the Communist Party organizationally but have not yet joined
the Party wholly or at all ideologically. Those who have not joined the Party
ideologically still carry a great deal of the muck of the exploiting classes
in their heads, and have no idea at all of what proletarian ideology, or
communism, or the Party is. "Proletarian ideology?" they think. "The same
old stuff!" Little do they know that it is no easy matter to acquire this
stuff. Some will never have the slightest Communist flavour about them as
long as they live and can only end up by leaving the Party.

Therefore, though the majority in our Party and in our ranks are clean and
honest, we must in all seriousness put things in order both ideologically
and organizationally if we are to develop the revolutionary movement more
effectively and bring it to speedier success. To put things in order
organizationally requires our first doing so ideologically, our launching
a struggle of proletarian ideology against non-proletarian ideology. An
ideological struggle is already under way in literary and art circles in
Yenan, and it is most necessary. Intellectuals of petty-bourgeois origin
always stubbornly try in all sorts of ways, including literary and artistic
ways, to project themselves and spread their views, and they want the Party
and the world to be remoulded in their own image. In the circumstances it
is our duty to jolt these "comrades" and tell them sharply, "That won't work!
The proletariat cannot accommodate itself to you; to yield to you would actually
be to yield to the big landlord class and the big bourgeoisie and to run
the risk of undermining our Party and our country." Whom then must we yield
to? We can mould the Party and the world only in the image of the proletarian
vanguard. We hope our comrades in literary and art circles will realize the
seriousness of this great debate and join actively in this struggle, so that
every comrade may become sound and our entire ranks may become truly united
and consolidated ideologically and organizationally.

Because of confusion in their thinking, many of our comrades are not quite
able to draw a real distinction between our revolutionary base areas and
the Kuomintang areas and they make many mistakes as a consequence. A good
number of comrades have come here from the garrets of Shanghai, and in coming
from those garrets to the revolutionary base areas, they have passed not
only from one kind of place to another but from one historical epoch to another.
One society is semi-feudal, semi-colonial, under the rule of the big landlords
and big bourgeoisie, the other is a revolutionary new-democratic society
under the leadership of the proletariat. To come to the revolutionary bases
means to enter an epoch unprecedented in the thousands of years of Chinese
history, an epoch in which the masses of the people wield state power. Here
the people around us and the audience for our propaganda are totally different.
The past epoch is gone, never to return. Therefore, we must integrate ourselves
with the new masses without any hesitation. If, living among the new masses,
some comrades, as I said before, are still "lacking in knowledge and
understanding" and remain "heroes with no place to display their prowess",
then difficulties will arise for them, and not only when they go out to the
villages; right here in Yenan difficulties will arise for them. Some comrades
may think, "Well, I had better continue writing for the readers in the Great
Rear Area; [10] it is a job I know well and has
'national significance'." This idea is entirely wrong. The Great Rear Area
is also changing. Readers there expect authors in the revolutionary base
areas to tell about the new people and the new world and not to bore them
with the same old tales. Therefore, the more a work is written for the masses
in the revolutionary base areas, the more national significance will it have.
Fadeyev in The Debacle [11] only told
the story of a small guerrilla unit and had no intention of pandering to
the palate of readers in the old world; yet the book has exerted world-wide
influence. At any rate in China its influence is very great, as you know.
China is moving forward, not back, and it is the revolutionary base areas,
not any of the backward, retrogressive areas, that are leading China forward.
This is a fundamental issue that, above all, comrades must come to understand
in the rectification movement.

Since integration into the new epoch of the masses is essential, it is necessary
thoroughly to solve the problem of the relationship between the individual
and the masses. This couplet from a poem by Lu Hsun should be our motto:

Fierce-browed, I coolly defy a thousand pointing fingers, 

Head-bowed, like a willing ox I serve the children.
[12]

The "thousand pointing fingers" are our enemies, and we will never yield
to them, no matter how ferocious. The "children" here symbolize the proletariat
and the masses. All Communists, all revolutionaries, all revolutionary literary
and art workers should learn from the example of Lu Hsun and be "oxen" for
the proletariat and the masses, bending their backs to the task until their
dying day. Intellectuals who want to integrate themselves with the masses,
who want to serve the masses, must go through a process in which they and
the masses come to know each other well. This process may, and certainly
will, involve much pain and friction, but if you have the determination,
you will be able to fulfil these requirements.

Today I have discussed only some of the problems of fundamental orientation
for our literature and art movement; many specific problems remain which
will require further study. I am confident that comrades here are determined
to move in the direction indicated.

I believe that in the course of the rectification movement and in the long
period of study and work to come, you will surely be able to bring about
a transformation in yourselves and in your works, to create many fine works
which will be warmly welcomed by the masses of the people, and to advance
the literature and art movement in the revolutionary base areas and throughout
China to a glorious new stage. 


NOTES 


1. See V. I. Lenin, "Party Organisation and Party Literature",
in which he described the characteristics of proletarian literature as follows:

  It will be a free literature, because the idea of socialism and sympathy
  with the working people, and not greed or careerism, will bring ever new
  forces to its ranks. It will be a free literature, because it will serve,
  not some satiated heroine, not the bored "upper ten thousand" suffering from
  fatty degeneration, but the millions and tens of millions of working people--the
  flower of the country, its strength and its future. It will be a free literature,
  enriching the last word in the revolutionary thought of mankind with the
  experience and living work of the socialist proletariat, bringing about permanent
  interaction between the experience of the past (scientific socialism, the
  completion of the development of socialism from its primitive, utopian forms)
  and the experience of the present (the present struggle of the worker comrades).
  (Collected Works, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1962, Vol. X, pp. 48-49.)


2. Liang Shih-chiu, a member of the counter-revolutionary
National Socialist Party, for a long time propagated reactionary American
bourgeois ideas on literature and art. He stubbornly opposed the revolution
and reviled revolutionary literature and art.

3. Chou Tso-jen and Chang Tzu-ping capitulated to the Japanese
aggressors after the Japanese occupied Peking and Shanghai in 1937.

4. Lu Hsun, "My View on the League of Left-Wing Writers"
in the collection Two Hearts, Complete Works, Chin. ed., Vol. IV.

5. See Lu Hsun's essay, "Death", in the "Addenda", The
Last Collection of Essays Written in a Garret in the Quasi-Concession, Complete
Works. Chin. ed., Vol. VI.

6. The "Little Cowherd" is a popular Chinese folk operetta
with only two people acting in it, a cowherd and a village girl, who sing
a question and answer duet. In the early days of the War of Resistance Against
Japan, this form was used, with new words, for anti-Japanese propaganda and
for a time found great favour with the public.

7. The Chinese characters for these six words are written
simply, with only a few strokes, and were usually included in the first lessons
in old primers.

8. "The Spring Snow" and the "Song of the Rustic Poor"
were songs of the Kingdom of Chu in the 3rd century B.C. The music of the
first was on a higher level than that of the second. As the story is told
in "Sung Yu's Reply to the King of Chu" in Prince Chao Ming's Anthology
of Prose and Poetry, when someone sang "The Spring Snow" in the Chu
capital, only a few dozen people joined in, but when the "Song of the Rustic
Poor" was sung, thousands did so.

9. See V. I. Lenin, "Party Organisation and Party Literature":
"Literature must become part of the common cause of the proletariat,
'a cog and a screw' of one single great Social-Democratic mechanism set in
motion by the entire politically conscious vanguard of the entire working
class." (Collected Works, Eng. ea., FLPH, Moscow, I962, Vol. X,
p. 45.)

10. The Great Rear Area was the name given during the
War of Resistance to the vast areas under Kuomintang control in southwestern
and northwestern China which were not occupied by the Japanese invaders,
as distinguished from the "small rear area", the anti-Japanese base areas
behind the enemy lines under the leadership of the Communist Party.

11. The Debacle by the famous Soviet writer Alexander
Fadeyev was published in 1927 and translated into Chinese by Lu Hsun. The
novel describes the struggle of a partisan detachment of workers, peasants
and revolutionary intellectuals in Siberia against the counter-revolutionary
brigands during the Soviet civil war.

12. This couplet is from Lu Hsun's "In Mockery of Myself"
in The Collection Outside the Collection, Complete Works,Chin. ed.,
Vol. VII.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## A Most Important Policy







A MOST IMPORTANT POLICY 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  A MOST IMPORTANT POLICY

September 7, 1942

[This editorial was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Liberation
Daily, Yenan.] 
  

Ever since the Central Committee of the Party put forward the policy of "better
troops and simpler administration", [1] the Party
organizations in many anti-Japanese base areas have been applying it, or
making plans to apply it, in accordance with the directives of the Central
Committee. The leading comrades of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan border
area have really taken this work in hand, setting an example of "better troops
and simpler administration". In some base areas, however, the comrades have
not tried to do so very seriously because of their incomplete comprehension
of this policy. They still fail to understand how it is related to the current
situation and to other Party policies, or fail to regard it as most important.
This matter has been discussed several times before in the Liberation
Daily and we now wish to explain it further.

All the Party's policies aim at the defeat of the Japanese invaders. From
the fifth year onward, the War of Resistance has in fact entered the final
stage of the struggle for victory. In this stage the situation is different
from that in the first and second years of the war, and also from that in
the third and fourth. A feature of the fifth and sixth years of the war is
that while victory is drawing near, there are very great difficulties ahead;
in other words, we are in the "darkness before the dawn". This situation
prevails at the present stage in all the anti-fascist countries, and in the
whole of China as well; it is not confined to the base areas of the Eighth
Route Army and the New Fourth Army, although it is particularly acute here.
We are striving to defeat the Japanese invaders in two years. They will be
years of extreme difficulty, differing greatly from the first and second
two years of the war. This particular point must be anticipated by the leading
personnel in the revolutionary party and revolutionary army. Should they
fail to do so, they will simply drift with events and, no matter how hard
they try, they will not be able to attain victory and may even jeopardize
the cause of the revolution. Although the situation in the anti-Japanese
base areas in the enemy rear is already several times as difficult as before,
the difficulty is not yet extreme. If we do not have a correct policy now,
then extreme difficulty will overtake us. People in general are liable to
judge by past and present conditions and to be misled into thinking that
the future will be much the same. They are unable to anticipate that the
ship may encounter submerged rocks or to steer clear of these rocks with
cool heads. What are the submerged rocks in the path of the ship of the War
of Resistance? They are the extremely grave material difficulties of the
final stage of the war. The Central Committee of the Party has pointed them
out and called on us to be on the alert and steer clear of them. Many of
our comrades already understand the point but some do not, and that is the
first obstacle we must overcome. There is the need for unity in the War of
Resistance, and unity involves difficulties. These difficulties are political;
they have occurred in the past and may occur again in the future. For five
years, our Party has been overcoming them gradually and with the utmost effort;
our slogan is to strengthen unity, and we must keep on doing so. But there
are difficulties of another kind, the material ones. They will grow more
and more acute. Today some comrades are still taking it easy and are not
alive to the situation, and we must therefore alert them. All comrades in
all the anti-Japanese base areas must recognize that from now on the material
difficulties are bound to grow graver, that we must overcome them and that
one important way of doing so is "better troops and simpler administration".

Why is the policy of better troops and simpler administration important for
overcoming the material difficulties? It is clear that the present, and still
more the future, war situation in the base areas will not permit us to cling
to our past views. Our enormous war apparatus is suited to past conditions.
It was then permissible and necessary. But things are different now, the
base areas have shrunk and may continue to shrink for a period, and undoubtedly
we cannot maintain the same enormous war apparatus as before. There is already
a contradiction, which we must resolve, between our war apparatus and the
war situation. The enemy's objective is to aggravate this contradiction,
hence his policy of "burn all, kill all, loot all". If we maintain our enormous
apparatus, we shall fall right into his trap. If we reduce it and have better
troops and simpler administration, our war apparatus, though reduced, will
remain strong. By resolving the contradiction, which is that of "a big fish
in shallow water", and by adapting our war apparatus to the war situation,
we shall prove even stronger, and so far from being defeated by the enemy
we shall finally defeat him. That is why we say that the policy of "better
troops and simpler administration" put forward by the Central Committee of
the Party is a most important policy.

But men's minds are liable to be fettered by circumstance and habit from
which even revolutionaries cannot always escape. We created this enormous
apparatus ourselves, little thinking that one day we ourselves would have
to reduce it; and now that the time has come to do so, we feel reluctant
and find it very difficult. The enemy is bearing down upon us with his enormous
war apparatus, and how dare we reduce ours? If we do, we shall feel that
our forces are too few to cope with him. Such misgivings are precisely the
result of being fettered by circumstance and habit. When the weather changes,
it becomes necessary to change one's clothing. Each year as spring turns
into summer, summer into autumn, autumn into winter and winter into spring
we have to make this change. But owing to the force of habit people sometimes
fail to make it at the proper turn and they fall ill. Present conditions
in the base areas already require us to shed our winter garments and put
on summer clothing so that we can move about nimbly to fight the enemy, but
we are still heavily padded and weighed down, and quite unfit for combat.
As for the question of how to deal with the enemy's enormous apparatus, we
can learn from the example of how the Monkey King dealt with Princess Iron
Fan. The Princess was a formidable demon, but by changing himself into a
tiny insect the Monkey King made his way into her stomach and overpowered
her. [2] Liu Tsung-yuan's description of "The Donkey
in Kweichow" [3] also contains a valuable lesson.
A huge donkey was brought to Kweichow and the sight of him rather frightened
a small tiger. But in the end this huge donkey was devoured by the small
tiger. Our Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies are the Monkey King or the
small tiger, and they are fully capable of dealing with the Japanese demon
or donkey. Now it is imperative for us to do a little changing and make ourselves
smaller but sturdier, and then we shall be invincible.
NOTES

1. The phrase "better troops and simpler administration"
is now widely used and is no longer confined to military matters. It suggests
readjustment in organizations and their staff membership, and simplification
of the administration and the work procedure.

2. For the story of how Sun Wu-kung, the Monkey King, changed
himself into a tiny insect and defeated Princess Iron Fan, see the Chinese
novel, Hsi Yu Chi (Pilgrimage to the West), Chapter 59.

3. Liu Tsung-yuan (773-819), a great Chinese writer of
the Tang Dynasty. His Three Parables includes "The Donkey in Kweichow",
which tells how a tiger in Kweichow was scared when he saw a donkey for the
first time. But discovering that all the donkey could do was to bray and
kick, the tiger fell upon it and devoured it.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Turning Point in World War II







THE TURNING POINT IN WORLD WAR II 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE TURNING POINT IN WORLD WAR II

October 12, 1942

[This editorial was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Liberation
Daily.]
  

The Battle of Stalingrad has been compared by the British and American press
to the Battle of Verdun, and the "Red Verdun" is now famous all over the
world. This comparison is not altogether appropriate. The Battle of Stalingrad
is different in nature from the Battle of Verdun in World War I. But they
have this in common-- now, as then, many people are misled by the German
offensive into thinking that Germany can still win the war. In 1916 the German
forces launched several attacks on the French fortress of Verdun, two years
before World War I ended in the winter of 1918. The commander-in-chief at
Verdun was the German Crown Prince and the forces thrown into the battle
were the cream of the German army. The battle was of decisive significance.
After the ferocious German assaults failed, the entire
German-Austrian-Turkish-Bulgarian bloc had no future, and from then on its
difficulties mounted, it was deserted by its followers, it disintegrated,
and finally collapsed. But at the time, the Anglo-American-French bloc did
not grasp this situation, believing that the German army was still very powerful,
and they were unaware of their own approaching victory. Historically, all
reactionary forces on the verge of extinction invariably conduct a last desperate
struggle against the revolutionary forces, and some revolutionaries are apt
to be deluded for a time by this phenomenon of outward strength but inner
weakness, failing to grasp the essential fact that the enemy is nearing
extinction while they themselves are approaching victory. The rise of the
forces of fascism and the war of aggression they have been conducting for
some years are precisely the expression of such a last desperate struggle;
and in this present war the attack on Stalingrad is the expression of the
last desperate struggle of fascism itself. At this turning point in history,
too, many people in the world anti-fascist front have been deluded by the
ferocious appearance of fascism and have failed to discern its essence. For
forty-eight days there raged an unprecedentedly bitter battle, unparalleled
in the history of mankind--from August 23, when the entire German force crossed
the bend of the River Don and began the all-out attack on Stalingrad, through
September 15, when some German units broke into the industrial district in
the northwestern section of the city, and right up to October 9, when the
Soviet Information Bureau announced that the Red Army had breached the German
line of encirclement in that district. Ultimately this battle was won by
the Soviet forces. During those forty-eight days, the news of each setback
or triumph from that city gripped the hearts of countless millions of people,
now bringing them anxiety, now stirring them to elation. This battle is not
only the turning point of the Soviet-German war, or even of the present
anti-fascist world war, it is the turning point in the history of all mankind.
Throughout these forty-eight days, the people of the world watched Stalingrad
with even greater concern than they watched Moscow last October.

Until his victory on the western front, Hitler seems to have been cautious.
When he attacked Poland, when he attacked Norway, when he attacked Holland,
Belgium, and France, and when he attacked the Balkans, he concentrated all
his strength on one objective at a time, not daring to disperse his attention.
After his victory on the western front, he became dizzy with success and
attempted to defeat the Soviet Union in three months. He launched an offensive
against this huge and powerful socialist country along the whole front stretching
from Murmansk in the north to the Crimea in the south, and in so doing dispersed
his forces. The failure of his Moscow campaign last October marked the end
of the first stage of the Soviet-German war, and Hitler's first strategic
plan failed. The Red Army halted the German offensive last year and launched
a counteroffensive on all fronts in the winter, which constituted the second
stage of the Soviet-German war, with Hitler turning to retreat and the defensive.
In this period, after dismissing Brauchitsch, his commander-in-chief, and
taking over the command himself, he decided to abandon the plan for an all-out
offensive, combed Europe for all available forces and prepared a final offensive
which, though limited to the southern front, would, he imagined, strike at
the vitals of the Soviet Union. Because it was in the nature of a final offensive
on which the fate of fascism hung, Hitler concentrated the greatest possible
forces and even moved in part of his aircraft and tanks from the North African
battle front. With the German attack on Kerch and Sevastopol in May this
year, the war entered its third stage. Massing an army of over 1,500,000,
which was supported by the bulk of his air and tank forces, Hitler launched
an offensive of unprecedented fury on Stalingrad and the Caucasus. He endeavoured
to capture these two objectives at great speed for the twofold purpose of
cutting the Volga and seizing Baku, intending subsequently to drive against
Moscow to the north and break through to the Persian Gulf in the south; at
the same time he directed the Japanese fascists to mass their troops in Manchuria
in preparation for an attack on Siberia after the fall of Stalingrad. Hitler
vainly hoped to weaken the Soviet Union to such an extent that he would be
able to release the main forces of the German army from the Soviet theatre
of war for dealing with an Anglo-American attack on the western front, and
for seizing the resources of the Near East and effecting a junction with
the Japanese; at the same time this would allow the main forces of the Japanese
to be released from the north and, with their rear secure, to move west against
China and south against Britain and the United States. That was how Hitler
reckoned on winning victory for the fascist camp. But how did things turn
out in this stage? Hitler came up against the Soviet tactics which sealed
his fate. The Soviet Union adopted the policy of first luring the enemy in
deep and then putting up a stubborn resistance. In five months of fighting
the German army has failed either to penetrate to the Caucasian oil-fields
or to seize Stalingrad, so that Hitler has been forced to halt his troops
before high mountains and outside an impregnable city, unable to advance
and unable to retreat, suffering immense losses and getting into an impasse.
October is already here and winter is approaching; soon the third stage of
the war will end and the fourth stage will begin. Not one of Hitler's strategic
plans of attack against the Soviet Union has succeeded. In this period, bearing
in mind his failure in the summer of last year when his forces were divided,
Hitler concentrated his strength on the southern front. But as he still wanted
to achieve the twofold purpose of cutting the Volga in the east and seizing
the Caucasus in the south at a single stroke, he again divided his forces.
He did not recognize that his strength did not match his ambitions, and he
is now doomed--"when the carrying pole is not secured at both ends, the loads
slip off". As for the Soviet Union, the more she fights the stronger she
grows. Stalin's brilliant strategic direction has completely gained the
initiative and is everywhere drawing Hitler towards destruction. The fourth
stage of the war, beginning this winter, will mark the approach of Hitler's
doom.

Comparing Hitler's position in the first and third stages of the war, we
can see that he is on the threshold of final defeat. Both at Stalingrad and
in the Caucasus the Red Army has now in fact stopped the German offensive;
Hitler is now nearing exhaustion, having failed in his attacks on Stalingrad
and the Caucasus. The forces which he managed to assemble throughout the
winter, from last December to May of this year, have already been used up.
In less than a month winter will set in on the Soviet-German front, and Hitler
will have to turn hastily to the defensive. The whole belt west and south
of the Don is his most vulnerable area, and the Red Army will go over to
the counter-offensive there. This winter, goaded on by the fear of his impending
doom, Hitler will once again reorganize his forces. To meet the dangers on
both the eastern and western fronts, he may perhaps be able to scrape together
the remnants of his forces, equip them and form them into a few new divisions
and, in addition, he will turn for help to his three fascist partners, Italy,
Rumania and Hungary, and extort some more cannon-fodder from them. However,
he will have to face the enormous losses of a winter campaign in the east
and be ready to deal with the second front in the west, while Italy, Rumania
and Hungary, becoming pessimistic as they see that it is all up with Hitler,
will increasingly fall away from him. In short, after October 9 there is
only one road open to Hitler, the road to extinction.

The Red Army's defence of Stalingrad in these forty-eight days has a certain
similarity to the defence of Moscow last year. That is to say, Hitler's plan
for this year has been foiled just as was his plan for last year. The difference,
however, is that, although the Soviet people followed up their defence of
Moscow with a winter counter-offensive, they had yet to face the summer offensive
of the German army this year, partly because Germany and her European accomplices
still had some fight left in them and partly because Britain and the United
States delayed the opening of the second front. But now, following the battle
for the defence of Stalingrad, the situation will be totally different from
that of last year. On the one hand, the Soviet Union will launch a second
winter counteroffensive on a vast scale, Britain and the United States will
no longer be able to delay the opening of the second front (though the exact
date cannot yet be foretold), and the people of Europe will be ready to rise
up in response. On the other hand, Germany and her European accomplices no
longer have the strength to mount large-scale offensives, and Hitler will
have no alternative but to change his whole line of policy to the strategic
defensive. Once Hitler is compelled to go over to the strategic defensive,
the fate of fascism is as good as sealed. From its birth, a fascist state
like Hitler's builds its political and military life on taking the offensive,
and once its offensive stops its very life stops too. The Battle of Stalingrad
will stop the offensive of fascism and is therefore a decisive battle. It
is decisive for the whole world war.

There are three powerful foes confronting Hitler, the Soviet Union, Britain
and the United States, and the people in the German-occupied territories.
On the eastern front stands the Red Army, firm as a rock, whose
counter-offensives will continue through the whole of the second winter and
beyond; it is this force which will decide the outcome of the whole war and
the destiny of mankind. On the western front, even if Britain and the United
States continue their policy of looking on and stalling, the second front
will eventually be opened, when the time comes to belabour the slain tiger.
Then there is the internal front against Hitler, the great uprising of the
people which is brewing in Germany, in France and in other parts of Europe;
they will respond with a third front the moment the Soviet Union launches
an all-out counter-offensive and the guns roar on the second front. Thus,
an attack from three fronts will converge on Hitler--such is the great historical
process that will follow the Battle of Stalingrad.

Napoleon's political life ended at Waterloo, but the decisive turning point
was his defeat at Moscow. Hitler today is treading Napoleon's road, and it
is the Battle of Stalingrad that has sealed his doom.

These developments will have a direct impact on the Far East. The coming
year will not be propitious for Japanese fascism either. As time goes on
its headaches will grow, until it descends into its grave.

All those who take a pessimistic view of the world situation should change
their point of view.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## In Celebration of the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the October Revolution







IN CELEBRATION OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE OCTOBER REVOLUTION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  IN CELEBRATION OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE OCTOBER REVOLUTION

November 6, 1942


It is with the greatest optimism that we celebrate the anniversary of the
October Revolution this year. I firmly believe that this anniversary marks
the turning point not only of the Soviet-German war, but also of the victory
of the world anti-fascist front over the fascist front.

Hitler was previously able to keep up the offensive without being defeated
because the Red Army was alone in resisting fascist Germany and its accomplices
in Europe. Now the Soviet Union has grown more powerful in the course of
the war and Hitler's second summer offensive has failed. Henceforward the
task of the world anti-fascist front is to take the offensive against the
fascist front and inflict final defeat on fascism.

The warriors of the Red Army at Stalingrad have performed prodigies of heroism
which will affect the destiny of mankind. They are the sons and daughters
of the October Revolution. The banner of the October Revolution is invincible,
and all the forces of fascism are doomed to extinction.

In celebrating the victory of the Red Army, we the Chinese people are also
celebrating our own victory. Our War of Resistance Against Japan has been
going on for more than five years, and although there are still difficulties
ahead the dawn of victory is already in sight. Victory over the Japanese
fascists is not only certain but is not far off.

It is the task of the Chinese people to concentrate every effort on beating
the Japanese fascists.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Economic and Financial Problems in the Anti-Japanese War







ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROBLEMS IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR

December 1942

[This article, originally entitled "A Basic Summing-Up of Our Past Work"
was the first chapter of Economic and Financial Problems, a report
delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung at a conference of senior cadres of the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region. The years 1941 and 1942 were the hardest
for the Liberated Areas in the War of Resistance Against Japan. The savage
attacks by the Japanese invaders and the encirclement and blockade by the
Kuomintang created enormous financial difficulties for the Liberated Areas.
Comrade Mao Tse-tung pointed out that in order to overcome these difficulties
it was necessary for the Party to exert itself in leading the people in
developing agriculture and other branches of production, and he called upon
the government and other organizations, the schools and the army in the Liberated
Areas to produce as much as possible for their own support. Comrade Mao
Tse-tung's Economic Financial Problems and his articles "Spread
the Campaigns to Reduce Rent, Increase Production" and "Support the Government
and Cherish the People' in the Base Areas" and "Get Organized!" formed the
Party's basic programme for leading the production campaign in the Liberated
Areas. Comrade Mao Tse-tung here severely criticizes the mistaken notion
of concentrating on public revenue and expenditure to the neglect of economic
development, and the wrong working style of making demands on the people
without mobilizing and helping them to develop production and surmount
difficulties, and he set forth the Party's correct policy of "developing
the economy and ensuring supplies". With this policy great successes were
achieved in the production campaign which was unfolded in the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and in the Liberated Areas behind the
enemy lines. It not only enabled the armed forces and the people of the Liberated
Areas successfully to tide over the most difficult period of the war, but
also provided the Party with a rich store of experience for guiding economic
construction in later years.]
  

The general policy guiding our economic and financial work is to develop
the economy and ensure supplies. But many of our comrades place one-sided
stress on public finance and do not understand the importance of the economy
as a whole; engrossed in matters of revenue and expenditure as such, they
cannot find solutions to any problem hard as they try. The reason is that
an outmoded and conservative notion is doing mischief in their minds. They
do not know that while a good or a bad financial policy affects the economy,
it is the economy that determines finance. Without a well-based economy it
is impossible to solve financial difficulties, and without a growing economy
it is impossible to attain financial sufficiency. The financial problem in
the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region is that of supplying funds for the
living and operating expenses of tens of thousands of troops and civilian
personnel, in other words, the problem of supplying funds for waging the
war. These funds come partly from taxes paid by the people and partly from
production carried on by the tens of thousands of troops and civilian personnel
themselves. We shall simply be resigning ourselves to extinction unless we
develop both the private and the public sectors of the economy. Financial
difficulties can be overcome only by down-to-earth and effective economic
development. To neglect economic development and the opening up of sources
of finance, and instead to hope for the solution of financial difficulties
by curtailing indispensable expenditures, is a conservative notion which
cannot solve any problem.

In the last five years we have passed through several stages. Our worst
difficulties occurred in 1940 and 1941, when the Kuomintang created friction
by its two anti-Communist drives. For a time we had a very acute scarcity
of clothing, cooking oil, paper and vegetables, of footwear for our soldiers
and of winter bedding for our civilian personnel. The Kuomintang tried to
strangle us by cutting off the funds due to us and imposing an economic blockade;
we were indeed in dire straits. But we pulled through. Not only did the people
of the Border Region provide us with grain but, in particular, we resolutely
built up the public sector of our economy with our own hands. The government
established many industries to meet the needs of the Border Region, the troops
engaged in an extensive production campaign and expanded agriculture, industry
and commerce to supply their own needs, and the tens of thousands of people
in the various organizations and schools also developed similar economic
activities for their own support. This self-supporting economy, which has
been developed by the troops and the various organizations and schools, is
a special product of the special conditions of today. It would be unreasonable
and incomprehensible in other historical conditions, but it is perfectly
reasonable and necessary at present. It is by such means that we have been
overcoming our difficulties. Do not these indisputable historical facts prove
the truth that supplies can be ensured only through economic development?
While we still face many difficulties, the foundation of the public sector
of our economy has already been laid. In another year, by the end of 1943,
this foundation will be even firmer.

Developing the economy is the correct line, but development does not mean
reckless or ill-founded expansion. Some comrades who disregard the specific
conditions here and now are setting up an empty clamour for development;
for example, they are demanding the establishment of heavy industry and putting
forward plans for huge salt and armament industries, all of which are unrealistic
and unacceptable. The Party's line is the correct line for development; it
opposes outmoded and conservative notions on the one hand and grandiose,
empty and unrealistic plans on the other. This is the Party's struggle on
two fronts in financial and economic work.

While we must develop the public sector of our economy, we should not forget
the importance of help from the people. They have given us grain, 90,000
tan in 1940 200,000 in 1941 and 160,000 in 1942,
[1] thus ensuring food for our troops and civilian
personnel. Up to the end of 1941, the grain output of the public sector of
our agriculture was meagre and we relied on the people for grain. We must
urge the army to produce more grain, but for a time we shall still have to
rely mainly on the people. Although the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region
is in the rear and has not suffered direct war damage, it has only 1,500,000
inhabitants, a small population for so large an area and the provision of
such large quantities of grain is not easy. Besides, the people transport
salt for us or pay a salt transport levy, and in 1941 they purchased five
million yuan worth of government bonds; all of which represents
no small burden. To meet the needs of the War of Resistance and national
reconstruction, the people must shoulder such burdens, the necessity of which
they very well realize. When the government is in very great difficulties,
it is necessary to ask the people to bear a heavier burden, and they understand
that too. But while taking from the people we must at the same time help
them to replenish and expand their economy. That is to say, appropriate steps
and methods must be adopted to help the people develop their agriculture,
animal husbandry, handicrafts, salt industry and commerce, so that they gain
at the same time as they give and, moreover, gain more than they give; only
thus can we sustain a long war against Japan.

Disregarding the needs of the war, some comrades insist that the government
should adopt a policy of "benevolence". This is a mistake. For unless we
win the war against Japan, such "benevolence" will mean nothing to the people
and will benefit only the Japanese imperialists. Conversely, although the
people have to carry rather heavy burdens for the time being, things will
get better for them as the difficulties confronting the government and the
troops are overcome, the War of Resistance is sustained and the enemy is
defeated; and this is where the true benevolence of the revolutionary government
lies.

Another mistake is "draining the pond to catch the fish", that is, making
endless demands on the people, disregarding their hardship and considering
only the needs of the government and the army. That is a Kuomintang mode
of thinking which we must never adopt. Although we have temporarily added
to the people's burden, we have immediately set to work building the public
sector of our economy. In the years 1941 and 1942 the army, the government
and other organizations and the schools met most of their needs by their
own efforts. This is a wonderful achievement without precedent in Chinese
history, and it contributes to the material basis of our invincibility. The
greater our self-supporting economic activities, the more we shall be able
to lighten the people's tax burdens. In the first stage, from 1937 to 1939,
we took very little from them; during this stage they were able to build
up considerable strength. In the second stage, from 1940 to 1942, the burden
on the people was increased. The third stage will begin in 1943. In the next
two years, 1943 and 1944, if the public sector of our economy continues to
grow and if all or most of our troops in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border
Region are in a position to engage in farming, then by the end of 1944 the
people's burden will again be lightened, and they will again be able to build
up strength. This is a possibility which we should prepare to turn into
actuality.

We must refute all one-sided views and advance the correct slogan of our
Party, "Develop the economy and ensure supplies". With regard to the relation
between public and private interests, our slogans are "Give consideration
to both public and private interests" and "Give consideration to both troops
and civilians". We consider only such slogans to be correct. We can guarantee
our financial needs only by expanding both the public and the private sectors
of our economy in a realistic and practical way. Even in difficult times
we must take care to set a limit to taxation so that the burdens, though
heavy, will not hurt the people. And as soon as we can, we should lighten
the burdens so that the people can build up strength.

The Kuomintang die-hards regard construction in the Border Region as a hopeless
undertaking and the difficulties here as insurmountable; they are expecting
the Border Region to collapse any day. It is not worth arguing with such
people; they will never see the day of our "collapse" and we shall unquestionably
grow more and more prosperous. They do not understand that under the leadership
of the Communist Party and the Border Region revolutionary government the
masses always give their support to the Party and government. And the Party
and the government will always find ways to get over economic and financial
difficulties, however serious In fact we have already pulled through some
of our recent difficulties and will soon overcome others. We encountered
difficulties many times greater in the past and surmounted them all. With
intense fighting going on every day, our base areas in northern and central
China are now facing much greater difficulties than the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region, but we have already held out for five and a half years in
these areas and can certainly continue to do so till victory. For us, there
is no ground for pessimism; we can conquer any difficulty. After the present
conference of senior cadres of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region we
shall put into effect the policy of "better troops and simpler administration".
[2] It must be carried out strictly, thoroughly
and universally, and not perfunctorily, superficially or partially. In carrying
it out, we must attain the five objectives of simplification, unification,
efficiency, economy and opposition to bureaucracy. These five objectives
have a very important bearing on our economic and financial work. Simplification
will reduce non-productive expenditures and increase our income from production;
it will not only have a direct and healthy effect on our finances, but will
lighten the people's burdens and benefit them economically. In our economic
and financial set-up, we must overcome such evils as disunity, assertion
of independence and lack of co-ordination, and must establish a working system
which is unified and responsive to direction and which permits the full
application of our policies and regulations. With the establishment of such
a unified system working efficiency will rise. All our organizations, and
particularly those engaged in economic and financial work, must pay attention
to thrift. By practising thrift we can cut out a great deal of unnecessary
and wasteful expenditure, which amounts possibly to tens of millions of
yuan. Finally, people engaged in economic and financial work must
overcome surviving bureaucratic practices, some of which, such as corruption
and graft, over-elaborate organization, meaningless "standardization" and
red tape, are very serious. If we fully attain these five objectives in the
Party, the government and the army, our policy of "better troops and simpler
administration" will achieve its purpose, our difficulties will surely be
overcome, and we shall silence the gibes about our approaching "collapse".
NOTES

1. These figures are the totals paid in agricultural tax
(public grain) by the peasants of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region
from 1940 to 1942.

2. For "better troops and simpler administration" see "A
Most Important Policy", pp. 99-l02 of this volume.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Some Questions Concerning Methods of Leasership







SOME QUESTIONS CONCERNING METHODS OF LEADERSHIP



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  SOME QUESTIONS CONCERNING METHODS OF LEADERSHIP

June 1, 1943

[This decision on methods of leadership was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung
for the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.] 
  

1. There are two methods which we Communists must employ in whatever work
we do. One is to combine the general with the particular; the other is to
combine the leadership with the masses.

2. In any task, if no general and widespread call is issued, the broad masses
cannot be mobilized for action. But if persons in leading positions confine
themselves to a general call--if they do not personally, in some of the
organizations, go deeply and concretely into the work called for, make a
break-through at some single point, gain experience and use this experience
for guiding other units--then they will have no way of testing the correctness
or of enriching the content of their general call, and there is the danger
that nothing may come of it. In the rectification movement of 1942, for example,
there were achievements wherever the method of combining the general call
with particular and specific guidance was used, but there were no achievements
wherever this method was not used. In the rectification movement of 1943,
each bureau and sub-bureau of the Central Committee and each area and prefectural
Party committee, in addition to making a general call (a rectification plan
for the whole year), must do the following things, gaining experience in
the process. Select two or three units (but not too many) from the organization
itself and from other organizations, schools or army units in the vicinity.
Make a thorough study of those units, acquire a detailed knowledge of the
development of the rectification movement in them and a detailed knowledge
of the political history, the ideological characteristics, the zeal in study
and the strong and weak points in the work of some (again not too many)
representative members of their personnel. Furthermore, give personal guidance
to those in charge to find concrete solutions for the practical problems
facing those units. The leaders in every organization, school or army unit
must do likewise, as each of these has a number of subordinate units. Moreover,
this is the method by which the leaders combine leading and learning. No
one in a leading position is competent to give general guidance to all the
units unless he derives concrete experience from particular individuals and
events in particular subordinate units. This method must be promoted everywhere
so that leading cadres at all levels learn to apply it.

a. Experience in the 1942 rectification movement also proves it is essential
for the success of the rectification that a leading group should be formed
in each unit in the course of the movement, made up of a small number of
activists and with the heads of the given unit as its nucleus, and that this
leading group should link itself closely with the masses taking part in the
movement. However active the leading group may be, its activity will amount
to fruitless effort by a handful of people unless combined with the activity
of the masses. On the other hand, if the masses alone are active without
a strong leading group to organize their activity properly, such activity
cannot be sustained for long, or carried forward in the right direction,
or raised to a high level. The masses in any given place are generally composed
of three parts, the relatively active, the intermediate and the relatively
backward. The leaders must therefore be skilled in uniting the small number
of active elements around the leadership and must rely on them to raise the
level of the intermediate element and to win over the backward elements.
A leading group that is genuinely united and linked with the masses can be
formed only gradually in the process of mass struggle, and not in isolation
from it. In the process of a great struggle, the composition of the leading
group in most cases should not and cannot remain entirely unchanged throughout
the initial, middle and final stages; the activists who come forward in the
course of the struggle must constantly be promoted to replace those original
members of the leading group who are inferior by comparison or who have
degenerated. One fundamental reason why the work in many places and many
organizations cannot be pushed ahead is the lack of a leading group which
is united, linked with the masses and kept constantly healthy. A school of
a hundred people certainly cannot be run well if it does not have a leading
group of several people; or a dozen or more, which is formed in accordance
with the actual circumstances (and not thrown together artificially) and
is composed of the most active, upright and alert of the teachers, the other
staff and the students. In every organization, school, army unit, factory
or village, whether large or small, we should give effect to the ninth of
Stalin's twelve conditions for the bolshevization of the Party, namely, that
on the establishment of a nucleus of leadership.
[1] The criteria for such a leading group should
be the four which Dimitrov enumerated in his discussion of cadres
policy--absolute devotion to the cause, contact with the masses, ability
independently to find one's bearings and observance of discipline.
[2] Whether in carrying out the central tasks--war,
production, education (including rectification)--or in checking-up on work,
examining the cadres' histories, or in other activities, it is necessary
to adopt the method of linking the leading group with the masses, in addition
to that of linking the general call with particular guidance.

4. In all the practical work of our Party, all correct leadership is necessarily
"from the masses, to the masses". This means: take the ideas of the masses
(scattered and unsystematic ideas) and concentrate them (through study turn
them into concentrated and systematic ideas), then go to the masses and propagate
and explain these ideas until the masses embrace them as their own, hold
fast to them and translate them into action, and test the correctness of
these ideas in such action. Then once again concentrate ideas from the masses
and once again go to the masses so that the ideas are persevered in and carried
through. And so on, over and over again in an endless spiral, with the ideas
becoming more correct, more vital and richer each time. Such is the Marxist
theory of knowledge.

5. The concept of a correct relationship between the leading group and the
masses in an organization or in a struggle, the concept that correct ideas
on the part of the leadership can only be "from the masses, to the masses",
and the concept that the general call must be combined with particular guidance
when the leadership's ideas are being put into practice--these concepts must
be propagated everywhere during the present rectification movement in order
to correct the mistaken viewpoints among our cadres on these questions. Many
comrades do not see the importance of, or are not good at, drawing together
the activists to form a nucleus of leadership, and they do not see the importance
of, or are not good at, linking this nucleus of leadership closely with the
masses, and so their leadership becomes bureaucratic and divorced from the
masses. Many comrades do not see the importance of, or are not good at, summing
up the experience of mass struggles, but fancying themselves clever, are
fond of voicing their subjectivist ideas, and so their ideas become empty
and impractical. Many comrades rest content with making a general call with
regard to a task and do not see the importance of, or are not good at, following
it up immediately with particular and concrete guidance, and so their call
remains on their lips, or on paper or in the conference room, and their
leadership becomes bureaucratic. In the present rectification movement we
must correct these defects and learn to use the methods of combining the
leadership with the masses and the general with the particular in our study,
in the check-up on work and in the examination of cadres' histories; and
we must also apply these methods in all our future work.

6. Take the ideas of the masses and concentrate them, then got to the masses,
persevere in the ideas and carry them through, so as to form correct ideas
of leadership--such is the basic method of leadership. In the process of
concentrating ideas and persevering in them, it is necessary to use the method
of combining the general call with particular guidance, and this is a component
part of the basic method. Formulate general ideas (general calls) out of
the particular guidance given in a number of cases, and put them to the test
in many different units (not only doing so yourself, but by telling others
to do the same); then concentrate the new experience (sum it up) and draw
up new directives for the guidance of the masses generally. Comrades should
do this in the present rectification movement, and also in, every other kind
of work. Better leadership comes with greater skill in doing this.

7. In relaying to subordinate units any task (whether it concerns the
revolutionary war, production or education; the rectification movement, check-up
on work or the examination of cadres' histories; propaganda work, organizational
work or anti-espionage, or other work), a higher organization and its departments
should in all cases go through the leader of the lower organization concerned
so that he may assume responsibility; in this way both division of labour
and unified centralized leadership are achieved. A department at a higher
level should not go solely to its counterpart at the lower level (for instance,
a higher department concerned with organization, propaganda or anti-espionage
should not go solely to the corresponding department at the lower level),
leaving the person in over-all change of the lower organization (such as
the secretary, the chairman, the director or the school principal) in ignorance
or without responsibility. Both the person in over-all charge and the person
with specific responsibility should be informed and given responsibility.
This centralized method, combining division of labour with unified leadership,
makes it possible, through the person with over-all responsibility, to mobilize
a large number of cadres--on occasion even an organization's entire personnel--to
carry out a particular task, and thus to overcome shortages of cadres in
individual departments and turn a good number of people into active cadres
for the work in hand. This, too, is a way of combining the leadership with
the masses. Take, for instance, the examining of cadres' histories. If the
job is done in isolation, if it is done only by the few people in the
organization department in charge of such work, it certainly cannot be done
well. But if it is done through the administrative head of a particular
organization or school, who mobilizes many or even all of his staff, or many
or even all of his students, to take part in the work, while at the same
time the leading members of the organization department at the higher level
give correct guidance, applying the principle of linking the leadership with
the masses, then undoubtedly the task of examining the cadres' histories
will be satisfactorily accomplished.

8. In any given place, there cannot be a number of central tasks at the same
time. At any one time there can be only one central task, supplemented by
other tasks of a second or third order of importance. Consequently, the person
with over-all responsibility in the locality must take into account the history
and circumstances of the struggle there and put the different tasks in their
proper order; he should not act upon each instruction as it comes from the
higher organization without any planning of his own, and thereby create a
multitude of "central tasks" and a state of confusion and disorder. Nor should
a higher organization simultaneously assign many tasks to a lower organization
without indicating their relative importance and urgency or without specifying
which is central, for that will lead to confusion in the steps to be taken
by the lower organizations in their work and thus no definite results will
be achieved. It is part of the art of leadership to take the whole situation
into account and plan accordingly in the light of the historical conditions
and existing circumstances of each locality, decide correctly on the centre
of gravity and the sequence of the work for each period, steadfastly carry
through the decision, and make sure that definite results are achieved. This
is also a problem of method of leadership, and care must be taken to solve
it when applying the principles of combining the leadership with the masses
and the general with the particular.

9. Details concerning methods of leadership are not dealt with here; it is
hoped that comrades in all localities will themselves do some hard thinking
and give full play to their own creativeness on the basis of the principles
here set forth. The harder the struggle, the greater the need for Communists
to link their leadership closely with the demands of the vast masses, and
to combine general calls closely with particular guidance, so as to smash
the subjectivist and bureaucratic methods of leadership completely. All the
leading comrades of our Party must at all times counterpose scientific, Marxist
methods of leadership to subjectivist, bureaucratic methods of leaders ship
and use the former to overcome the latter. Subjectivists and bureaucrats
do not understand the principles of combining the leadership with the masses
and the general with the particular; they greatly impede the development
of the work of the Party. To combat subjectivist and bureaucratic methods
of leadership, we must promote scientific, Marxist methods of leadership
both extensively and intensively.
NOTES

1. See J. V. Stalin, "The Prospects of the Communist Party
of Germany and the Question of Bolshevization", Works, Eng. ed.,
FLPH, Moscow, 1954, Vol. VII, p. 39.

2. See Georgi Dimitrov, "Unity of the Working Class Against
Fascism", Selected Articles and Speeches, Eng. ed., Lawrence &
Wishart, London, 1951, pp. 138-39.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Some Pointed Questions for the Kuomintang







SOME POINTED QUESTIONS FOR THE KUOMINTANG



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  SOME POINTED QUESTIONS FOR THE KUOMINTANG

July 12, 1943

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrote this editorial for the Liberation Daily,
Yenan.] 
  

The last few months have witnessed a most unusual and shocking event inside
China's anti-Japanese camp, namely, the campaign launched by many Kuomintang-led
party, government and army organizations to wreck unity and undermine the
War of Resistance. It assumes the form of an attack on the Communist Party,
but is in fact directed against the whole Chinese nation and people.

Consider first the Kuomintang armies. Of the Kuomintang-led armies throughout
the country, as many as three group armies from the main forces are stationed
in the Northwest--the 34th, 37th and 38th Group Armies, all under Hu Tsung-nan,
Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the 8th War Zone. Of these, two have been used
to encircle the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, while only one has been
assigned defence duty along the Yellow River, from Yichuan to Tungkuan, against
the Japanese invaders. This has been the situation for more than four years,
and people became accustomed to it so long as there was no military clash.
But in the last few days an unexpected change has taken place. Of the three
army corps on defence duty along the river--the 1st 16th and 90th Army Corps--
two have been removed, the 1st Army Corps to the area of Pinchow and Chunhua
and the 90th to the area of Lochuan, and both are actively preparing to attack
the Border Region, while the greater part of the river defences is left unmanned
against the Japanese invaders.

This inevitably makes people ask: What exactly are the relations between
those Kuomintang people and the Japanese?

Day in day out many Kuomintang people have been brazenly spreading propaganda
that the Communist Party is "sabotaging the War of Resistance" and "wrecking
unity". Can the withdrawal of the main forces defending the river be called
strengthening the War of Resistance? Can attacks on the Border Region be
called strengthening unity?

We should like to ask the Kuomintang people who are doing all this: You are
turning your backs on the Japanese while they are still facing you. What
is going to happen if the Japanese start advancing on your heels?

What is the meaning of your abandonment of large sections of the river defences
while the Japanese quietly look on from the other bank, without making any
move other than to watch with glee through their field-glasses the gradually
receding view of your backs? Why do the Japanese so greatly prefer seeing
your backs? And what makes you fed so much at ease after abandoning the river
defences and leaving large sections unmanned?

In a society based on private property, people usually bolt their doors at
night before going to bed. Everybody knows that this is not fussiness but
a precaution against burglars. Now, having left the front door wide open,
are you not afraid of burglars coming? And if the front door is left wide
open without the burglars coming, what then is the reason?

According to you, in China it is the Communists who are "sabotaging the War
of Resistance", while you yourselves are most devoted to "the nation above
all". Well now, what are you placing "above all" when you turn your backs
on the enemy?

According to you, it is also the Communists who are "wrecking unity", while
you are so very devoted to "unity in good faith". Well, you have sent a huge
force of three group armies (minus one army corps), with fixed bayonets and
heavy artillery, to march against the people of the Border Region; can this
be counted as "unity in good faith"?

Or take another of your assertions--that you are very keen not on "unity"
but on "unification"--and you therefore want to wipe out the Border Region,
liquidate "feudal separatism" and kill off every Communist. Very well! How
is it then you are not afraid that the Japanese will "unify" the Chinese
nation, including you, out of existence?

Supposing that while you triumphantly "unify" the Border Region at one stroke
and wipe out the Communists, you are able to keep the Japanese stupefied
by some "sleeping-draught" or by some "spell" of yours, so that the nation
and you yourselves both escape "unification" by them. Well, dear gentlemen
of the Kuomintang, won't you give us some inkling of the secret of your
sleeping-draught or spell?

But if you have no sleeping-draught or spell for dealing with the Japanese,
and if you have not reached a secret understanding with them, then let us
tell you plainly and formally: you should not and must not attack the Border
Region. "When the snipe and the clam grapple, it is the fisherman who profits",
"The mantis stalks the cicada, but behind them lurks the oriole"--there is
truth in these two parables. The proper thing for you to do is to join forces
with us to "unify" the territory occupied by the Japanese and drive the devils
out. What is the reason for your anxiety and hurry to "unify" the span of
land forming the Border Region? Though vast stretches of our beautiful country
have fallen into the hands of the enemy, you are not anxious or in a hurry
about this, but instead are anxious to attack the Border Region and in a
hurry to crush the Communist Party. How painful! How disgraceful!

Next, consider the activities of the Kuomintang Party. To combat the Communist
Party the Kuomintang has organized several hundred detachments of secret
agents, into which it has recruited all kinds of scoundrels. For example,
on July 6, 1943, in the 32nd year of the Chinese Republic, on the eve of
the sixth anniversary of the War of Resistance, the Kuomintang Central News
Agency released a news item stating that certain "cultural associations"
in Sian, Shensi Province, had held a meeting and resolved to cable Mao Tse-tung,
calling on him to use the opportunity of the dissolution of the Third
International to "dissolve" the Communist Party of China and, in addition,
to "abolish the separatist Border Region regime". The reader may well take
this to be "news", but actually it is an old story.

It turns out that the whole thing was the handiwork of one of the several
hundred detachments of secret agents. Acting on orders from headquarters
(namely, "The Bureau of Investigation and Statistics of the Military Council
of the National Government" and "The Bureau of Investigation and Statistics
of the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang"), this detachment gave
instructions to the Trotskyite and traitor Chang Ti-fei, who is now Director
of Discipline in the Sian concentration camp and notorious for his anti-Communist
writings in Resistance and Culture, a traitorous periodical financed
by the Kuomintang; on June 12, that is, twenty-five days before the Central
News Agency released its news item, he mustered together nine people in a
ten-minute meeting which "endorsed" the text of the so-called telegram.

This telegram has not reached Yenan to this day but its contents are clear.
It says, we are told, that since the Third International has been dissolved,
the Communist Party of China should likewise be "dissolved", that
"Marxism-Leninism has been discredited", and so on and so forth.

There it is. This is the sort of thing the Kuomintang are saying! We have
always believed that anything may issue from the mouth of the likes of those
Kuomintang creatures (and like attracts like), and as one would expect, they
have now let out this gust of foul air!

There are now many political parties in China--there are even two Kuomintangs.
One is the Wang Ching-wei brand of Kuomintang, set up in Nanking and elsewhere,
which also has a flag with a white sun against a blue sky and a so-called
Central Executive Committee, as well as a collection of secret police
detachments. In addition, everywhere in the occupied areas there are the
fascist parties created by the Japanese.

Dear gentlemen of the Kuomintang! Why is it that since the dissolution of
the Third International you have been so terribly busy plotting the "dissolution"
of the Communist Party but will not even lift a finger to dissolve a few
of the traitorous and Japanese-sponsored parties? When you directed Chang
Ti-fei to draft the telegram, why is it that, besides demanding the dissolution
of the Communist Party, you did not deign to add that the traitorous and
Japanese-sponsored parties, too, ought to be dissolved?

Is it possible that you think there is one Communist Party too many? In the
whole of China there is only one Communist Party, while there are two
Kuomintangs. After all, of which party is there one too many?

Gentlemen of the Kuomintang! Have you ever given the following matter a thought?
Why is it that, in addition to yourselves, both the Japanese and Wang Ching-wei
are making frantic efforts to overthrow the Communist Party, asserting that
the Communist Party alone is one too many and must therefore be crushed?
And why is it that they feel there are too few Kuomintangs and there never
can be too many, and that they are everywhere grooming and fostering the
Wang Ching-wei brand of Kuomintang?

Gentlemen of the Kuomintang! We don't mind taking the trouble to tell you
that the Japanese and Wang Ching-wei have a special love for the Kuomintang
and the Three People's Principles because they find something in both they
can turn to good account. The only time since World War I that the imperialists
and traitors had no love for the Kuomintang but bitterly hated it and tried
their utmost to abolish it was in the period of 1924-27, when it was reorganized
by Dr. Sun Yat-sen, admitted Communists into its ranks and became a national
alliance in which the Kuomintang and the Communist Party co-operated. The
only time that the imperialists and traitors had no love for the Three People's
Principles but bitterly hated them and tried their utmost to abolish them
was also in the same period, when those principles were transformed by Dr.
Sun Yat-sen into the revolutionary Three People's Principles as set out in
the Manifesto of the First National Congress of the Kuomintang. Save for
that period, the Kuomintang has thrown out the Communists and the Three People's
Principles have been emptied of Dr. Sun Yat-sen's revolutionary spirit, and
both have therefore earned the love of all the imperialists and traitors
and, for the same reasons, have earned the love of the Japanese fascists
and the traitor Wang Ching-wei, who are grooming and fostering them like
treasured possessions. There used to be a yellow patch in the upper left-hand
corner of the flag of Wang Ching-wei's brand of Kuomintang to distinguish
it from the other Kuomintang, but now even that has been removed and everything
is made to look the same so as not to offend the eye. What great love!

Kuomintang specimens of the Wang Ching-wei brand are numerous in the Great
Rear Area as well as in the occupied areas. Some are under cover, forming
the enemy's fifth column. Others are in the open, depending for their food
and keep upon the Kuomintang or upon their work as police agents, doing nothing
at all to resist Japan but specializing in anti-communism. Though they do
not wear Wang Ching-wei labels, these people are really his men. They, too,
are enemy fifth-columnists, only they use a somewhat different guise in order
to conceal their identity and fool people.

The whole thing is now perfectly clear. When you instructed Chang Ti-fei
to draft the telegram demanding the "dissolution" of the Communist Party,
the reason why you would in no circumstance trouble to add that the
Japanese-sponsored parties and traitor parties should also be dissolved is
that you have much in common with them in ideology, policy and organization,
and that the fundamental feature of your common ideology is opposition to
communism and to the people.

We want to ask you Kuomintang people yet another question. Is it true that
the only "discredited" ism in China and indeed in the whole world
is Marxism-Leninism and that all the others are great stuff? Apart from Wang
Ching-wei's brand of the Three People's Principles which we have just mentioned,
what about the fascism of Hitler, Mussolini and Hideki Tojo? What about the
Trotskyism of Chang Ti-fei? What about the counter-revolutionary doctrines
of the various brands of counter-revolutionary secret services in China?

Dear gentlemen of the Kuomintang! Why is it that when you instructed Chang
Ti-fei to draft the telegram, you did not add a single phrase or proviso
about all these so-called isms which are about as much good as the
plague, or bedbugs, or dog's droppings? Is it possible that in your eyes
all this counter-revolutionary rubbish is flawless and perfect, while
Marxism-Leninism alone is completely discredited?

To be blunt, we strongly suspect that you are working in collusion with the
Japanese-sponsored and traitorous parties, and that is why you and they "breathe
through the same nostrils", that is why you and the enemy and traitors are
so exactly alike, indeed, identical and indistinguishable both in your words
and in your deeds. The Japanese and the traitors wanted the New Fourth Army
disbanded, and you ordered it to be disbanded; they want to dissolve the
Communist Party, and so do you; they want to abolish the Border Region, and
so do you; they do not want you to defend the Yellow River, and so you abandon
its defence; they attack the Border Region (for the last six years the enemy
forces along the river bank opposite the counties of Suiteh, Michih, Chiahsien,
Wupao and Chingchien have never ceased shelling the Eighth Route Army's river
defences), and you too intend to attack it; they are anti-Communist, and
so are you; they bitterly revile communism and liberal ideas, and so do you;
when they seize a Communist, they force him to make a public recantation
in the press, and so do you; they send counter-revolutionary agents to worm
their way into the Communist Party and the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies
for disruptive purposes, and so do you. How is it that you and they are so
remarkably alike, identical and indistinguishable? As you and the enemy and
the traitors are exactly alike, identical and indistinguishable in so many
words and deeds, how can people help suspecting that you are working hand
in glove with them or have come to some secret understanding with them?

We hereby make this formal protest to the Central Executive Committee of
the Kuomintang: Your action in withdrawing the main forces for river defence
in preparation for attacking the Border Region and starting civil war is
utterly wrong and impermissible. Your Central News Agency's publication of
the news item of July 6, which is disruptive of unity and insulting to the
Communist Party, is also utterly wrong and impermissible. Both these errors
are towering crimes, indistinguishable from those committed by the enemy
and the traitors. You must correct them.

We hereby make this formal demand to Mr. Chiang Kai-shek, Director-General
of the Kuomintang: Please order Hu Tsung-nan's troops to return to the river
defences, please discipline the Central News Agency and punish the traitor
Chang Ti-fei.

We hereby appeal to all true patriots among the Kuomintang members who do
not approve of the withdrawal of the river defence forces for the purpose
of attacking the Border Region and do not approve of the demand for the
dissolution of the Communist Party: please act now to avert the crisis of
civil war. We are willing to co-operate with you to the very end to save
the nation.

We believe that these are absolutely just demands.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Spread the Campaigns to Reduce Rent, Increase Production and "Support the Government and Cherish the People" In the Base Areas







SPREAD THE CAMPAIGNS TO REDUCE RENT, INCREASE PRODUCTION AND "SUPPORT
  THE GOVERNMENT AND CHERISH THE PEOPLE" IN THE BASE AREAS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  SPREAD THE CAMPAIGNS TO REDUCE RENT, INCREASE PRODUCTION AND "SUPPORT THE
  GOVERNMENT AND CHERISH THE PEOPLE" IN THE BASE AREAS

October 1, 1943

[This inner-Party directive was written by comrade Mao Tse-tung on behalf
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.] 
  

1. As the time for autumn harvest is come, the leading bodies in the base
areas must ask Party and government organizations at all levels to check
up on the application of our policy of rent reduction. Wherever it has not
been carried out in earnest, rents must be reduced this year without any
exception. Wherever this work has not been thorough, it must be done thoroughly
this year. Party committees should immediately issue directives based on
the agrarian policy of the Central Committee and conforming to local conditions,
and they should inspect a few villages at first hand, pick out good examples
and so expedite the work in other places. At the same time, the press should
carry editorials on rent reduction and reports of good examples. As rent
reduction is a mass struggle by the peasants, Party directives and government
decrees should guide and help it instead of trying to bestow favours on the
masses. To bestow rent reduction as a favour instead of arousing the masses
to achieve it by their own action is wrong, and the results will not be solid.
Peasant organizations should be formed or reconstituted in the struggle for
rent reduction. The government's position should be one of enforcing the
decree on rent reduction and adjusting the relative interests of the landlords
and the tenants. Now that the base areas have shrunk in size, it is of more
immediate importance than at any time in the past six years for the Party
to win the masses there by patient, conscientious and thorough work, and
to share weal and woe with them. If during this autumn we check on how far
the policy has been carried out and perform the task of rent reduction
thoroughly, we shall be able to arouse the initiative of the peasant masses
and, in the coming year, intensify our struggle against the enemy and give
impetus to the production campaign.

2. In the base areas behind the enemy lines most cadres have not yet learned
how to get the personnel of the Party and government organizations, the troops
and the people (including everyone, men and women, old and young, soldiers
and civilians, and people in public and private employment) to undertake
production on a wide scale. During this autumn and winter the Party committee,
the government and the army in each base area must get ready to launch a
big area-wide production campaign next year, covering both public and private
farming, industry, handicrafts, transport, animal husbandry and commerce,
with the main emphasis on farming--a campaign for overcoming difficulties
by our own efforts (the slogan of "ample food and clothing" should not be
raised for the time being except in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region).
There should be planning household by household and mutual aid in labour
(known as labour-exchange teams in northern Shensi and once known as ploughing
teams or mutual-aid working groups in the former Red areas in Kiangsi), labour
heroes should be rewarded, emulation in production should be practised and
co-operatives serving the masses should be promoted. In the financial and
economic field, the Party and government personnel at the county and district
levels should devote nine-tenths of their energy to helping the peasants
increase production, and only one-tenth to collecting taxes from them. If
pains are taken with the first task, the second will be easy. In the present
war conditions all organizations, schools and army units must make great
efforts to grow vegetables, breed pigs, collect firewood, make charcoal,
expand handicrafts and raise part of their own grain supply. Apart from the
development of collective production in all units, whether big or small,
every individual (except for those in the army) should also be encouraged
to engage in some spare-time agricultural or handicraft production (but not
in trade), the proceeds of which he can keep for himself. Seven to ten-day
training courses should be given on vegetable-growing and pig-farming, and
on the preparation of better food by the cooks. Thrift should be stressed,
waste combated and corrupt practices forbidden in all Party, government and
army organizations. At all levels, the leading personnel in the Party, government
and army organizations and in the schools should master all the skills involved
in leading the masses in production. No one who fails to study production
carefully can be considered a good leader. Any soldier or civilian who is
not serious about production and who likes to eat but does not like to work
cannot be considered a good soldier or a good citizen. Village Party members
who are not diverted from production should realize that one of the
qualifications for becoming a model among the masses is to work well in
increasing production. In the campaign for production, it is wrong to take
a conservative and purely financial point of view which concentrates on revenue
and expenditure to the neglect of economic development. It is wrong to have
a handful of government functionaries busying themselves with collecting
grain and taxes, funds and food supplies to the neglect of organizing the
enormous labour power of the rank and file of the Party, the government and
the army, and that of the people, for a mass campaign of production. It is
wrong simply to demand grain and money from the masses (as does the Kuomintang)
without making every effort to help them to increase production. It is wrong
to have a few economic departments organizing a small number of people for
production and to neglect the launching of extensive mass campaigns for
production. It is wrong to consider it dishonourable and selfish either for
Communists in the countryside to engage in household production in order
to support their families or for Communists in government organizations and
schools to engage in private spare-time production in order to improve their
own living conditions, for all such activity is in the interests of the
revolutionary cause. It is wrong simply to exhort people in any base area
to endure hardship in the bitter struggle without encouraging them to increase
production and thereby try to improve their material conditions. It is wrong
to regard the co-operatives as money-making concerns run for the benefit
of the small number of functionaries or as stores run by the government and
not as economic organizations run by and for the masses. It is wrong not
to introduce the model methods of work used by some of the agricultural labour
heroes of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region (e.g., mutual aid in labour,
repeated ploughing, frequent hoeing and ample manuring) on the pretext that
these methods are not applicable in certain base areas. It is wrong, in
production campaigns, to shift the task of production to the heads of the
local departments in charge of economic development, the army supply chiefs
or the administration chiefs in governmental and other bodies, instead of
ensuring that the leading cadres themselves assume responsibility and participate
personally, that the leading group links itself closely with the masses and
general calls are combined with particular and specific guidance, that
investigation and study are undertaken and priority is given to what is urgent
and important, that efforts are made to bring everyone into production--men
and women, young and old, and even the loafers --and that cadres are trained
and the masses given education. In the present circumstances the organization
of labour power is the key to increasing production. In each of the base
areas, even under present war conditions, it is possible and altogether necessary
to organize the labour power of tens of thousands of men and women in the
Party, the government offices and the army, and hundreds of thousands of
the people for production purposes (i.e., to organize on a voluntary basis
all people who are capable of performing part-time or full-time labour, using
the forms of household-by-household planning, labour-exchange teams, transport
teams, mutual-aid working groups or co-operatives, and keeping to the principle
of exchange of equal values). Communist Party members must attain a full
grasp of all the principles and methods of organizing labour power. Rent
reduction carried out universally and thoroughly in all the base areas this
year will stimulate a broad increase in production next year. And the great
production campaign that will be carried on next year by Party and government,
soldiers and civilians, men and women, and young and old, to increase the
supply of grain and other necessities and to prepare against natural
disasters, will lay the material foundation for the continued maintenance
of the anti-Japanese base areas. Otherwise, we will encounter grave difficulties.

3. For the Party, the government and the army to be at one with the people
in developing next year's anti-Japanese struggle and campaign for production,
the Party committees and the leading army and government bodies in every
single base area should prepare to launch a large-scale mass campaign in
the first month of the coming lunar year to "support the government and cherish
the people" and to "support the army and give preferential treatment to the
families of soldiers who are fighting the Japanese". The troops should publicly
renew their pledge to "support the government and cherish the people", hold
meetings for self-criticism, arrange get-togethers with the local people
(to which representatives of the local Party and government organizations
should also be invited), and apologize and give compensation for any past
infringements upon the interests of the masses. Under the leadership of the
local Party, government and mass organizations, the masses on their side
should publicly renew their pledge to support the army and give preferential
treatment to the families of the soldiers fighting the Japanese, and should
set going an ardent campaign for greetings and gifts to the army units. In
the course of these campaigns, the army on its side and the Party and the
government on theirs should thoroughly examine the shortcomings and mistakes
of 1943, and should resolutely correct them in 1944. From now on, such campaigns
should be launched everywhere in the first month of every lunar year, and
in the course of them the pledges to "support the government and cherish
the people" and "support the army and give preferential treatment to the
families of the soldiers who are fighting the Japanese" should be read out
time and again, and there should be repeated self-criticism before the masses
of any high-handed behaviour by the troops in the base areas towards the
Party or government personnel or towards civilians, or of any lack of concern
for the troops shown by the Party or government personnel or the civilians
(each side criticizing itself and not the other) in order that these shortcomings
and mistakes may be thoroughly corrected.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## A Comment on the Sessions of the Kuomintang Central Executive Committee and the People's Political Council







A COMMENT ON THE SESSIONS OF THE KUOMINTANG CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  A COMMENT ON THE SESSIONS OF THE KUOMINTANG CENTRAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE AND
  OF THE PEOPLE'S POLITICAL COUNCIL

October 5, 1943

[This editorial was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Liberation
Daily, Yenan.]
  

The Kuomintang held the Eleventh Plenary Session of its Central Executive
Committee from September 6 to 13, and the Kuomintang government held the
Second Session of the Third People's Political Council from September 18
to 27. Now that all the documents of both these meetings are at hand, we
can make a general comment.

The international situation is on the threshold of a great change, whose
imminence is sensed on all sides. The European Axis Powers have sensed it,
and Hitler is adopting a desperate last-ditch policy. In the main, it is
the Soviet Union that is bringing this change about. The Soviet Union is
now taking advantage of it--the Red Army has already fought its way to the
Dnieper, sweeping all before it, and another winter offensive will bring
it to the old, if not to the new, Soviet boundaries. Britain and the United
States, too, are taking advantage of the change; Roosevelt and Churchill
are waiting for the first sign of Hitler's downfall to thrust into France.
In short, the German fascist war machine will soon fall apart, the problem
of the anti-fascist war in Europe is on the eve of total solution, and the
Soviet Union is the main force in annihilating fascism. As the world anti-fascist
war has its pivot in Europe, once the problem there is solved, the fate of
the two great world camps, the fascist and the anti-fascist camps, will be
decided. The Japanese imperialists feel themselves cornered, and their policy,
too, can only be to muster all possible strength for a desperate last-ditch
struggle. In China, they will try to "mop up" the Communists and entice the
Kuomintang to capitulate.

The Kuomintang has also sensed the change. Faced with this situation it feels
both joy and fear. Joy, because it imagines that with the war in Europe over,
Britain and the United States will be left free to fight Japan on its behalf,
and that it will be able to return to Nanking without any effort. Fear, because
with the downfall of all three fascist powers the world will enter a great
and unprecedented age of liberation, and the Kuomintang's comprador-feudal
fascist dictatorship will become a small island in a vast ocean of freedom
and democracy; it fears that its own brand of fascism with its "one party,
one doctrine, one leader" will be buried beneath the waves.

Originally the Kuomintang hoped to have the Soviet Union fighting it out
with Hitler single-handed and to instigate the Japanese to attack the Soviet
Union, so that the land of socialism would be destroyed or at least badly
mauled; it also hoped that Britain and the United States would shift all
their forces to the East and first smash Japan and then wipe out the Chinese
Communist Party, before bothering about any second or third front in Europe.
It was for this ulterior purpose that the Kuomintang first clamoured for
a strategy of "Asia before Europe" and then for "equal attention to Europe
and Asia". In August this year, towards the end of the Quebec conference,
when Roosevelt and Churchill summoned T. V. Soong, the foreign minister of
the Kuomintang government, to Quebec and spoke a few words to him, the Kuomintang
started shouting that "Roosevelt and Churchill are turning to the East",
that "the 'Europe before Asia' plan is changed", that "Quebec is a conference
of the three great powers, Britain, the United States and China", etc., and
joyfully indulged in self-glorification. But this was the Kuomintang's last
occasion to rejoice. Since then its mood has changed somewhat; "Asia before
Europe" and "equal attention to Europe and Asia" have been consigned to the
museum of history, and now the Kuomintang is probably cooking up new schemes.
Perhaps the Eleventh Plenary Session of the Kuomintang Central Executive
Committee and the Second Session of the Kuomintang-controlled People's Political
Council mark the beginning of these new schemes.

The Eleventh Plenary Session of the Kuomintang CEC slanderously accused the
Communist Party of "sabotaging the War of Resistance and endangering the
state", and at the same time declared itself in favour of a "political solution"
and of "preparations for constitutional government". Controlled and manipulated
by its Kuomintang majority, the Second Session of the Third PPC passed
resolutions against the Communist Party to roughly the same effect. In addition,
the Eleventh Plenary Session of the Kuomintang CEC "elected" Chiang Kai-shek
president of the Kuomintang government in order to strengthen its dictatorial
machine.

What can the Kuomintang be planning to do now, following the Eleventh Plenary
Session? There are only three possibilities:

  (1) capitulation to Japanese imperialism;


  (2) dragging along on the old road; and


  (3) a change in its political line.


Serving the Japanese imperialists' purpose of "hitting the Communists and
courting the Kuomintang", the defeatists and capitulationists within the
Kuomintang have all along advocated surrender. They have constantly endeavoured
to unleash an anti-Communist civil war which, once started, would naturally
make resistance to Japan impossible, leaving capitulation as the only
alternative. The Kuomintang has concentrated 400,000 to 500,000 troops in
northwestern China and is stealthily diverting still more forces there from
other fronts. It is said that the generals are in good fettle and are
proclaiming, "Taking Yenan is no problem." This is how they have been talking
since Mr. Chiang Kai-shek's speech at the Eleventh Plenary Session in which
he described the Communist problem as "a political one and should be solved
politically" and since the Session's resolutions to roughly the same effect.
Similar resolutions were adapted last year at the Tenth Plenary Session of
the Kuomintang CEC, and the ink was hardly dry before the generals were ordered
to draw up military plans for liquidating the Border Region; in June and
July this year forces were deployed in preparation for a blitz against the
Border Region, and the scheme was temporarily shelved only because public
opinion at home and abroad was against it. Now once again, no sooner have
the resolutions of the Eleventh Plenary Session been put down in black and
white than there are reports of the generals' braggadocio and of troop movements.
"Taking Yenan is no problem"--what does this signify? It signifies a decision
to capitulate to Japanese imperialism. Not all the Kuomintang members who
favour "taking Yenan" are necessarily conscious and determined capitulationists.
Some of them may think, "We shall still resist the Japanese while fighting
the Communists." This is probably what many officers of the Whampoa clique
[1] are thinking.

To these gentlemen we Communists would like to put the following questions.
Have you forgotten the lessons of the ten years of civil war? Once another
civil war starts, will the determined capitulationists allow you to continue
the war against Japan? Will the Japanese and Wang Ching-wei allow you to
continue the war against Japan? Are you really so strong that you can fight
a civil war and a war against the foreign foe at the same time? You claim
to have three million men, but your armies are so demoralized that people
have compared them to two baskets of eggs on the ends of a carrying pole--one
collision and they are finished. This is what has happened in all the campaigns
in the Chungtiao Mountains, the Taihang Mountains, Chekiang and Kiangsi,
western Hupeh and the Tapieh Mountains. The simple reason is that you have
followed the fatal policy of being "active against the Communists" and "passive
against the Japanese". A national enemy has penetrated deep into our country,
and the more actively you fight the Communists and the more passively you
resist the Japanese, the lower will be the morale of your troops. If you
make such a poor show in fighting the foreign aggressor, can you expect your
troops suddenly to become tough in fighting the Communists and the people?
It is out of the question. Once you start civil war, you will have to give
it your undivided attention and inevitably abandon all thought of "simultaneous
resistance"; in the end you will inevitably find yourselves signing a treaty
of unconditional surrender to Japanese imperialism, with capitulation as
the only policy left to you. Those of you in the Kuomintang who do not really
wish to capitulate will inevitably end up as capitulationists if you take
an active part in instigating or prosecuting civil war. This will surely
happen if you lend yourselves to the manoeuvres of the capitulationist clique
and use the resolutions of the Eleventh Plenary Session and the People's
Political Council as an instrument for mobilizing public opinion and preparing
for anti-Communist civil war. Even if you do not want to capitulate in the
first place, you will end up by surrendering in the wake of the capitulationist
clique if you lend yourselves to their manoeuvres and take a wrong step.
That is the first possibility concerning the direction the Kuomintang may
take after the Eleventh Plenary Session, and there is an extremely serious
danger that it may materialize. From the standpoint of the capitulationist
clique, talk about a "political solution" and "preparations for constitutional
government" is the best means of camouflaging its preparations for civil
war, i.e., for surrender; all Communists, all patriotic members of the
Kuomintang, all anti-Japanese parties, and all our follow-countrymen who
are opposed to Japan should be sharply on the alert against this extremely
grave danger and should not be fooled by the camouflage. It must be recognized
that the danger of civil war has never been so great as it is now after the
Kuomintang's Eleventh Plenary Session.

There is another direction in which these resolutions may lead, that of "stalling
for a while and starting the civil war later". This course, which differs
somewhat from that of the capitulationist clique, may be taken by those people
who still want to keep up the appearance of resistance to Japan while absolutely
refusing to abandon anti-communism and dictatorial rule. They may move in
this direction since they see that great changes in the international situation
are inevitable and Japanese imperialism is doomed; that civil war would mean
capitulation and the people throughout the country are for resistance and
against civil war; that the Kuomintang is in a state of serious crisis, having
alienated itself from the masses, lost popular support and become more isolated
than ever; and that the United States, Britain and the Soviet Union are all
opposed to the launching of civil war by the Chinese government. All this
may force them to postpone their civil-war schemes and play for time with
empty talk about a "political solution" and "preparations for constitutional
government". These people are past masters in the tactics of deception and
stalling. Even in their dreams they do not forget their desire to "take Yenan"
and "liquidate the Communist Party". On this point they are entirely at one
with the capitulationist clique. Nevertheless they do wish to keep up the
pretence of resistance to Japan, they do not wish the Kuomintang to forfeit
its international standing, and they sometimes fear the censure of domestic
and foreign public opinion; therefore they may stall behind the smokescreen
of a "political solution" and "preparations for constitutional government"
while waiting for more favourable conditions. They have no sincere desire
for a "political solution" or "constitutional government", at least certainly
not at the moment. Last year, about the time of the Tenth Plenary Session
of the Kuomintang CEC, Comrade Lin Piao was sent to Chungking by the Central
Committee of the Communist Party to confer with Mr. Chiang Kai-shek. He waited
in Chungking for ten long months, but Mr. Chiang Kai-shek and the Central
Executive Committee of the Kuomintang had no desire to discuss a single concrete
problem with him. In March this year, Mr. Chiang Kai-shek published his book
China's Destiny in which he emphasizes his opposition to communism
and liberal ideas, shifts the blame for the ten years of civil war on to
the Communist Party, slanders the Communist Party, the Eighth Route Army
and the New Fourth Army as "warlords of a new type" and "separatists of a
new type", and implies that he will finish off the Communists within two
years. On June 28 this year, Mr. Chiang Kai-shek permitted Chou En-lai, Lin
Piao and other comrades to return to Yenan, but at that very moment he ordered
his defence forces on the Yellow River to march on the Border Region, and
he also ordered the local authorities throughout the country to seize the
opportunity of the dissolution of the Third International to demand, in the
name of so-called people's organizations, that the Communist Party of China
be dissolved. In these circumstances, we Communists were obliged to call
on the Kuomintang and the whole nation to avert civil war, and we were obliged
to expose all the Kuomintang's sinister schemes and conspiracies which were
sabotaging the War of Resistance and endangering the state. Our patience
has been taxed to the limit, as the historical facts show. Ever since the
fall of Wuhan, there has been no end to the anti-Communist battles, large
or small, in northern and central China. It is now two years since the Pacific
war broke out, and throughout this time the Kuomintang has been attacking
the Communists in central and northern China; apart from the troops originally
stationed there, it has dispatched the group armies under Wang Chung-lien
and Li Hsien-chou to attack the Communists in Kiangsu and Shantung. Pang
Ping-hsun's group army in the area of the Taihang Mountains is under orders
to concentrate exclusively on the Communists; so are the Kuomintang troops
in Anhwei and Hupeh. For a long time, we did not make even these facts public.
The Kuomintang newspapers and periodicals have never for a moment stopped
vilifying the Communist Party, but for a long time we did not say a word
in reply. Without any justification, the Kuomintang disbanded the New Fourth
Army which was heroically fighting Japan, wiped out over nine thousand men
of its contingents in southern Anhwei, arrested Yeh Ting, killed Hsiang Ying
[2] and imprisoned hundreds of its cadres; although
this was a monstrous betrayal of the people and the nation, we maintained
our forbearance for the country's sake, simply lodging a protest and demanding
redress. When Mr. Chiang Kai-shek met Comrade Chou En-lai, the representative
of the Communist Party, at Lushan in June and July 1937, he promised that
the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region would be designated by decree as an
administrative division under the direct jurisdiction of the Executive Yuan
of the National Government and that its officials would receive formal
appointments. Now Mr. Chiang Kai-shek has not only eaten his own words, he
has gone so far as to encircle the Border Region with 400,000 to 500,000
men to enforce a military and economic blockade; he will not be happy with
anything less than the destruction of the people of the Border Region as
well as the rear headquarters of the Eighth Route Army. It is particularly
notorious that promised supplies have been cut off from the Eighth Route
Army and that the Communist Party is abused as the "traitor party", the New
Fourth Army as the "rebel army", the Eighth Route Army as the "traitor army",
etc. In short, all the Kuomintang people who are behaving in this way see
the Communist Party as the enemy. To the Kuomintang, the Communist Party
is ten times, nay, a hundred times more hateful than the Japanese. The Kuomintang
concentrates its hatred on the Communist Party and has little, if any, to
spare for the Japanese. This resembles the behaviour of the Japanese fascists,
who treat the Kuomintang and the Communist Party differently. Concentrating
their hatred on the Chinese Communist Party, the Japanese fascists have become
more and more gentle with the Kuomintang; of their two slogans, "Oppose the
Communists" and "Annihilate the Kuomintang", only the first now remains.
The newspapers and periodicals controlled by the Japanese and Wang Ching-wei
no longer print such slogans as "Down with the Kuomintang" and "Overthrow
Chiang Kai-shek". Japan is bearing down on the Communist Party with 58 per
cent of her forces in China and is just using 42 per cent to keep watch on
the Kuomintang; she has recently relaxed this watch and withdrawn many of
her troops from Chekiang and Hupeh in order to make it easier to inveigle
the Kuomintang into capitulation. The Japanese imperialists have never dared
utter a single word to persuade the Communist Party to capitulate, but they
have no hesitation in directing an endless stream of words to persuade the
Kuomintang to do so. The Kuomintang is fierce only towards the Communist
Party and the people, but it drops all its ferocity in the face of the Japanese.
Not only has it changed from being a participant to being a mere spectator
in the war as far as fighting is concerned, but even in words it dares not
offer as much as a single sharp rebuff to the insults and blandishments of
Japanese imperialism. The Japanese say, "There is nothing wrong with the
line of argument in Chiang Kai-shek's China's Destiny." Has Mr.
Chiang or any member of his party ever rebutted this? No, they have not and
dare not. How can the Japanese help despising the Kuomintang when they see
that Mr. Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang use "military and governmental
orders" and "discipline" only against the Communists, and neither desire
nor dare to use them against the twenty members of the Kuomintang Central
Executive Committee and the fifty-eight Kuomintang generals who have deserted
to the enemy? The people throughout the country and the friendly nations
throughout the world have seen Mr. Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang disbanding
the New Fourth Army and attacking the Eighth Route Army, encircling the Border
Region, maligning them with such labels as "traitor party", "traitor army",
"warlords of a new type", "a new type of separatist regime", "sabotaging
the War of Resistance" and "endangering the state", and constantly invoking
"military and governmental orders" and "discipline"; they have never seen
Mr. Chiang and the Kuomintang enforcing any military orders, government decrees
or disciplinary measures against the twenty members of the Kuomintang Central
Executive Committee and the fifty-eight Kuomintang generals who went over
to the enemy. Similarly, the resolutions recently passed at the Eleventh
Plenary Session of the Kuomintang CEC and at the meeting of the People's
Political Council are all directed against the Communist Party, while not
a single one is directed against the many members of the Kuomintang CEC itself
and the many army generals who have turned traitor and defected. What are
the people throughout the country and the friendly nations throughout the
world to think of the Kuomintang? As was to be expected, there was once again
talk about a "political solution" and "preparations for constitutional
government" at the Eleventh Plenary Session; well and good, we welcome such
talk. But judging by the political line the Kuomintang has consistently followed
all those years, we consider this talk to be just so many empty words designed
to dupe the people, the real purpose being to gain time for preparing civil
war so as to perpetuate its dictatorial rule over the people.

Is there a third direction in which the current situation may develop? Yes,
there is. It is what a number of Kuomintang members, all the people and we
Communists are hoping for. What is this third course? A just and reasonable
political settlement of the relations between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party, a genuinely democratic and free constitutional government, the abolition
of the fascist dictatorship with its "one party, one doctrine, one leader"
and the convening during the War of Resistance of a national assembly genuinely
elected by the people. We Communists have advocated this course from the
very beginning. A number of Kuomintang members will also agree to it. For
a long time we hoped that even Mr. Chiang Kai-shek and his own faction in
the Kuomintang might pursue this course. But judging from what has happened
in the last few years and what is happening now, there is nothing to show
that Mr. Chiang and the majority of the Kuomintang personages in power are
willing to do so.

A number of conditions, international and domestic, are needed before this
course can be realized. At the present time (with fascism in Europe on the
eve of complete collapse) the international conditions are favourable to
China's War of Resistance, but it is at this very moment that the capitulators
are especially eager to instigate civil war so that they can capitulate,
and that the Japanese and Wang Ching-wei, too, are particularly keen on civil
war, so as to inveigle them into capitulation. Wang Ching-wei said (according
to the Domei News Agency, October 1): "Devoted brothers always remain brothers,
and Chungking will certainly follow our road, the sooner the better, we hope."
What affection, confidence and eagerness! Thus in the present situation the
best that can be expected from the Kuomintang is stalling, while the danger
of a sudden deterioration is very grave indeed. The conditions necessary
for the third course are not all present yet, and patriots of all parties
and the people throughout China must make many-sided efforts to bring them
into being.

Mr. Chiang Kai-shek announced at the Eleventh Plenary Session:

  It should be stated clearly that the central authorities make no demands
  upon the Communist Party other than that it should give up its armed separatist
  regime and cease its surprise attacks on the National Army, which sabotage
  the War of Resistance; it is to be hoped that the Communist Party will carry
  out its declaration made in the 26th year of the Republic [1937] calling
  for united efforts to save the nation and will put into effect the four pledges
  given in that declaration.


Mr. Chiang's talk of "surprise attacks on the National Army, which sabotage
the War of Resistance" ought to be applied to the Kuomintang itself, and
it is a pity that he is so prejudiced and malicious as to slander the Communist
Party in this way. Since the fall of Wuhan the Kuomintang has launched three
anti-Communist onslaughts, in each of which, as the facts show, the Kuomintang
troops sprang surprise attacks on the Communist forces. In the first campaign,
from the winter of 1939 to the spring of 1940, the Kuomintang troops in their
surprise attacks captured five county towns garrisoned by the Eighth Route
Army in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, Chunhua, Hsunyi, Chengning,
Ninghsien and Chenyuan, even employing aircraft in these operations. In northern
China, Chu Huai-ping's troops were dispatched to the Taihang Mountain region
for a surprise attack on the Eighth Route Army forces, which only fought
back in self-defence. The second campaign was launched in January 1941. Earlier,
on October 19, 1940, Ho Ying-chin and Pai Chung-hsi had telegraphed a categorical
order to Chu Teh, Peng Teh-huai, Yeh Ting and Hsiang Ying, commanding all
units of the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies south of the Yellow River
to move north of the river within a month. We promised that our troops in
southern Anhwei would move north; as for the others, while it was impossible
for them to be shifted in the circumstances, we promised that they would
move to the assigned positions after victory in the anti-Japanese war. Yet,
before our 9,000 men in southern Anhwei began moving north on January 5 in
compliance with the order, Mr. Chiang Kai-shek had already issued another
order to "catch them all in a dragnet". Between January 6 and 14, the Kuomintang
troops in southern Anhwei actually did catch these New Fourth Army units
in a dragnet. Moreover, on January 17, Mr. Chiang Kai-shek ordered the whole
New Fourth Army to be disbanded and Yeh Ting to be court-martialled. The
Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies have since been attacked wherever there
are Kuomintang troops in the anti-Japanese base areas in central and northern
China, and they have only fought back in self-defence. The third campaign
began in March of this year and is still going on. The Kuomintang forces
have continued their assaults on the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies in
central and northern China. In addition, Mr. Chiang Kai-shek has published
his China's Destiny, which is a diatribe against communism and against
the people. He has diverted many of his Yellow River defence forces for a
lightning attack on the Border Region. He has instigated so-called people's
organizations all over the country to demand the dissolution of the Communist
Party. He has mobilized the Kuomintang majority in the People's Political
Council to endorse Ho Ying-chin's military report vilifying the Eighth Route
Army and to adopt anti-Communist resolutions. He has thus turned the Council,
which should be a symbol of anti-Japanese unity, into a private agency of
the Kuomintang for manufacturing anti-Communist public opinion in preparation
for civil war, with the result that Comrade Tang Pi-wu, the Communist member
of the Council, had to walk out in protest. These three anti-Communist onslaughts
were deliberately planned and launched by the Kuomintang. We may well ask,
what are they if not actions which "sabotage the War of Resistance"?

On September 22 of the 26th year of the Republic (1937), the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China issued a declaration calling for united efforts
to save the nation. In it we said:

  To strip the enemy of any pretext for his intrigues and to remove any
  misunderstanding among all well-intentioned doubters, the Central Committee
  of the Communist Party of China finds it necessary to proclaim its heartfelt
  devotion to the cause of national liberation. Therefore, it once again solemnly
  declares to the whole nation: (1) that Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Three People's
  Principles being what China needs today, our Party is ready to fight for
  their complete realization; (2) that we shall discontinue the policies of
  insurrection to overthrow the Kuomintang regime and of forcible confiscation
  of the land of the landlords; (3) that we shall reorganize the present Red
  government as the democratic government of a special region in the hope that
  state power will be unified throughout the country; and (4) that the Red
  Army will change its name and designation, will be reorganized as part of
  the National Revolutionary Army and placed under the Military Council of
  the National Government, and will be ready for orders to march to the
  anti-Japanese front and do its duty.


We have completely fulfilled these four pledges; neither Mr. Chiang Kai-shek
nor anyone else in the Kuomintang can charge us with having defaulted on
a single one of them. In the first place, the policies practised by the Communist
Party in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and in the anti-Japanese
base areas behind the enemy lines are in keeping with Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Three
People's Principles, and not a single one runs counter to them. In the second
place, as long as the Kuomintang does not capitulate to the national enemy,
disrupt Kuomintang-Communist co-operation or launch civil war against the
Communists, we will always keep our promise not to overthrow the Kuomintang
or to confiscate the land of the landlords by force. We have kept this pledge
in the past, are doing so now and will continue to do so in the future. That
means that only when the Kuomintang capitulates to the enemy, disrupts
co-operation and launches civil war will we be forced to cancel our pledge,
for these are the only circumstances which would make it impossible for us
to keep it. In the third place, the original Red government was reorganized
in the very first year of the War of Resistance, and the "three thirds- system"
of democratic government has long been in operation, but to this day the
Kuomintang has not fulfilled its promise to recognize the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region and, what is more, it accuses us of "feudal separatism". Mr.
Chiang Kai-shek and other members of the Kuomintang! You should know that
what you call "separatism"-- the state of affairs in which the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and other anti-Japanese base areas are
not recognized by the Kuomintang government--is not of our seeking but has
been entirely forced on us by yourselves. What reason do you have for accusing
us of "separatism" while you go back on your own words, refuse the recognition
you pledged to the Border Region and refuse to acknowledge its democratic
government? Day in day out we ask for recognition and you refuse--who then
is responsible? What reason does Mr. Chiang have for railing against "separatism"
in his China's Destiny, without showing the slightest sense of his
own responsibility in the matter, though he himself is Director-General of
the Kuomintang and head of its government? Availing ourselves of the occasion
of the Eleventh Plenary Session at which Mr. Chiang Kai-shek has again demanded
that we fulfil our promise, we demand that he fulfil his promise to give
legal recognition to the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, where the Principle
of Democracy has long been in practice, and to the anti-Japanese democratic
base areas behind the enemy's lines as well. If you persist in your policy
of non-recognition, it will mean that you want us to continue with "separatism",
and that, as in the past, the blame will fall entirely on you and not on
us. In the fourth place, it is a long time since the Red Army changed its
"name and designation", became "reorganized as part of the National Revolutionary
Army" and was "placed under the Military Council of the National Government";
this pledge was fulfilled long ago. The only force directly under the Central
Committee of the Communist Party and not under the Military Council of the
National Government is the New Fourth Army of the National Revolutionary
Army; the reason is that it was proscribed as a "rebel army" and "disbanded"
on January 17, 1941 by the Military Council in a counter-revolutionary order
sabotaging the War of Resistance and endangering the state, and was, moreover,
subjected to daily attacks by the Kuomintang troops. Yet this army has
consistently fought the Japanese in central China and fulfilled the first
three of the four pledges; furthermore, it is willing to come "under the
Military Council of the National Government" once again, and asks Mr. Chiang
Kai-shek to repeal the order for its disbandment and restore its designation
so as to enable it to fulfil the fourth pledge.

The document concerning the Communist Party adopted at the Eleventh Plenary
Session also stated:

  As for the other problems, they can all be raised at the national assembly
  for discussion and solution, since the present session has resolved that
  a national assembly should be convened and a constitution drawn up and
  promulgated within one year after the conclusion of the war.


The "other problems" here referred to are the abolition of the Kuomintang
dictatorship, the abolition of the fascist secret service, the establishment
of democratic role throughout the country, the abolition of economic controls,
exorbitant taxes and miscellaneous levies harmful to the people, the application
on a nation-wide scale of the agrarian policy of reducing rent and interest
and of the economic policy of helping small and medium scale industries and
improving the workers' livelihood. In its declaration of September 22, 1937
calling for united efforts to save the nation our Party stated:

  Democracy should be put into effect and a national assembly convened to frame
  and adopt a constitution and draw up a policy of national salvation. To enable
  the Chinese people to lead a happy and prosperous life, effective measures
  must first be taken to provide famine relief, ensure a stable livelihood,
  develop defence industries, deliver the people from suffering and improve
  their living conditions.


Since this declaration was accepted in its entirety by Mr. Chiang Kai-shek
in a statement on the very next day (September 23), he should not merely
ask the Communist Party to keep the four pledges it set forth, he should
also ask himself, the Kuomintang and the Kuomintang government to carry out
the provisions we have quoted.

Mr. Chiang Kai-shek is not only the Director-General of the Kuomintang, he
has also become president of the Kuomintang government (nominally the National
Government); he should therefore conscientiously carry out these provisions
about democracy and the people's livelihood, honour the innumerable promises
he himself has made to us Communists and to the people throughout the country,
and should stop repudiating his promises and acting high-handedly, saying
one thing and doing another. Together with the whole people, we Communists
want deeds and not more empty, deceitful words. If deeds are forthcoming,
we shall rejoice; empty words without deeds will not deceive the people for
long. What we ask of Mr. Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang is the following:
Carry the War of Resistance through to the end, avert the danger of capitulation;
continue co-operation, avert the crisis of civil war; recognize the democratic
government in the Border Region and in the anti-Japanese base areas behind
the enemy lines, reinstate the New Fourth Army, stop the anti-Communist campaign,
withdraw the 400,000 to 500,000 troops now encircling the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region; stop using the People's Political Council as a private agency
of the Kuomintang for stirring up anti-Communist opinion, lift the ban on
freedom of speech, assembly and association, abolish the one-party dictatorship
of the Kuomintang; reduce rent and interest, improve the living and working
conditions of the workers, help the small and medium scale industries; abolish
the secret service, put an end to fascist education and introduce democratic
education. You yourselves have promised to do most of these things. If you
fulfil these demands and promises, we assure you that we shall continue to
fulfil our promises. We are ready to resume the talks between the two parties
at any time, if Mr. Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang are ready.

In short, of the three possible directions which the Kuomintang may take,
the first, capitulation and civil war, is the road of destruction for Mr.
Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang. The second, demagogic deception for the
purpose of gaining time while clinging to fascist dictatorship and actively
conducting secret preparations for civil war, likewise offers no salvation
for Mr. Chiang and the Kuomintang. Only the third direction, the complete
abandonment of the erroneous course of fascist dictatorship and civil war
and the pursuit of the correct course of democracy and co-operation, can
bring Mr. Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang on to the road of salvation.
However, Mr. Chiang and the Kuomintang have so far done nothing to convince
the people that they intend to move in the third direction; hence, the people
throughout the country must remain on guard against the extremely grave danger
of capitulation and civil war.

Let all patriotic members of the Kuomintang unite and forbid the Kuomintang
authorities to go in the first direction, prevent them from continuing in
the second and demand that they take the third!

Let all patriotic anti-Japanese parties and people unite and forbid the
Kuomintang authorities to go in the first direction, prevent them from continuing
in the second and demand that they take the third!

An unparalleled change is imminent in the world. We hope that Mr. Chiang
Kai-shek and the members of the Kuomintang will conduct themselves well at
this great turning point of our era. We hope that all patriotic parties and
patriotic people will conduct themselves well at this great turning point
of our era.
NOTES

1. The Whampoa clique refers to those Kuomintang generals
and officers who had once been instructors or cadets at the Whampoa Military
Academy. They were Chiang Kai-shek's closest followers in the Kuomintang
army.

2. Yeh Ting and Hsiang Ying were respectively Commander
and Deputy Commander of the New Fourth Army.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Get Organized!







GET ORGANIZED!



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  GET ORGANIZED!

November 29, 1943

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung made this speech at a reception in honour of the labour
heroes of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region.]
  

On behalf of the Central Committee of the Communist Party I would like to
say a few words at this reception it is giving for the labour heroes and
heroines and other model workers in production elected from the villages,
the factories, the armed forces, the government and other organizations and
the schools in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region. What I want to say
can be summed up in the words, "Get organized!" This year the peasant masses
and the people in the army, the government and other organizations, the schools
and the factories of the Border Region have been conducting a production
campaign in accordance with the resolutions of the meeting of senior cadres
convened last winter by the Northwest Bureau of the Central Committee. Great
achievements and advances have been scored in every field of production this
year and the Border Region has taken on a new look. Facts have fully borne
out the correctness of the policy adopted by the conference of senior cadres.
The gist of this policy is to organize the masses, to mobilize and organize
into a great army of labour all the available forces without exception--the
people, the army, the government and other organizations and the schools--all
men and women, young and old, who can contribute their labour power on a
part-time or full-time basis. We have an army for fighting as well as an
army for labour. For fighting we have the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies;
but even they do a dual job, warfare and production. With these two kinds
of armies, and with a fighting army skilled in these two tasks and in mass
work, we can overcome our difficulties and defeat Japanese imperialism. If
the achievements of our production campaign in the Border Region in recent
years were not great or remarkable enough to prove this conclusively, our
achievements this year have really done so, as we have all seen with our
own eyes.

In all the armed units of the Border Region that have been allotted land
this year, the soldiers have on the average cultivated eighteen mou
per person; and they can produce or make practically everything--food
(vegetables, meat and cooking oil), clothing (cotton-padded clothes, woollen
knitwear and footwear), shelter (cave-dwellings, houses and meeting halls),
articles of daily use (tables, chairs, benches and stationery), and fuel
(firewood, charcoal and coal). By using our own hands we have attained the
objective of "ample food and clothing". Every soldier needs to spend only
three months of the year in production and can devote the remaining nine
months to training and fighting. Our troops depend for their pay neither
on the Kuomintang government, nor on the Border Region Government, nor on
the people, but can fully provide for themselves. What a vitally important
innovation for our cause of national liberation! During the last six and
a half years of the War of Resistance, the anti-Japanese base areas have
been subjected to the enemy's policy of "burn all, kill all, loot all", the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region has been tightly blockaded by the Kuomintang
and we were reduced to the direst straits financially and economically; if
our troops had been able to do nothing except fight, we would never have
solved our problems. Now our troops in the Border Region have learned to
produce, and so have some of the troops at the front, while others are learning.
If every man in our heroic and combat-worthy Eighth Route and New Fourth
Armies becomes able not only to fight and do mass work but also to produce,
we need fear no difficulty and shall be "invincible under heaven",
[1] to use the words of Mencius. Our organizations
and schools have also taken a big step forward this year. Only a small part
of their expenditure has come from the government, most of it being covered
by their own production; they have grown 100 per cent of the vegetables they
consume as compared with 50 per cent last year, considerably increased their
consumption of meat by raising pigs and sheep, and established many workshops
for making simple necessities. As the army, the organizations and the schools
now meet their own material needs fully or for the most part, less is taken
in taxation from the people, who can therefore enjoy more of the fruits of
their labour. As soldiers and civilians are alike increasing production,
all have ample food and clothing and are happy. In our factories, too, production
has been stepped up, secret agents have been combed out and productivity
has risen greatly. Throughout the Border Region, labour heroes have come
forward in great numbers in agriculture and industry, in the organizations
and the schools, and also in the army; we can say that production in the
Border Region has been set on the right path. All this comes from organizing
the strength of the masses.

To organize the strength of the masses is one policy. Is there a contrary
policy? Yes, there is. It is one that lacks the mass viewpoint, fails to
rely on the masses or organize them, and gives exclusive attention to organizing
the small number of people working in the financial, supply or trading
organizations, while paying no attention to organizing the masses in the
villages, the army, the government and other organizations, the schools and
factories; it treats economic work not as a broad movement or as an extensive
front, but only as an expedient for meeting financial deficits. That is the
other policy, the wrong policy. Such a policy formerly existed in the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, but after the correct guidance given
over these years, and especially after the senior cadres' conference last
year and the mass movement this year, the number of people who still think
this way is probably small. In the base areas in northern and central China,
where fighting is intense and the leading bodies have not given it enough
attention, the production campaign of the masses has not yet become widespread.
However, since the Central Committee's directive of October 1
[2] this year, preparations are being made everywhere
for a production campaign next year. Conditions at the front are more difficult
than in the Border Region; not only is there heavy fighting, but natural
disasters have occurred in some places. Nevertheless, we must mobilize the
entire Party, the government and the army and the civilian population both
to fight against the enemy and to engage in production, in order to support
the war, to cope with the enemy's policy of "burn all, kill all, loot all"
and to provide disaster relief. With the experience already gained in the
last few years in production at the front, and with the ideological,
organizational and material preparations this winter, an extensive campaign
can be and must be launched next year. In the front-line areas where fighting
is going on, it is not yet possible to have "ample food and clothing" but
quite possible and, indeed, imperative to "use our own hands and overcome
difficulties".

The co-operatives are now the most important form of mass organization in
the economic field. Although it is unnecessary to insist on attaching the
label co-operative to the productive activities of the masses in our army,
our government and other organizations and our schools, these activities
are of a co-operative nature, being carried on under centralized leadership
to meet the material needs of various departments, units and individuals
through mutual help and joint labour. They are co-operatives of a sort.

Among the peasant masses a system of individual economy has prevailed for
thousands of years, with each family or household forming a productive unit.
This scattered, individual form of production is the economic foundation
of feudal rule and keeps the peasants in perpetual poverty. The only way
to change it is gradual collectivization, and the only way to bring about
collectivization, according to Lenin, is through co-operatives.
[3] We have already organized many peasant
co-operatives in the Border Region, but at present they are only of a rudimentary
type and must go through several stages of development before they can become
co-operatives of the Soviet type known as collective farms. Ours is a
new-democratic economy, and our co-operatives are still organizations for
collective labour based on an individual economy (on private property).
Furthermore, they are of several types. One type is the organization of
agricultural labour for mutual aid, such as the "teams for the exchange of
labour" and "teams for the exchange and hire of labour";
[4] this kind of organization was known as the
"mutual-aid working group" or "ploughing team"
[5] in the Red areas in Kiangsi and is now called
the "mutual-aid group" in some places at the front. So long as they are
collective mutual-aid organizations which the people join voluntarily (compulsion
must never be used), all of them are good, no matter how they are named,
no matter whether they are each composed of a few, a few dozen or hundreds
of people, or whether they are composed entirely or partly of people who
can contribute full-time labour; no matter whether the members render each
other mutual aid in terms of manpower, animal power or implements, or they
live and eat together during the busy farming season; and no matter whether
the organizations are temporary or permanent. These methods of collective
mutual aid are the inventions of the masses themselves. In the past we summed
up such experience among the masses in Kiangsi, and now we are summing it
up in northern Shensi. In the Border Region mutual aid in labour has become
much more systematic and better developed, after being encouraged by the
meeting of senior cadres last year and put into practice all through the
current year. Many labour-exchange teams in the Border Region have done their
ploughing, planting, weeding and reaping collectively, and the harvest this
year is double that of last. Now that the masses have seen these substantial
results, undoubtedly more and more people will adopt the practice next year.
We do not expect to organize into co-operatives in one year all the hundreds
of thousands of people in the Border Region who can contribute full-time
or part-time labour, but this objective can be realized within a few years.
All women, too, should be mobilized to do a certain amount of productive
work. All loafers must be reformed into good citizens through participation
in production. Such collective mutual-aid producers' co-operatives should
be extensively and voluntarily organized in all the anti-Japanese base areas
in northern and central China.

Besides the collective mutual-aid co-operative for agricultural production,
there are three other varieties: the multi-purpose cooperative like the Southern
District Co-operative of Yenan, which combines the functions of producers',
consumers', transport (salt transport) and credit co-operatives; the transport
co-operative (salt transport team); and the handicraft co-operative.

With these four kinds of co-operatives among the masses and the collective
labour co-operatives in the army, the schools and the government and other
organizations, we can organize all the forces of the people into a great
army of labour. This is the only road to liberation for the people, the only
road from poverty to prosperity and the only road to victory in the War of
Resistance. Every Communist must learn to organize the labour of the masses.
Communists with an intellectual background must also learn to do so; once
they have set their minds on it, they can learn in six months or a year.
They can help the masses to organize production and to sum up experience.
When our comrades have learned, among other skills, to organize the labour
of the masses--to help the peasants draw up their household production plans,
to set up labour-exchange teams, salt transport teams and multi-purpose
co-operatives, to organize production in the army, the schools and the government
and other organizations, to organize production in the factories, develop
emulation in production, encourage and reward labour heroes, and arrange
production exhibitions--when our comrades have learned to bring the creative
power and initiative of the masses into play, we shall certainly be able
to drive out the Japanese imperialists and, together with the whole people,
build up a new China.

We Communists must be able to integrate ourselves with the masses in all
things. If our Party members spend their whole lives sitting indoors and
never go out to face the world and brave the storm, what good will they be
to the Chinese people? None at all, and we do not need such people as Party
members. We Communists ought to face the world and brave the storm, the great
world of mass struggle and the mighty storm of mass struggle. "Three cobblers
with their wits combined equal Chukeh Liang the master mind."
[6] In other words, the masses have great creative
power. In fact there are thousands upon thousands of Chukeh Liangs among
the Chinese people; every village, every town has its own. We should go to
the masses and learn from them, synthesize their experience into better,
articulated principles and methods, then do propaganda among the masses,
and call upon them to put these principles and methods into practice so as
to solve their problems and help them achieve liberation and happiness. If
our comrades doing local work are isolated from the masses, fail to understand
their feelings and to help them organize their production and improve their
livelihood, and if they confine themselves to collecting "public grain for
national salvation" without realizing that 10 per cent of their energy is
quite enough for this purpose provided they first devote 90 per cent to helping
the masses solve the problem of "private grain for the people's own salvation",
then these comrades are contaminated with the Kuomintang style of work and
covered with the dust of bureaucracy. The Kuomintang only demands things
from the people and gives them nothing in return. If a member of our Party
acts in this way, his style of work is that of the Kuomintang, and his face,
caked with the dust of bureaucracy, needs a good wash in a basin of hot water.
In my opinion, this bureaucratic style is to be found in local work in all
our anti-Japanese base areas, and there are comrades who are isolated from
the masses because they lack the mass viewpoint. We must firmly do away with
this style of work before we can have close ties with the masses.

In addition, a kind of warlord style is to be found in our army work, a style
also characteristic of the Kuomintang whose army is divorced from the masses.
Our troops must observe the correct principles that govern relations between
the army and the people, between the army and the government, between the
army and the Party, between officers and men, and between military work and
political work, and relations among the cadres, and must never commit the
errors of warlordism. Officers must cherish their men and must not be indifferent
to their well-being or resort to corporal punishment; the army must cherish
the people and never encroach upon their interests; the army must respect
the government and the Party and never "assert independence". Our Eighth
Route and New Fourth Armies are the armed forces of the people; they have
always been very good, and are indeed the best in the country. But it is
true that in recent years errors of warlordism of a certain kind have arisen,
and some comrades in the army have become arrogant and high-handed in their
behaviour towards the soldiers, the people, the government and the Party,
always blaming the comrades doing local work but never themselves, always
seeing their own achievements but never their own shortcomings, and always
welcoming flattery but never criticism. Such phenomena are to be found, for
example, in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region. The tendency has been
basically overcome as a result of the conference of senior cadres and the
meeting of military and political cadres last year and of the campaigns to
"support the government and cherish the people" and "support the army" during
the Spring Festival [7] this year, but there is
still a residue which we must make further efforts to eradicate. These faults
are also to be found in the base areas in northern and central China, and
the Party organizations and the army there must endeavour to eradicate them.

Whether it is the tendency towards bureaucracy in local work or towards
warlordism in army work, the fault is of the same nature, namely, isolation
from the masses. The overwhelming majority of our comrades are good comrades.
Those who have this fault can correct it once they have been criticized and
their mistakes pointed out. But self-criticism is imperative and wrong tendencies
must be squarely faced and conscientiously corrected. If anyone fails to
criticize the tendency towards bureaucracy in local work or towards warlordism
in army work, it means that he wants to retain the Kuomintang style and keep
the dust of bureaucracy or warlordism on his otherwise clean face, and he
is not a good Communist. If these two tendencies are eliminated, all our
work, including, of course, the production campaign, will proceed smoothly.

Our Border Region has taken on a totally different look because great results
have been achieved here in production, whether among the peasant masses,
or in the government and other organizations, the schools, the army or in
the factories, and the relations between the army and the people have greatly
improved. All this indicates that our comrades have a stronger mass viewpoint
and have made great progress in becoming one with the masses. Nevertheless,
we must not be complacent but continue our self-criticism and strive for
further progress. We must strive for further progress in production, too.
As our faces are apt to get dirty, we must wash them every day; as the floor
is apt to gather dust, we must sweep it every day. Even though the tendencies
towards bureaucracy in local work and warlordism in army work have been basically
overcome, these bad tendencies may arise again. We are surrounded by the
serried forces of Japanese imperialism and Chinese reaction, and we live
in the midst of the undisciplined petty bourgeoisie, and hence great gusts
of dirt of bureaucracy and warlordism blow in our faces daily. Therefore,
we must not become complacent over every success. We should check our complacency
and constantly criticize our shortcomings, just as we should wash our faces
or sweep the floor every day to remove the dirt and keep them dean.

Labour heroes and model workers in production! You are leaders of the people,
you have been very successful in your work, and I hope you, too, will not
grow complacent. I hope that when you get back to the counties in the sub-regions
of Kuanchung, Lungtung, Sanpien, Suiteh and Yenan,
[8] when you get back to your organizations, schools,
army units or factories, you will lead the people, lead the masses and work
still better, and first of all get the masses organized on a voluntary basis
into co-operatives, get them even better organized and in even greater numbers.
I hope that, when you go back, you will do this work and propagate it, so
that by next year's conference of labour heroes we shall have achieved still
greater results.
NOTES

1. From Mencius Book III, "Kungsun Chou", Part
I, Chapter 5.

2. The Central Committee's directive of October 1 was "Spread
the Campaigns to Reduce Rent, Increase Production and 'Support the Government
and Cherish the People' in the Base Areas", pp. 131-35 of this volume.

3. See V. I. Lenin, "On Cooperation", Selected Works,
Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1952, Vol. II, Part 2, pp. 715-23.

4. "Teams for the exchange of labour" and "teams for the
exchange and hire of labour" were both labour organizations for collective
mutual aid in agriculture in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region.
Labour-exchange is a means by which the peasants adjust labour power among
themselves. Man-workdays were exchanged for man-workdays, ox-workdays for
ox-workdays, man-workdays for ox-workdays etc. Peasants who joined
labour-exchange teams contributed their labour power or animal power to cultivate
the land of each member-family collectively and in rotation. In settling
accounts, the workday was taken as the unit of exchange those who contributed
more man-workdays or animal-workdays were paid for the difference by those
who contributed less. "Teams for the exchange and hire of labour" were usually
formed by peasants with insufficient land. Besides exchanging work among
themselves for mutual aid, their members also hired themselves out collectively
to families which were short of labour power.

5. Mutual-aid working groups and ploughing teams, based
on individual farming, were formed by peasants in the Red areas to facilitate
production through a better organization of labour power. On the principle
of voluntary participation and mutual benefit, the members did an equal amount
of work for each other, or if one could not give another as much help as
he received he made up the difference in cash. Apart from helping each other,
the teams gave preferential treatment to the families of Red Army soldiers
and worked for bereaved old folk without any pay except for meals during
the work. As these measures of mutual aid were of great help to production
and were carried out on a reasonable basis they won the warm support of the
masses.

6. Chukeh Liang was a statesman and strategist in the period
of the Three Kingdoms (221-265), who became a symbol of resourcefulness and
wisdom in Chinese folklore.

7. The Spring Festival is New Year's Day in the Chinese
lunar calendar.

8. The Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region was divided into
these five sub-regions.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Our Study and the Current Situation







OUR STUDY AND THE CURRENT SITUATION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  OUR STUDY AND THE CURRENT SITUATION

April 12, 1944

[From 1942 to 1944 the central organ and senior cadres of the Communist Party
of China held discussions on the history of the Party, especially of the
period from the beginning of 1931 to the end of 1934. These discussions greatly
helped in bringing about ideological unity in the Party on the basis of
Marxism-Leninism. The enlarged meeting of the Political Bureau of the Central
Committee at Tsunyi, Kweichow, in January 1935, had corrected the erroneous
"Left" line pursued from early 1931 to late 1934, changed the composition
of the central leading organ, established the leadership headed by Comrade
Mao Tse-tung and set the Party line on the correct Marxist-Leninist track;
nevertheless, many Party cadres had not yet reached a thorough understanding
of the character of the erroneous lines of the past. In order to raise the
Marxist-Leninist ideological level of Party cadres still higher, in 1942-43
the Political Bureau held several discussions on the history of the Party,
and then led the senior cadres of the whole Party in holding similar discussions
during 1943-44. These discussions were an important preparation for the Seventh
National Congress of the Party in 1945, enabling it to attain an ideological
and political unity without precedent in the history of the Communist Party
of China. "Our Study and the Current Situation" was a speech made by Comrade
Mao Tse-tung at a meeting of senior cadres in Yenan on April 12, 1944 on
the subject of these discussions.] 
  

  I


Since last winter, the senior cadres of our Party have been studying the
question of the two lines that existed in the history of the Party. This
has very greatly raised the political level of those numerous senior cadres.
In the course of the study, comrades have brought up many questions, and
the Political Bureau of the Central Committee has reached conclusions on
some of the important ones. They are as follows:

1. On the question of what attitude to adopt in studying our historical
experience. The Central Committee holds that we should enable the cadres
to become perfectly clear ideologically on the questions which arose in the
history of the Party and that at the same time we should adopt a lenient
policy in arriving at decisions about comrades who formerly committed errors,
so that on the one hand the cadres should thoroughly understand the historical
experience of our Party and avoid repeating past errors, and on the other
hand all comrades can be united for our common endeavour. In the history
of our Party there were great struggles against the erroneous lines of Chen
Tu-hsiu [1] and of Li Li-san, and they were absolutely
necessary. But there were defects in the methods employed. For one thing,
the cadres were not brought to a full ideological understanding of the causes
of these errors, the circumstances in which they were committed and the detailed
ways and means of correcting them, so that errors of a similar nature came
to be repeated; and for another, too much stress was placed on the responsibility
of individuals, so that we failed to unite as many people as we could have
done for our common endeavour. We should take warning from those two defects.
This time, in dealing with questions of Party history we should lay the stress
not on the responsibility of certain individual comrades but on the analysis
of the circumstances in which the errors were committed, on the content of
the errors and on their social, historical and ideological roots, and this
should be done in the spirit of "learning from past mistakes to avoid future
ones" and "curing the sickness to save the patient", in order to achieve
the twofold objective of clarity in ideology and unity among comrades. The
adoption of a careful attitude in handling cases of individual comrades,
neither glossing things over nor doing harm to comrades, is a sign that our
Party is vigorous and flourishing

2. Treat all questions analytically; do not negate everything. The question
concerning the line of the central leadership during the period from the
Fourth Plenary Session [2] to the Tsunyi Meeting,
[3] for example, should be analysed from two aspects.
It should be pointed out on the one hand that the political tactics, the
military tactics and the cadres policy which the central leading body adopted
during that period were wrong in their main aspects, but on the other hand
that on such fundamental issues as opposing Chiang Kai-shek and carrying
on the Agrarian Revolution and the struggle of the Red Army there was no
dispute between ourselves and the comrades who committed errors. And even
the tactical side needs to be analysed. On the land question, for instance,
their error consisted in the ultra-Left policy of allotting no land to the
landlords and poor land to the rich peasants, but these comrades were at
one with us on confiscating the land of the landlords for distribution among
peasants who had little or no land. Concrete analysis of concrete conditions,
Lenin said, is "the most essential thing in Marxism, the living soul of Marxism".
[4] Lacking an analytical approach, many of our
comrades do not want to go deeply into complex matters, to analyse and study
them over and over again, but like to draw simple conclusions which are either
absolutely affirmative or absolutely negative. The fact that our newspapers
are lacking in analytical articles and that the habit of analysis is not
yet fully cultivated in the Party shows that there are such shortcomings.
From now on we should remedy this state of affairs.

3. On the discussion of the documents of the Sixth National Congress of the
Party. It should be stated that the line of the Sixth National Congress was
basically correct, since that Congress defined the character of the present
revolution as bourgeois-democratic, defined the situation at that time as
an interval between two revolutionary high tides, repudiated opportunism
and putschism and promulgated the Ten-Point Programme.
[5] All this was correct. The Congress also had
its defects. For instance, among its other shortcomings or mistakes, it failed
to point out the very protracted nature of the Chinese revolution and the
very great importance of rural base areas in the revolution. Nonetheless,
the Sixth National Congress played a progressive role in the history of our
Party.

4. On the question of whether the provisional central leadership that was
formed in Shanghai in 1931 and the Fifth Plenary Session
[6] which it subsequently convened were legal or
not. The Central Committee holds that both were legal, but it should be stated
that the procedures for the election were inadequate and that this case should
be taken as a historical lesson.

5. On the question of factions in the history of the Party. It should be
stated that as a result of the series of changes since the Tsunyi Meeting
the factions which formerly existed and played an unwholesome role in the
history of our Party no longer exist. In our present study of the two lines
within the Party, it is absolutely necessary to point out that those factions
did exist and did play an unwholesome role. But it would be wrong to think
that factions with the same erroneous political programmes and organizational
forms still exist in the Party, after all the changes brought about by so
many inner-Party struggles--the Tsunyi Meeting of January 1935, the Sixth
Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee in October 1938, the enlarged
session of the Political Bureau in September 1941,
[7] the Party-wide rectification movement in 1942
and the campaign begun in the winter of 1943 for the study of the past struggles
between the two lines within the Party. The old factions are gone. What is
left is only the remnants of dogmatist and empiricist ideology, which can
be overcome by continuing and intensifying our rectification movement. But
what still exists in our Party to a serious extent, and almost everywhere,
is a more or less blind "mountain-stronghold"
mentality.[8] For instance, there is a lack of
mutual understanding, mutual respect and unity among comrades of different
units, which arises from differences in their background of struggle, differences
in the areas in which they work (as between one base area and another and
as between the Japanese-occupied areas, the Kuomintang areas and the
revolutionary base areas) and differences in their departments of work (as
between one army unit and another and as between one kind of work and another);
this phenomenon seems quite commonplace but in fact it seriously obstructs
the unity of the Party and the growth of its fighting capacity. The social
and historical roots of the mountain-stronghold mentality lie in the fact
that the Chinese petty bourgeoisie is particularly large and that for a long
period our rural base areas have been cut off from one another by the enemy,
while the subjective cause is the insufficiency of inner-Party education.
The important task now confronting us is to point out these causes, to persuade
our comrades to get rid of their blindness and raise the level of their political
awareness, to break down the ideological barriers that separate comrades
and to promote mutual understanding and respect, so as to bring about unity
throughout the Party.

A clear understanding of these questions by the whole Party will not only
assure the success of our present course of study within the Party, but will
also assure the victory of the Chinese revolution.

  
  II


The present situation has two characteristics: one is that the anti-fascist
front is growing stronger and the fascist front is declining, and the second
is that within the anti-fascist front the people's forces are growing stronger
and the anti-popular forces are declining. The first characteristic is quite
obvious and can readily be seen. Hitler will be defeated before long, and
the Japanese aggressors, too, are heading for defeat. The second characteristic
is not so obvious and cannot readily be seen, but it is daily becoming more
manifest in Europe, in Britain and the United States and in China.

The growth of the people's forces in China has to be explained with our Party
as the centre of the picture.

The growth of our Party during the War of Resistance Against Japan can be
divided into three stages. The first stage was from 1937 to 1940. In 1937
and 1938, the first two years of this stage, the Japanese militarists took
the Kuomintang seriously and the Communist Party lightly; therefore they
threw their main forces against the Kuomintang front, and, in their policy
towards the Kuomintang, military attack was primary and political blandishments
to bring about capitulation were supplementary; they did not take the
Communist-led anti-Japanese base areas seriously, believing that these amounted
to only a handful of Communists engaged in guerrilla actions. But after occupying
Wuhan in October 1938, the Japanese imperialists began to change their policy
and to take the Communist Party seriously and the Kuomintang lightly. In
their policy towards the Kuomintang, political blandishments to bring about
capitulation became primary and military attack supplementary, while at the
same time they gradually shifted their main forces to deal with the Communists.
For the Japanese imperialists now felt it was no longer the Kuomintang, but
the Communist Party, that was to be feared. In 1937 and 1938, the Kuomintang
put rather more effort into the War of Resistance, its relations with our
Party were comparatively good and it permitted rather more freedom, although
imposing many restrictions on the people's anti-Japanese movement. After
the fall of Wuhan, however, because of its defeats in the war and its increasing
hostility towards the Communist Party, the Kuomintang gradually became more
reactionary, more active against the Communists and more passive in the war
against Japan. In 1937, as a result of the setbacks in the civil war period,
the Communist Party had only about 40,000 organized members and an army of
30,000 men; hence it was taken lightly by the Japanese militarists. But by
1940 the Party's membership had risen to 800,000, our army had grown to nearly
500,000 and the population of the base areas, including those paying grain
tax only to us and those paying it both to us and to the Japanese and puppets,
[9] totalled about 100,000,000. In the course of
several years our Party had opened up such an extensive theatre of war, namely,
the Liberated Areas, that for no less than five and a half years we were
able to prevent any strategic offensive by the main forces of the Japanese
invaders against the Kuomintang front, draw these forces around ourselves,
extricate the Kuomintang from the crisis in its theatre of war and maintain
the protracted War of Resistance. But during that stage some comrades in
our Party committed an error; they underestimated Japanese imperialism (and
so did not see the protracted and ruthless nature of the war, maintained
that mobile warfare with large formations should be primary and belittled
guerrilla warfare), placed reliance on the Kuomintang, and failed to pursue
an independent policy soberly (hence their capitulationism towards the Kuomintang
and their vacillation in applying the policy of boldly and freely arousing
the masses to establish anti-Japanese democratic base areas behind the enemy
lines and greatly expanding the armed forces led by our Party). Meanwhile
our Party had recruited large numbers of new members who were still
inexperienced, and all the base areas in the enemy's rear were newly established
and not yet consolidated. During this stage, a kind of conceit appeared within
the Party because of the favourable development of the general situation
and the growth of our Party and armed forces, and many members became
swelled-headed. During this stage, however, we overcame the Right deviation
in the Party and carried out an independent policy; we not only hit Japanese
imperialism hard, created base areas and expanded the Eighth Route and New
Fourth Armies, but also repulsed the first large-scale anti-Communist onslaught
by the Kuomintang.

The years 1941 and 1942 formed the second stage. In order to prepare and
prosecute the war against Britain and the United States, the Japanese
imperialists more actively pursued the policy to which they had switched
after the fall of Wuhan, the policy of concentrating on the Communist Party
and not on the Kuomintang. They massed a still larger part of their main
forces around all the Communist-led base areas, conducted one "mopping-up"
operation after another, and executed the ruthless policy of "burn all, kill
all, loot all", concentrating their attacks on our Party. As a result, in
the two years 1941-42, our Party was placed in an extremely difficult position.
During this stage its base areas shrank in size, the population fell to under
50,000,000, the Eighth Route Army was reduced to 300,000, the loss of cadres
was very great, and our finances and economy were very heavily strained.
Meanwhile, the Kuomintang, finding its hands free, moved against our Party
in a thousand and one ways, unleashed its second large-scale anti-Communist
onslaught and attacked us in co-ordination with the Japanese imperialists.
But this difficult position served to educate us Communists and we learned
many things. We learned how to combat the enemy's "mopping-up" operations,
his policy of "nibbling" our territory, his "tighten public security" campaign,
[10] his policy of "burn all, kill all, loot all"
and his policy of extorting political recantations. We learned or began to
learn how to carry out the "three thirds system" in the state organs of the
united front, how to carry out the land policy, the rectification movement
to correct our style of study, style in Party relations and style of writing,
the policy of better troops and simpler administration, the policy of unified
leadership, the movement for supporting the government and cherishing the
people, and the development of production. And we overcame many shortcomings,
including the conceit of many people that had arisen during the first stage.
Although our losses in the second stage were very heavy, we held our ground;
we repulsed the offensives of the Japanese invaders on the one hand and the
second large-scale anti-Communist onslaught of the Kuomintang on the other.
The Kuomintang's attacks on the Communist Party and the struggles we had
to wage in self-defence gave rise to a kind of ultra-Left deviation in the
Party, one example being the belief that Kuomintang-Communist cooperation
would soon break down, with the result that excessive attacks were made on
the landlords and unity with public figures outside the Party was neglected.
But we overcame this deviation also. In the struggle to counter the friction
created by the Kuomintang we affirmed the principle of waging struggles "on
just grounds, to our advantage, and with restraint", and in united front
work we pointed out the necessity of "unity, struggle, unity through struggle".
Thus we maintained the Anti-Japanese National United Front throughout the
country as well as in the base areas.

The third stage extends from 1943 to the present. Our various policies have
become more effective and, in particular, the rectification movement and
the development of production have yielded results of a fundamental nature,
thereby making our Party invincible both ideologically and materially. Moreover,
last year we learned, or began to learn, how to carry out our policy on the
examination of the histories of cadres and our policy on combating secret
agents. It is in those circumstances that our base areas have again expanded,
that the population has risen to over 80,000,000, including those paying
the grain tax only to us and those paying it both to us and to the Japanese
and puppets, that our army has grown to 470,000 and our people's militia
to 2,270,000, and that our Party membership has reached 900,000 and more.

In 1943 the Japanese militarists made no appreciable change in their policy
towards China and continued to direct their main attacks at the Communist
Party. For more than three years, from 1941 to the present, over 60 per cent
of the Japanese troops in China have been pressing hard on the anti-Japanese
base areas led by our Party. During these years the several hundred thousand
Kuomintang troops who were left behind the enemy lines have been unable to
withstand the blows of Japanese imperialism; about half surrendered, about
half were wiped out, and only a small number-survived and withdrew. Those
Kuomintang troops who surrendered have turned and attacked our Party, which
has consequently had to resist over 90 per cent of the puppet troops. The
Kuomintang has only had to resist less than 40 per cent of the Japanese forces
and less than 10 per cent of the puppet troops. For fully five and a half
years since the fall of Wuhan in October 1938, the Japanese militarists have
not launched a single strategic offensive on the Kuomintang front; there
have been only a few relatively big operations (in Chekiang-Kiangsi, Changsha,
western Hupeh, southern Honan and Changteh), and even these were mere raids,
while they concentrated their main attention on the anti-Japanese base areas
led by our Party. In this situation, the Kuomintang has pursued the policy
of "retreating into the mountains" and "watching others fight", simply staving
off blows when the enemy advanced and looking on with folded arms when he
withdrew. In 1943 the Kuomintang became even more reactionary in its domestic
policy and made its third large-scale anti-Communist onslaught, which we
again repulsed.

From 1943 to the spring of this year, the Japanese aggressors have been steadily
losing ground in the Pacific theatre, the United States has been intensifying
its counter-offensive, and now, in the West, Hitler is tottering under the
heavy blows of the Soviet Red Army. In an effort to avert their doom, the
Japanese imperialists have conceived the idea of forcing the Peiping-Hankow
and Hankow-Canton Railways open for through traffic and, since they have
not yet succeeded in their policy of inducing the Kuomintang in Chungking
to capitulate, they have found it necessary to deal it another blow; hence
their plan for a large-scale offensive on the Kuomintang front this year.
The Honan campaign [11] has been going on for
over a month.

The enemy forces there amount to only a few divisions, yet several hundred
thousand Kuomintang troops have collapsed without a battle, and only the
troops of miscellaneous brands have been able to put up some sort of fight.
In Tang En-po's command, utter disorder prevails, with the officers estranged
from their men and the troops from the people, and more than two-thirds of
his total forces have been lost. Likewise, the divisions which Hu Tsung-nan
dispatched to Honan collapsed at their first encounter with the enemy. This
is wholly the result of the reactionary policies which the Kuomintang has
rigorously enforced for the past few years. During the five and a half years
since the fall of Wuhan, the theatre of war of the Liberated Areas led by
the Communist Party has borne the brunt of resisting the main forces of the
Japanese and puppets; and although there may be same change in the future,
it can only be temporary because the Kuomintang rendered utterly degenerate
by its reactionary policy of passive resistance to Japan and active opposition
to the Communists, is bound to suffer serious reverses. When that happens,
our Party's task in fighting the enemy and the puppet's will become heavier
still. What the Kuomintang has gained from looking on with folded arms for
five and a half years is the loss of its fighting capacity. What the Communist
Party has gained from fighting and struggling hard for five and a half years
is the strengthening of its fighting capacity. This is what will decide China's
destiny.

Comrades can see for themselves that in the seven years since July 1937 the
people's democratic forces under the leadership of our Party have gone through
three phases--a rise, a decline and a new rise. We have beaten back the ferocious
attacks of the Japanese invaders, established extensive revolutionary base
areas, greatly expanded the Party and the army, repulsed three large-scale
anti-Communist onslaughts by the Kuomintang and overcome the erroneous Right
and "Left" ideologies in the Party; and the whole Party has gained much valuable
experience. This sums up our work over the past seven years.

Our present task is to prepare ourselves for a still greater responsibility.
We must prepare to drive the Japanese invaders out of China, whatever the
circumstances. To enable our Party to shoulder this responsibility, we must
further expand and consolidate our Party, our army and base areas, pay attention
to work in the big cities and along the main lines of communication and raise
the work in the cities to a position of equal importance with that in the
base areas.

As for our work in the base areas, during the first stage these areas were
greatly expanded but not consolidated, and so in the second stage they contracted
as soon as they came under the heavy blows of the enemy. In the second stage
all the anti-Japanese base areas led by our Party went through a hard tempering
process and improved greatly as compared with the first stage; the cadres
and Party members considerably advanced their ideological and political level,
and learned many things they did not know before. But it takes time to clarify
thinking and to study policy, and we have still much to learn. Our Party
is not yet sufficiently strong, not yet sufficiently united or consolidated,
and so cannot yet take on greater responsibility than we now carry. From
now on the problem is further to expand and consolidate our Party, our army
and base areas in the continued prosecution of the War of Resistance; this
is the first indispensable item in our ideological and material preparation
for the gigantic work of the future. Without this preparation, we shall not
be able to drive out the Japanese invaders and liberate the whole of China.

Our work in the big cities and along the main lines of communication has
always been very inadequate. If now we do not strive to rally around our
Party the tens of millions of the toiling masses and other people oppressed
by the Japanese imperialists in the big cities and along the main lines of
communication, and do not prepare armed mass insurrections, our army and
rural base areas will face all sorts of difficulties for lack of co-ordination
with the cities. For more than ten years we have been in the countryside
and have had to encourage people to know the countryside well and to build
the rural base areas. During these ten years and more the task of preparing
insurrections in the cities, as decided by the Party's Sixth National Congress,
was not and could not have been carried out. But now it is different, and
the resolution of the Sixth National Congress will be carried out after the
Seventh National Congress. This Congress will probably be held soon and will
discuss the problems of strengthening our work in the cities and winning
nation-wide victory.

The industrial conference of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, now
in session, is of great significance. In 1937 the number of factory workers
in the Border Region was only 700, it increased to 7,000 by 1942 and is now
12,000. Those figures are not to be treated lightly. While we are in the
base areas, we must learn how to administer the industry, commerce and
communications of big cities, or otherwise we shall not know what to do when
the time comes.

Thus the second indispensable item in our ideological and material preparation
for the future is to organize for armed insurrections in the big cities and
along the main lines of communication and to learn how to administer industry
and commerce. Without this preparation too, we shall not be able to drive
out the Japanese invaders and liberate the whole of China.

  
  III


In order to win new victories we must call on our Party cadres to get rid
of the baggage and start up the machinery. "To get rid of the baggage" means
to free our minds of many encumbrances. Many things may become baggage, may
become encumbrances, if we cling to them blindly and uncritically. Let us
take some illustrations. Having made mistakes, you may feel that, come what
may, you are saddled with them and so become dispirited if you have not made
mistakes, you may feel that you are free from error and so become conceited.
Lack of achievement in work may breed pessimism and depression, while achievement
may breed pride and arrogance. A comrade with a short record of struggle
may shirk responsibility on this account, while a veteran may become opinionated
because of his long record of struggle. Worker and peasant comrades, because
of pride in their class origin, may look down upon intellectuals, while
intellectuals, because they have a certain amount of knowledge, may look
down upon workers and peasants. Any specialized skill may be capitalized
on and so may lead to arrogance and contempt of others. Even one's age may
become ground for conceit. The young, because they are bright and capable,
may look down upon the old; and the old, because they are rich in experience,
may look down upon the young. All such things become encumbrances or baggage
if there is no critical awareness. An important reason why some comrades
are very lofty, isolating themselves from the masses and making repeated
mistakes, is that they carry such baggage. Thus, a prerequisite for maintaining
close links with the masses and making fewer mistakes is to examine one's
baggage, to get rid of it and so emancipate the mind. There have been several
occasions in the history of our Party when great conceit manifested itself
and we suffered in consequence. The first was in the early half of 1927.
The Northern Expeditionary Army had reached Wuhan, and some comrades became
so proud and overweening as to forget that the Kuomintang was about to assault
us. The result was the error of the Chen Tu-hsiu line, which brought defeat
to the revolution. The second occasion was in 1930. Taking advantage of Chiang
Kai-shek's large-scale war against Feng Yu-hsiang and Yen Hsi-shan,
[12] the Red Army won a number of battles, and
again some comrades became proud and overweening. The result was the error
of the Li Li-san line, again causing some losses to the revolutionary forces.
The third occasion was in 1931. The Red Army had smashed the Kuomintang's
third "encirclement and suppression" campaign and, immediately afterwards,
faced with the Japanese invasion, the people throughout the country started
the stormy and heroic anti-Japanese movement; and again some comrades became
proud and overweening. The result was an even more serious error in the political
line, which cost us about 90 per cent of the revolutionary forces that we
had built up with so much toil. The fourth occasion was in 1938. The War
of Resistance had begun and the united front had been established; and once
again some comrades became proud and overweening. As a result they committed
an error somewhat similar to the Chen Tu-hsiu line. This time the revolutionary
work suffered serious damage in those places where the effects of those comrades'
erroneous ideas were more especially pronounced. Comrades throughout the
Party should take warning from these instances of pride and error. Recently
we have reprinted Kuo Mo-jo's essay on Li Tzu-cheng,
[13] so that comrades may also take warning from
this story and not repeat the error of becoming conceited at the moment of
success.

"To start up the machinery" means to make good use of the organ of thought.
Although some people carry no baggage and have the virtue of close contact
with the masses, they fail to accomplish anything because they do not know
how to think searchingly or are unwilling to use their brains to think much
and think hard. Others refuse to use their brains because they are carrying
baggage which cramps their intellect. Lenin and Stalin often advised people
to use their brains, and we should give the same advice. This mechanism,
the brain, has the special function of thinking. Mencius said, "The office
of the mind is to think."[14] He defined the function
of the brain correctly. We should always use our brains and think everything
over carefully. A common saying goes, "Knit the brows and you will hit upon
a stratagem." In other words, much thinking yields wisdom. In order to get
rid of the practice of acting blindly which is so common in our Party, we
must encourage our comrades to think, to learn the method of analysis and
to cultivate the habit of analysis. There is all too little of this habit
in our Party. If we get rid of our baggage and start up the machinery, if
we march with light packs and know how to think hard, then we are sure to
triumph.
NOTES

1. Chen Tu-hsiu was originally a professor at Peking University
and became famous as an editor of New Youth. He was one of the founders
of the Communist Party of China. Because of his reputation at the time of
the May 4th Movement and owing to the Party's immaturity in its initial period,
he became General Secretary of the Party. In the last period of the revolution
of 1924-27, the Rightist thinking in the Party represented by Chen Tu-hsiu
developed into a line of capitulationism. Comrade Mao Tse-tung has observed
that the capitulationists at that dime "voluntarily gave up the Party's
leadership of the peasant masses, urban petty bourgeoisie and middle bourgeoisie,
and in particular gave up the Party's leadership of the armed forces, thus
causing the defeat of the revolution" ("The Present Situation and Our Tasks",
Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Eng. ed., FLP, Peking, 1961, Vol.
IV, p. 171). After the defeat of 1927 Chen Tu-hsiu and a handful of other
capitulationists lost faith in the future of the revolution and became
liquidationists. They took the reactionary Trotskyist stand and together
with the Trotskyites formed a small anti-Party group. Consequently Chen Tu-hsiu
was expelled from the Party in November 1929. He died in 1942.

2. The Fourth Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China was held in January 1931.

3. The Tsunyi Meeting was the enlarged meeting of the Political
Bureau called by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China at
Tsunyi Kweichow Province, in January 1935.

4. See V. I. Lenin, " 'Communism' ", in which Lenin,
criticizing the Hungarian Communist Bela Kun, said that he "gives up the
most essential thing in Marxism, the living soul of Marxism, the concrete
analysis of concrete conditions" (Collected Works, Russ. ed., Moscow,
1950, Vol. XXXI, p. 143).

5. The Sixth National Congress of the Communist Party of
China held in July 1928 adapted the following Ten-Point Programme: (1) overthrow
imperialist role; (2) confiscate foreign capitalist enterprises and banks;
(3) unify China and recognize the right of the nationalities to
self-determination; (4) overthrow the Kuomintang warlord government; (5)
establish a government of councils of workers, peasants and soldiers; (6)
institute the eight-hour day, increase wages, and establish unemployment
relief and social insurance; (7) confiscate the land of all landlords and
distribute the land among the peasants, (8) improve the living conditions
of the soldiers, give land and jobs to ex-soldiers; (9) abolish all exorbitant
taxes and miscellaneous levies and adopt a consolidated progressive tax;
and (10) unite with the world proletariat, unite with the Soviet Union.

6. The Fifth Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China was held in January 1934.

7. This session of the Political Bureau in September 1941
reviewed the question of the political line in the past history of the Party,
especially during the Second Revolutionary Civil War.

8. The "mountain-stronghold" mentality was a tendency to
form cliques and arose mainly out of the circumstances of the protracted
guerrilla war in which rural revolutionary bases were scattered and cut off
from each other. Most of these bases were first established in mountain regions.
Each tended to regard itself as a compact unit, like a single mountain
stronghold, so this wrong tendency became known as mountain-stronghold mentality.

9. In the relatively stable parts of the base areas the
people paid the regular grain tax only to the anti-Japanese democratic
government. But in the outlying parts of the base areas and the guerrilla
zones, which were constantly harassed by the enemy, the people were often
forced to pay another grain levy to the enemy's puppet government.

10. In March 1941 the Japanese invaders and Chinese traitors
in northern China proclaimed a "campaign for tightening public security",
which included raiding the people's houses, establishing the neighbourhood
guarantee system, making house-to-house check-ups and organizing puppet troops,
all for the purpose of suppressing the anti-Japanese forces.

11. In March 1944 the Japanese invaders launched their
campaign in Honan Province with a force of 50,000 to 60,000 men. The 400,000
Kuomintang troops under Chiang Ting-wen, Tang En-po and Hu Tsung-nan melted
away before the Japanese invaders. Thirty-eight counties, including Chengchow
and Loyang, fell to the enemy one after another. Tang En-po lost 200,000
men.

12. This large-scale war between the warlords, with Chiang
Kai-shek on the one side and Feng Yu-hsiang and Yen Hsi-shan on the other,
was fought along the Luaghai and Tientsin-Pukow Railways. It lasted six months,
from May to October 1930. Casualties on both sides reached 300,000.

13. Kuo Mo-jo wrote the essay "The Tercentenary of the
1644 Uprising" in 1944 to commemorate the victory of the peasant uprising
led by Li Tzu-cheng in the last years of the Ming Dynasty. He explained that
the uprising met with defeat in 1645 because, after the entry of the peasant
forces into Peking in 1644, some of their leaders were corrupted by luxurious
living, and factional strife arose. The essay first appeared in New China
Daily in Chungking and was later published as a pamphlet in Yenan and
elsewhere in the Liberated Areas.

14. From Mencius, Book XI, "Kao Tzu", Part I.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Serve the People







SERVE THE PEOPLE 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  SERVE THE PEOPLE

September 8, 1944

[This speech was delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung at a memorial meeting
for Comrade Chang Szu-teh, held by departments directly under the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China.]
  

Our Communist Party and the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies led by our
Party are battalions of the revolution. These battalions of ours are wholly
dedicated to the liberation of the people and work entirely in the people's
interests. Comrade Chang Szu-teh [1] was in the
ranks of these battalions.

All men must die, but death can vary in its significance. The ancient Chinese
writer Szuma Chien said, "Though death befalls all men alike, it may be weightier
than Mount Tai or lighter than a feather." [2]
To die for the people is weightier than Mount Tai, but to work for the fascists
and die for the exploiters and oppressors is lighter than a feather. Comrade
Chang Szu-teh died for the people, and his death is indeed weightier than
Mount Tai.

If we have shortcomings, we are not afraid to have them pointed out and
criticized, because we serve the people. Anyone, no matter who, may point
out our shortcomings. If he is right, we will correct them. If what he proposes
will benefit the people, we will act upon it. The idea of "better troops
and simpler administration" was put forward by Mr. Li Ting-ming,
[3] who is not a Communist. He made a good suggestion
which is of benefit to the people, and we have adopted it. If, in the interests
of the people, we persist in doing what is right and correct what is wrong,
our ranks will surely thrive.

We hail from all corners of the country and have joined together for a common
revolutionary objective. And we need the vast majority of the people with
us on the road to this objective. Today, we already lead base areas with
a population of 91 million, [4] but this is not
enough; to liberate the whole nation more are needed. In times of difficulty
we must not lose sight of our achievements, must see the bright future and
must pluck up our courage. The Chinese people are suffering; it is our duty
to save them and we must exert ourselves in struggle. Wherever there is struggle
there is sacrifice, and death is a common occurrence. But we have the interests
of the people and the sufferings of the great majority at heart, and when
we die for the people it is a worthy death. Nevertheless, we should do our
best to avoid unnecessary sacrifices. Our cadres must show concern for every
soldier, and all people in the revolutionary ranks must care for each other,
must love and help each other.

From now on, when anyone in our ranks who has done some useful work dies,
be he soldier or cook, we should have a funeral ceremony and a memorial meeting
in his honour. This should become the rule. And it should be introduced among
the people as well. When someone dies in a village, let a memorial meeting
be held. In this way we express our mourning for the dead and unite all the
people.
NOTES

1. Comrade Chang Szu-teh was a soldier in the Guards Regiment
of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party. A member of Communist
Party who loyally served the interests of the people, he joined the revolution
in 1933, took part in the Long March and was wounded in service. On September
5, 1944, when making charcoal in the mountains of Ansai County, northern
Shensi, he was killed by the sudden collapse of a kiln.

2. Szuma Chien, the famous Chinese historian of the 2nd
century B.C., was the author of the Historical Records. The quotation
comes from his "Reply to Jen Shao-ching's Letter".

3. Li Ting-ming, an enlightened landlord of northern Shensi
Province, was at one time elected Vice-Chairman of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region Government.

4. This was the total population of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningela
Border Region and all other Liberated Areas in northern, central and southern
China.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Chiang Kai-shek's Speech on the Double Tenth Festival







ON CHIANG KAI-SHEK'S SPEECH ON THE DOUBLE TENTH FESTIVAL 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON CHIANG KAI-SHEK'S SPEECH ON THE DOUBLE TENTH FESTIVAL

Octoter 11, 1944

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrote this commentary for the Hsinhua News Agency.]
  

One of the distinguishing features of Chiang Kai-shek's Double Tenth
[1] speech is its utter lack of content and its
failure to answer any of the questions about which the people are deeply
concerned. Chiang Kai-shek declares that the enemy is not to be feared because
there are still vast territories in the Great Rear Area. So far the autocratic
Kuomintang leaders have shown neither the desire nor the ability to introduce
political reforms or keep the enemy at bay, and territory is the only "capital"
they can fall back upon for resisting the enemy. But it is plain to all that
without a correct policy and without human effort this capital is not enough,
for Japanese imperialism is daily threatening the remaining territories.
In all probability Chiang Kai-shek has acutely felt this threat, as is shown
by the very fact that he is repeatedly assuring the people that no such threat
exists and even says, "In the twenty years since I founded the army at the
Whampoa Military Academy, [2] the revolutionary
situation has never been so stable as at present." He also keeps repeating,
"We must not lose our self-confidence," which actually indicates loss of
confidence among many people within the ranks of the Kuomintang and among
many prominent public figures in the Kuomintang areas. Chiang Kai-shek has
been casting about for some means to restore that confidence. But instead
of looking for such means by examining his policy and work in the political,
military, economic and cultural fields, he resorts to the rejection of criticisms
and the whitewashing of his mistakes. He says that all "foreign observers"
are "ignorant of the heart of the matter" and that the "babel of foreign
criticism of our military and political affairs" is entirely due to credulous
acceptance of "the rumours and tricks of the invaders and the Chinese
collaborators".

Curiously enough, such foreigners as Franklin D. Roosevelt as well as such
Kuomintang members as Soong Ching Ling, many members of the People's Political
Council, and all Chinese who are not devoid of conscience, disbelieve the
plausible explanations offered by Chiang Kai-shek and his trusted followers
and are also raising a "babel of criticism of our military and political
affairs". Chiang Kai-shek is annoyed, but not until this year's Double Tenth
Festival did he succeed in discovering what he regards as a compelling argument,
i.e., that these people believe "the rumours and tricks of the invaders
and the Chinese collaborators". So in his speech Chiang Kai-shek vehemently
denounces these "rumours and tricks of the invaders and the Chinese
collaborators" at great length. He fancies that, having made this denunciation,
he can silence all the Chinese and foreigners. And anyone who again raises
a "Babel of criticism" of his military and political affairs will be put
down as a willing believer of "the rumours and tricks of the invaders and
the Chinese collaborators"! We consider Chiang Kai-shek's accusations ridiculous
in the extreme. For the invaders and the Chinese collaborators have never
criticized, but on the contrary have warmly applauded, the Kuomintang for
its autocracy, its half-hearted prosecution of the war, its corruption and
incompetence, and the fascist decrees and defeatist military orders of its
government. Chiang Kai-shek's China's Destiny, a book which has
met with general disapproval, has won sincere and repeated praise from the
Japanese imperialists. The invaders and the Chinese collaborators have never
said a word about reorganization of the National Government and its supreme
command, because it is their cherished wish that this government and supreme
command which keep on oppressing the people and losing battles will be preserved.
Is it not a fact that Chiang Kai-shek and his group have always been the
target of Japanese inducements to surrender? Is it not also a fact that of
the two slogans originally put forward by the Japanese imperialists, one,
"Annihilate the Kuomintang!" has been dropped long ago and only the other,
"Oppose the Communists!" remains? To this very moment the Japanese imperialists
have not declared war on the Kuomintang government, and no state of war,
so they say, exists between Japan and the Kuomintang government! To this
very moment the invaders and the Chinese collaborators are taking good care
of the property of the Kuomintang bigwigs in Shanghai, Nanking, Ningpo, etc.
The enemy chieftain Shuaroku Hata has sent his representatives to offer
sacrifices at Chiang Kai-shek's ancestral tombs at Fenghua. In Shanghai and
elsewhere, emissaries secretly dispatched by Chiang Kai-shek's trusted followers
are maintaining almost uninterrupted contact and carrying on clandestine
negotiations with the Japanese invaders. Those contacts and negotiations
become more frequent whenever the Japanese intensify their offensives. Aren't
all these things facts? Are those who raise a "Babel of criticism" of the
military and political affairs of Chiang Kai-shek and his group really "ignorant
of the heart of the matter", or are they on the contrary only too well acquainted
with it? After all, where is "the heart of the matter" to be found, in "the
rumours and tricks of the invaders and the Chinese collaborators", or in
Chiang Kai-shek himself and his own group?

In another statement in his speech, Chiang Kai-shek denies that civil war
will break out in China. But he adds, "Certainly no one will ever again dare
to rebel against the Republic and sabotage the War of Resistance, as Wang
Ching-wei and his like have done." Here Chiang Kai-shek is seeking, and has
in fact found, an excuse for civil war. Any Chinese whose memory is not too
short will remember that in 1941, at the very moment when the betrayers of
China were ordering the disbandment of the New Fourth Army and the Chinese
people were rising to avert the crisis of civil war, Chiang Kai-shek made
a speech in which he said that there would never be any war to "suppress
the Communists" and that, should there be a war, it would only be a punitive
one to put down rebels. Those who have read China's Destiny will
also remember Chiang Kai-shek's remark that the Communist Party of China
was "in league with" Wang Ching-wei in 1927 during the period of the Wuhan
Government. In the resolutions of the Eleventh Plenary Session of the Kuomintang
Central Executive Committee in 1943, an eight-word label was attached to
the Chinese Communist Party: "Sabotaging the War of Resistance and endangering
the state." After reading his present speech, one feels that the danger of
civil war not only exists but is actually growing. From now on the Chinese
people should firmly bear in mind that one fine morning Chiang 'Kai-shek
will order a punitive expedition against so-called rebels and that the charge
will be "rebellion against the Republic", "sabotaging the War of Resistance",
and doing what "Wang Ching-wei and his like have done". Chiang is good at
playing this game; he is no good at denouncing as rebels people like Pang
Ping-hsun, Sun Liang-cheng and Chen Hsiao-chiang
[3] or at launching punitive expeditions against
them, but he is very good at denouncing as "rebels" the New Fourth Army in
central China and the Dare-to-Die Corps [4] in
Shansi and is exceptionally good at launching punitive expeditions against
them. The Chinese people must not forget that, while proclaiming that he
will not fight a civil war, Chiang Kai-shek has already dispatched 775,000
troops who are now engaged exclusively in encircling or attacking the Eighth
Route Army, the New Fourth Army and the people's guerrillas in southern China.

Chiang Kai-shek's speech has nothing to show on the positive side, and he
has in no way met the Chinese people's eager desire to strengthen the
anti-Japanese front. On the negative side, the speech is fraught with dangerous
possibilities. His attitude is becoming more and more anomalous, as witness
his stubborn opposition to the people's demand for political change, his
bitter hatred of the Chinese Communist Party and his hint at a pretext for
the anti-Communist civil war he is preparing. However, he will succeed in
none of his schemes. Unless he is willing to mend his ways, he will be lifting
a rock only to drop it on his own toes. We sincerely hope he will change
his ways, because his present course of action will get him absolutely nowhere.
Since he has proclaimed that "a greater latitude will be allowed to the voicing
of opinions", [5] he should not stifle the "babel
of criticism" by threatening people with the slander that they are willingly
accepting "the rumours and tricks of the invaders and the Chinese collaborators".
Since he has proclaimed that "the period of political tutelage will be
shortened", he should not reject the demand for reorganizing the government
and the supreme command. Since he has proclaimed that "the Communist problem
should be solved politically", he should not again seek a pretext for preparing
civil war.
NOTES

1. The Double Tenth, October 10, is the anniversary of
the armed uprising in Wuhan which set off the Revolution of 1911.

2. The Whampoa Military Academy, located at Whampoa near
Canton, was established by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in 1924 after the reorganization
of the Kuomintang with the help of the Chinese Communist Party and the Soviet
Union. Before Chiang Kai-shek's betrayal of the revolution in 1927, the academy
was run jointly by the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. Comrades Chou
En-lai, Yeh Chien-ying, Yun Tai-yIng, Hsiao Chu-nu and others held responsible
posts in the academy at one time or another. Many of the cadets were members
of the Communist Party or the Communist Youth League, and they formed the
revolutionary core of the academy.

3. Pang Ping-hsun, Sun Liang-cheng and Chen Hsiao-chiang
were Kuomintang generals who openly deserted to the Japanese invaders.

4. The Dare-to-Die Corps in Shansi was an anti-Japanese
armed force of the people which developed under the leadership and influence
of the Communist Party in the early days of the War of Resistance Against
Japan.

5. In April 1944 the Kuomintang announced that "a greater
latitude will be allowed to the voicing of opinions". Its purpose was to
fob off the people, because the demand that the Kuomintang dictatorship should
be ended, democracy established, and freedom of speech guaranteed had become
the general cry of the people in the Kuomintang areas from the beginning
of the year. In May, the Twelfth Plenary Session of the Central Executive
Committee of the Kuomintang again declared that it would "protect freedom
of speech". But the Kuomintang never fulfilled any of the promises it had
been compelled to make, and as the people's movement for democracy surged
forward, it multiplied its measures fat the suppression of popular opinion.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The United Front in Cultural Work







THE UNITED FRONT IN CULTURAL WORK



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE UNITED FRONT IN CULTURAL WORK

October 30, 1944

[This speech was delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung at a conference of cultural
and educational workers of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border
Region.]
  

The purpose of all our work is the overthrow of Japanese imperialism. Like
Hitler, Japanese imperialism is approaching its doom. But we must continue
our efforts, for only so can we achieve its final overthrow. In our work
the war comes first, then production, then cultural work. An army without
culture is a dull-witted army, and a dull-witted army cannot defeat the enemy.

The culture of the Liberated Areas already has its progressive side, but
it still has a backward side. The Liberated Areas already have a new culture,
a people's culture, but a good many vestiges of feudalism survive. Among
the 1,500,000 people of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region there are
more than 1,000,000 illiterates, there are 2,000 practitioners of witchcraft,
and the broad masses are still under the influence of superstition. These
are enemies inside the minds of the people. It is often more difficult to
combat the enemies inside people's minds than to fight Japanese imperialism.
We must call on the masses to arise in struggle against their own illiteracy,
superstitions and unhygienic habits. For this struggle a broad united front
is indispensable. And this united front has to be particularly broad in a
place like the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, which has a sparse population,
poor communications and a low cultural base to start from and in addition
is fighting a war. Hence, in our education we must have not only regular
primary and secondary schools but also scattered, irregular village schools,
newspaper-reading groups and literacy classes. Not only must we have schools
of the modern type but we must also utilize and transform the old-style village
schools.

In the arts, we must have not only modern drama but also the Shensi opera
and the yangko dance. Not only must we have new Shensi operas and
new yangko dances, but we must also utilize and gradually transform
the old opera companies and the old yangko troupes, which comprise
go per cent of all yangko troupes. This approach is even more necessary
in the field of medicine. In the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region the human
and animal mortality rates are both very high, and at the same time many
people still believe in witchcraft. In such circumstances, to rely solely
on modern doctors is no solution. Of course, modern doctors have advantages
over doctors of the old type, but if they do not concern themselves with
the sufferings of the people, do not train doctors for the people, do not
unite with the thousand and more doctors and veterinarians of the old type
in the Border Region and do not help them to make progress, then they will
actually be helping the witch doctors and showing indifference to the high
human and animal mortality rates. There are two principles for the united
front: the first is to unite, and the second is to criticize, educate and
transform. In the united front, capitulationism is wrong, and so is sectarianism
with its exclusiveness and contempt for others. Our task is to unite with
all intellectuals, artists and doctors of the old type who can be useful,
to help them, convert them and transform them. In order to transform them,
we must first unite with them. If we do it properly, they will welcome our
help.

Our culture is a people's culture; our cultural workers must serve the people
with great enthusiasm and devotion, and they must link themselves with the
masses, not divorce themselves from the masses. In order to do so, they must
act in accordance with the needs and wishes of the masses. All work done
for the masses must start from their needs and not from the desire of any
individual, however well-intentioned. It often happens that objectively the
masses need a certain change, but subjectively they are not yet conscious
of the need, not yet willing or determined to make the change. In such cases,
we should wait patiently. We should not make the change until, through our
work, most of the masses have become conscious of the need and are willing
and determined to carry it out. Otherwise we shall isolate ourselves from
the masses. Unless they are conscious and willing, any kind of work that
requires their participation will turn out to be a mere formality and will
fail. The saying "Haste does not bring success" does not mean that we should
not make haste, but that we should not be impetuous; impetuosity leads only
to failure. This is true in any kind of work, and particularly in the cultural
and educational work the aim of which is to transform the thinking of the
masses. There are two principles here: one is the actual needs of the masses
rather than what we fancy they need, and the other is the wishes of the masses,
who must make up their own minds instead of our making up their minds for
them.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## We Must Learn to Do Economic Work







WE MUST LEARN TO DO ECONOMIC WORK



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  WE MUST LEARN TO DO ECONOMIC WORK

January 10, 1945

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung delivered this speech at a conference of labour heroes
and model workers of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region.]
  

Heroes of Labor and Model Workers!

You have attended this conference and summed up your experience; we all welcome
you and honour you. You have three good qualities and you play three roles.
First, the role of initiators. In other words, by your outstanding efforts
and your numerous innovations you have made your work a model for others,
raising standards and inspiring others to learn from you. Second, the role
of backbone. Most of you are not yet cadres, but you have become the backbone,
the hard core of the masses; with you, it is easier to push our work forward.
In the future you may become cadres; at present you are cadres in reserve.
Third, the role of a bridge. You are a bridge between the leadership and
the broad masses; through you the opinions of the masses are transmitted
to the leadership and vice versa.

You have many good qualities and have rendered great service, but you must
always remember not to become conceited. You are respected by all, and quite
rightly, but this easily leads to conceit. If you become conceited, if you
are not modest and cease to exert yourselves, and if you do not respect others,
do not respect the cadres and the masses, then you will cease to be heroes
and models. There have been such people in the past, and I hope you will
not follow their example.

This conference has summed up your experience. The summary is a very good
one and is applicable in the other Liberated Areas as well. However, I am
not going to dwell upon that. I should just like to say a few words about
our economic work.

In the past few years we have begun to learn how to do economic work and
we have achieved substantial successes in this field, but it is still only
a beginning. We must see to it that within two or three years the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the Liberated Areas in the enemy's
rear are completely or largely self-supporting in grain and manufactured
goods, and even have a surplus. We must achieve still greater successes in
agriculture, industry and trade. Only then can we regard ourselves as having
learned more about economic work and as having learned to do it better. In
places where there is no improvement in the living conditions of the troops
and the people, where the material foundations for the counter-offensive
remain unstable and agriculture, industry and trade stagnate or even decline
instead of expanding year by year, it is evident that the personnel of the
Party, government and army have not learned how to do economic work, and
great difficulties will undoubtedly be encountered.

There is one point I must again bring to everybody's attention, namely, that
our ideas should be adapted to our immediate environment. Our immediate
environment is rural; it would seem that nobody has any doubt on that score,
for who does not know that we are living in the countryside? Yet actually,
that is not the case. Many comrades do not understand the countryside at
all, or at any rate not profoundly, although they live there and imagine
they understand it. They do not proceed from the fact that our environment
is the countryside, which is based on individual economy, cut up by the enemy
and involved in guerrilla warfare, and the result is that their handling
of political, military, economic and cultural problems, or of Party matters
and the workers', peasants', youth and women's movements is often incorrect
or only partially correct. They approach rural affairs from an urban viewpoint
and often run their heads against a brick wall because they draw up many
inappropriate plans subjectively and enforce them arbitrarily. In recent
years our comrades have made much progress, thanks both to the rectification
campaign and to the failures they have met with in their work. But we must
still take care to adapt our ideas fully to our environment before we can
obtain results in every field of work and do so quickly. If we truly understand
the fact that the rural base areas in which we find ourselves are founded
on individual economy, cut up by the enemy and involved in guerrilla warfare
and make it the starting point in everything we do, then the pertinent question
is, how do our results, which may seem slow and unspectacular, compare with
the results of taking some other starting point, for instance, the urban
viewpoint? Far from being slow, they are actually quite fast. For if we were
to start from the urban viewpoint and depart from our present-day realities,
the question would be not of getting fast or slow results, but of running
into endless snags and getting no results at all.

Clear proof of this fact is provided by the great success of the present
form of the army and civilian production drive we have promoted.

We want to hit the Japanese aggressors hard and make preparations for seizing
the cities and recovering our lost territories. But how can we attain this
aim, situated as we are in a countryside founded on individual economy, cut
up by the enemy and involved in guerrilla warfare? We cannot imitate the
Kuomintang, which does not lift a finger itself but depends entirely on
foreigners even for such necessities as cotton cloth. We stand for self-reliance.
We hope for foreign aid but cannot be dependent on it; we depend on our own
efforts, on the creative power of the whole army and the entire people. But
how do we go about it? By launching large-scale production campaigns
simultaneously among the troops and the people.

Since we are in the countryside, where manpower and material resources are
scattered, we have adopted the policy of "unified leadership and decentralized
management" for production and supply.

Since we are in the countryside, where the peasants are scattered individual
producers employing backward means of production and where most of the land
is still owned by landlords and the peasants are subjected to feudal rent
exploitation, we have adapted the policies of reducing rent and interest
and of organizing mutual aid in labour to heighten the peasants' enthusiasm
for production and to increase the productivity of agricultural labour. Rent
reduction has heightened the peasants' enthusiasm in production and mutual
aid has increased the productivity of agricultural labour. I have obtained
data from various places in northern and central China, all of which show
that after rent reduction the peasants take much greater interest in production
and are willing to organize mutual-aid groups like our labour-exchange teams
here, in which the productivity of three persons now equals that of four
in the past. That being the case, 90 million people can do as much as 120
million. There are also instances of two persons doing what used to require
the effort of three. If instead of coercion and commandism, which are
self-defeating because of their quest for quick results, we adopt a policy
of patiently persuading people by setting them good examples, then it will
be possible for the majority of the peasants to be organized into mutual-aid
groups for agricultural and handicraft production in the next few years.
Once such production groups become the usual practice, not only will output
increase and all kinds of innovations emerge, but there will also be political
progress, a higher educational level, progress in hygiene, a remoulding of
loafers and a change in social customs, and it will not take long before
the implements of production will be improved, too. With all this happening,
our rural society will gradually be rebuilt on new foundations.

If our cadres carefully study this sphere of work and most energetically
help the rural people develop campaigns for production, there will be a plentiful
supply of grain and other necessities in the countryside within a few years,
and we shall be able not only to keep up the war and cope with crop failures
but also to maintain a large reserve of grain and other necessities for future
use.

We should organize the army units and the government and other organizations
as well as the peasants for production.

Since we are in the countryside, which is constantly ravaged by the enemy
and involved in protracted war, it is imperative for the army units and the
government and other organizations to engage in production. And it is possible
for them to do so because the guerrilla fighting is scattered over a wide
area. Besides, the troops and government personnel in our Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region are very numerous in proportion to the total population, and
they will go hungry if they themselves do not engage in production, while
on the other hand the people will go hungry if too much is taken from them
and the burden is too heavy for them to bear. These are the reasons why we
are resolved to launch a large-scale production campaign. Take the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, for instance. The annual requirements
of the army units and the government and other organizations total 260,000
tan (here 1 tan equals 300 chin) of husked grain
(millet), of which they get 160,000 from the people and produce the rest
themselves if they did not engage in production themselves, either they or
the people would go hungry. Thanks to our production campaigns, we are free
from hunger, and in fact the troops and the people are quite well fed.

With the exception of grain, clothing and bedding, government and other
organizations in the Border Region are self-supporting in most their needs
and some units are entirely self-supporting. Many units are partially
self-supporting even in grain, clothing and bedding.

The achievements of the army units of the Border Region are even greater.
Many are entirely self-supporting in grain, clothing, bedding and every other
essential, that is, they are 100 per cent self-supporting and draw nothing
from the government. This is the highest standard, the top grade, and it
has been attained gradually over a period of several years.

This standard cannot be adopted at the front, where fighting has to be done.
There a second and a third standard may be set up. The second standard requires
that except for grain, clothing and bedding, which are supplied by the
government, self-sufficiency through production should be achieved in the
following items: cooking oil (0.5 liang per person per day), salt
(0.5 Lang per person per day), vegetables (1-1.5 chin per
person per day), and meat (1-2 chin per person per month); the purchase
of fuel, office supplies and miscellaneous items; subsidies for education
and health; expenditures for the cleaning of weapons and for the provision
of tobacco, shoes, socks, gloves, towels, tooth-brushes, etc.; these
items-amounting in all to some 50 per cent of the total expenditure. This
standard can be gradually attained in two or three years. In same places
it has already been attained. This standard may be adapted in the stable
base areas.

The third standard applies to outlying districts and to the guerrilla zones
where 50 per cent self-sufficiency is not possible but 15-25 per cent may
be. Reaching this standard is good enough there.

In short, apart from those in exceptional circumstances, all army units and
government and other organizations must engage in production in the intervals
between fighting, training or work. In addition to using such intervals for
collective production, they should organize some of their personnel specifically
for production, assigning them to run farms, vegetable gardens, pastures,
workshops, small factories, transport teams and co-operatives, or to grow
grain and vegetables in partnership with the peasants. In our present
circumstances, every organization or army unit should establish its own "domestic
economy" to tide over the difficulties. Unwillingness to do so is a
characteristic of loafers and is disgraceful. To stimulate production we
should also institute a system of individual bonuses, graded according-to
the quality of the work, for all who participate in it directly. Further,
as the effective way of pushing the work forward, the head of each organization
must assume responsibility and personally take part, and must apply the method
of linking the leading group with the masses and the general call with particular
and specific guidance.

Some people say that if the army units go in for production, they will be
unable to train or fight and that if the government and other organizations
do so, they will be unable to do their own work. This is a false argument.
In recent years our army units in the Border Region have undertaken production
on a big scale to provide themselves with ample food and clothing and have
simultaneously done their training and conducted their political studies
and literacy and other courses much more successfully than before, and there
is greater unity than ever within the army and between the army and the people.
While there was a large-scale production campaign at the front last year,
great successes were gained in the fighting and in addition an extensive
training campaign was started. And thanks to production, the personnel of
the government and other organizations live a better life and work with greater
devotion and efficiency; this is the case both in the Border Region and at
the front.

Thus it can be seen that in the context of guerrilla warfare in rural areas,
those army units and government and other organizations which undertake
production for self-support show greater energy and activity in their fighting,
training and work, and improve their discipline and their unity both internally
and with the civilians. Production for self-support is the outcome of our
country's protracted guerrilla war and this is our glory. Once we master
it, no material difficulty can daunt us. We shall grow in vigour and energy
year by year and become stronger with every battle; we shall overwhelm the
enemy and have no fear of his overwhelming us.

Here another point must be called to the attention of our comrades at the
front. Some of our recently established areas are fairly rich in material
resources and, counting on this, the cadres there are unwilling either to
economize or to engage in production. This is very bad, and they are bound
to suffer for it later. Wherever we happen to be, we must treasure our manpower
and material resources, and must not take a short view and indulge in
wastefulness and extravagance. Wherever we are, from the very first year
of our work we must bear in mind the many years to come, the protracted war
that must be maintained, the counter-offensive, and the work of reconstruction
after the enemy's expulsion. On the one hand, never be wasteful or extravagant;
on the other, actively expand production. Previously, in some places people
suffered a great deal because they did not take the long view and neglected
economy in manpower and material resources and the expansion of production.
The lesson is there and attention must be called to it.

As regards manufactured goods, the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region has
decided to become completely self-supporting in cotton, cotton yarn, cotton
cloth, iron, paper and many other things within two years. We must grow,
manufacture and supply whatever is not produced here or is produced only
in small quantities, and must not depend on the outside at all. The whole
task is to be accomplished by the public, private and co-operative enterprises.
For all items, we demand not only quantity but also quality, that is, they
must stand wear and tear. The Border Region Government, the Joint Defence
Headquarters of the Eighth Route Army and the Northwest Bureau of the Central
Committee of the Party are absolutely right in giving close attention to
these matters. I hope that the same thing will be done in all places at the
front. In many places it is already being done, and I wish them success.

In our Border Region and the other Liberated Areas, it will take another
two or three years for us to learn every branch of economic work. The day
when we grow all or most of our own grain, manufacture all or most of our
own goods and thus are completely or mainly self-supporting and even have
a surplus will also be the day when we have mastered every branch of economic
work in the countryside. After we have cleared the cities of the enemy, we
shall be able to take up new branches of economic work. We must exert ourselves
and learn, because China depends on us for her reconstruction.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Production is Also Possible in the Guerilla Zone







PRODUCTION IS ALSO POSSIBLE IN THE GUERRILLA ZONES



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  PRODUCTION IS ALSO POSSIBLE IN THE GUERRILLA ZONES

January 31, 1945

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrote thus editorial for the Liberation Daily,
Yenan.] 
  

It is already admitted and there is no longer any doubt that production campaigns
can and must be conducted in the army and among the people in the relatively
stable bases of the Liberated Areas behind the enemy lines. But whether they
can be conducted in the guerrilla zones and in the furthermost areas behind
the enemy lines has not yet been settled in many people's minds for want
of proof.

But now we have proof. In 1944 production was undertaken on a considerable
scale in many guerrilla zones and with excellent results, according to Comrade
Chang Ping-kai's report on the production campaign of the guerrilla units
in the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei border area, published in the Liberation Daily
of January 28. The districts and units listed in his report are: in
central Hopei, the sixth sub-region, the fourth district contingent of the
second sub-region, the eighth district contingent of the fourth sub-region,
the Hsushui-Tinghsien detachment, the Paoting-Mancheng detachment and the
Yunpiao detachment; and in Shansi, the troops in the counties of Taihsien
and Kuchsien. Conditions in those areas are most unfavourable:

  The place bristles with enemy and puppet strongpoints and blockhouses and
  is criss-crossed with ditches, walls and roads, and taking advantage of his
  military superiority and communication facilities, the enemy often launches
  surprise attacks and encirclement and "mopping-up" campaigns against us.
  Under such conditions the guerrilla units often have to shift their positions
  several times a day.


Nevertheless, the guerrilla units have managed to carry on production in
the intervals between fighting. The results are:

  Everybody is now better fed--each person has 0.5 liang of cooking
  oil and salt and 1 chin of vegetables per day, and 1.5 chin
  of meat per month. Furthermore, tooth-brushes, tooth-powder and reading
  primers, which for years were unavailable, are now all provided.


Just look! Who says that production is not possible in guerrilla zones? Many
people claim that there is no spare land in the densely populated areas.
Is there really no spare land? Again please look at the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei
border area:

  First, the land problem has been settled in accordance with the policy of
  giving primary attention to agriculture. They use nine methods in all: (1)
  razing walls and filling in ditches used by the enemy for blockade purposes;
  (2) destroying motor roads the enemy may use and planting crops along them;
  (3) making use of small pieces of waste land; (4) helping the people's militia
  by providing armed protection when, on moonlit nights, crops are planted
  in the fields around the blockhouses in defiance of the enemy; (5) ploughing
  the fields in partnership with peasants who are short of labour power; (6)
  ploughing the fields around the enemy's strongpoints or blockhouses more
  or less openly, using soldiers dressed as peasants; (7) making use of river
  banks by building dykes, removing the sand and turning the banks into fields;
  (8) helping peasants bring dry land under irrigation; and (9) helping in
  the farm work in every village in which they are active.


But if agriculture is possible, perhaps handicrafts and other production
remain impossible? Is that actually the case? Please look at the
Shansi-Chahar-Hopei border area:

  The troops in the vicinity of the enemy's blockade lines or blockade ditches
  do not confine their production to agriculture but, as in the stable areas,
  have also developed handicrafts and transport. The fourth district contingent
  has set up a felt-cap workshop, an oil press and a flour mill, and in seven
  months has netted a profit of 500,000 yuan in local currency. Not
  only has it settled its own difficulties but it is satisfying the needs of
  the people in its guerrilla zone. The soldiers can now provide all their
  own woollen sweaters and socks.


Since military operations are so frequent in the guerrilla zones, perhaps
fighting is affected if the troops engage in production? Is that really so?
Please look at the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei border area:

  Applying the principle of integrating labour power and armed strength, they
  give equal importance to the tasks of production and fighting.


And

  Take, for instance, the fourth district contingent of the second sub-region.
  When they began their spring ploughing, they sent a special detachment to
  attack the enemy and at the same time launched a powerful political offensive.
  Precisely because of this, there was greater activity in the military sphere,
  too, and the combat effectiveness of the troops increased. From February
  to early September this small detachment fought 71 encounters, took the
  strongholds of Chutungsheh, Shangchuang, Yehchuang, Fengchiachai and Yaitou,
  inflicted 165 casualties on the enemy and puppet troops, and captured 91
  puppet soldiers, 3 light machine-guns and 101 rifles and pistols.


And

  Co-ordinating military activity with propaganda for extensive production,
  they immediately launched a political offensive with the watchword: "Smash
  anyone who tries to wreck the great production drive!" In the county towns
  of Taihsien and Kuohsien the enemy asked the inhabitants: "Why has the Eighth
  Route Army become so tough recently?" They replied: "Because you are trying
  to wreck the great production drive in the border area." The puppet troops
  said to one another: "Better not go out while they are carrying out this
  great production drive."


Is it possible to get the people in the guerrilla zones to launch a production
campaign too? Are the peasants interested in increasing production in such
zones, where rents have perhaps not yet been reduced or the rent reduction
has not been thorough? This has been answered in the affirmative in the
Shansi-Chahar-Hopei border area:

Furthermore, the troops in the vicinity of the enemy's blockade lines or
blockade ditches give direct help to the local people by spreading the production
campaign. On the one hand, they provide armed protection for the masses engaged
in production and, on the other, they render extensive help by their labor.
Some units have made it a rule to assign 50 per cent of their manpower to
provide free help for the masses during the busy farming seasons. Thus, the
enthusiasm of the masses for production has become very much greater, the
relations between the army and the people have become still more harmonious,
and the masses have enough to eat. Hence the sympathy and support of the
masses in the guerrilla zones for the Communist Party and the Eighth Route
Army have grown.

All doubts have thus been answered as to whether the army and the people
in the guerrilla zones can and must conduct large-scale production campaigns.
We demand of all Party, government and army cadres in the Liberated Areas,
and especially in the guerrilla zones, that they should attain full comprehension
of this point, for once the "can" and the "must" are understood, production
will be set going everywhere. It was precisely from this point that the start
was made in the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei border area:

In the production campaign the troops in the vicinity of the enemy's blockade lines or blockade ditches were not only able to fulfil their production plan
on schedule in the short space of five months, but what is more, they introduced
a number of practical innovations. This was because the cadres re-orientated
their thinking, paid serious attention to production and to integrating labour
power with armed strength, and brought forward labour heroes and model workers
from among the masses (sixty-six labour heroes and model workers according
to a preliminary summing-up).


In 1945, the Liberated Areas must carry out a bigger army and civilian production
campaign than ever before through the united efforts of all, and in the coming
winter we shall compare the achievements of all the areas.

War is not only a military and political contest but also an economic contest.
In order to defeat the Japanese aggressors, in addition to all the other
tasks we must apply ourselves to economic work and must master it within
two or three years; in the present year, 1945, we must achieve greater results
than ever before. This is what the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist
Party eagerly expects of all our cadres and all the people throughout the
Liberated Areas, and we hope this objective will be attained.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## China's Two Possible Destinies







CHINA'S TWO POSSIBLE DESTINIES



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  CHINA'S TWO POSSIBLE DESTINIES

April 23, 1945

[This was the opening speech at the Seventh National Congress of the Communist
Party of China.] 
  

Comrades! The Seventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China opens
today.

What is the significance of our congress? It is a congress, it should be
said, that affects the destiny of China's 450 million people. China can have
one of two destinies. Someone has written a book about one of them;
[1] our congress represents China's other destiny
and we, too, shall write a book about it. [2] The
aim of our congress is the overthrow of Japanese imperialism and the liberation
of all the people of China. Ours is a congress for the defeat of the Japanese
aggressors and the building of a new China, for final victory through the
unity of all the Chinese people and of the peoples of the whole world.

The times are very favourable. In Europe, Hitler will soon be overthrown.
The chief theatre of the world anti-fascist war is in the West, where the
fighting will soon end in victory, thanks to the efforts of the Soviet Red
Army. The guns of the Red Army can already be heard in Berlin, which will
probably fail before long. In the East, too, victory in the war to overthrow
Japanese imperialism is nigh. Our congress is meeting on the eve of final
victory in the anti-fascist war.

Two roads lie before the Chinese people, the road of light and the road of
darkness. Two possible destinies await China, a destiny of light and a destiny
of darkness. Japanese imperialism has not yet been defeated. But even after
its defeat, the two prospects will still confront us. Either a China which
is independent, free, democratic, united, prosperous and strong, that is,
a China full of light, a new China whose people have won liberation, or a
China which is semi-colonial, semi-feudal, divided, poor and weak, that is,
the old China. The new China or the old China--these are the two prospects
facing the Chinese people, the Communist Party of China and our present congress.

Since Japan is not yet defeated and since the two prospects will still face
us even after its defeat, how should we set about our work? What is our task?
Our sole task is boldly to mobilize the masses, expand the people's forces
and unite all the forces of the nation capable of being united in order to
struggle under our Party's leadership to defeat the Japanese aggressors and
build a bright new China, a China that is independent, free, united, prosperous
and strong. We must strive with all our might for a bright future, a destiny
of light, and against a dark future, a destiny of darkness. This is our one
and only task! Indeed, it is the task of our congress, of our whole Party,
and of all the people of China.

Is it possible for our hopes to be realized? We believe it is. The possibility
exists, because we already enjoy the following conditions:

  (1) A powerful Communist Party with rich experience and a membership of
  1,210,000.


  (2) Powerful Liberated Areas with a population of 95,500,000, an army of
  910,000 and a militia of 2,200,000.


  (3) The support of the masses throughout the country.


  (4) The support of the people of all countries, and especially of the Soviet
  Union.


With these conditions--a powerful Communist Party, powerful Liberated Areas,
the support of the masses throughout the country and the support of the people
of the world--can our hopes be realized? We believe they can. China has never
enjoyed these conditions before. Some have been present for a number of years,
but never so fully as today. Our Communist Party has never been so powerful,
the revolutionary base areas have never had so large a population and so
large an army, the prestige of the Communist Party is higher than ever among
the people both in the Japanese-occupied and in the Kuomintang areas, and
the revolutionary forces of the Soviet Union and the people of all countries
are stronger than ever before. One must say that, with these conditions,
it is entirely possible to defeat the aggressors and build a new China.

We must have a correct policy. The fundamental point of our policy is boldly
to mobilize the masses and expand the people's forces so that, under the
leadership of our Party, they will defeat the aggressors and build a new
China.

In the twenty-four years of its existence since its birth in 1921 the Communist
Party of China has gone through three historical periods of heroic struggle--the
Northern Expedition, the Agrarian Revolutionary War and the War of Resistance
Against Japan--and has accumulated a wealth of experience. Now our Party
has become the centre of gravity of the Chinese people's struggle to resist
Japan and save the nation, the centre of gravity of their struggle for liberation
and of their struggle to defeat the aggressors and build a new China. China's
centre of gravity lies right here where we are and nowhere else.

We should be modest and prudent, guard against arrogance and rashness, and
serve the Chinese people heart and soul, in order to unite them for defeating
the Japanese aggressors in the present and for building a new-democratic
state in the future. Provided we do so, provided we have the correct policy
and provided we make a united effort, we can definitely fulfil our task.

Down with Japanese Imperialism!

Long live the liberation of the Chinese people!

Long live the Communist Party of China!

Long live the Seventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China!
NOTES

1. This refers to Chiang Kai-shek's China's Destiny
published in 1943.

2. This refers to Comrade Mao Tse-tung's report "On Coalition
Government" at the same congress.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Coalition Government







ON COALITION GOVERNMENT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON COALITION GOVERNMENT

April 24, 1945

[This was the political report made by Comrade Mao Tse-tung to the Seventh
National Congress of the Communist Party of China.]
  

I. THE FUNDAMENTAL DEMANDS OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE


Our congress is being held in the following circumstances. A new situation
has emerged after nearly eight years of resolute, heroic and indomitable
struggle waged by the Chinese people with countless sacrifices and amid untold
hardships against the Japanese aggressors; in the world as a whole, decisive
victory has been gained in the just and sacred war against the fascist aggressors
and the moment is near when the Japanese aggressors will be defeated by the
Chinese people in co-ordination with the allied countries. But China remains
disunited and is still confronted with a grave crisis. In these circumstances,
what ought we to do? Beyond all doubt, the urgent need is to unite
representatives of all political parties and groups and of people without
any party affiliation and establish a provisional democratic coalition government
for the purpose of instituting democratic reforms, surmounting the present
crisis, mobilizing and unifying all the anti-Japanese forces in the country
to fight in effective co-ordination with the allied countries for the defeat
of the Japanese aggressors, and thus enabling the Chinese people to liberate
themselves from the latter's clutches. After that it will be necessary to
convene a national assembly on a broad democratic basis and set up a formally
constituted democratic government, which will also be in the nature of a
coalition and will have a still wider representation of people from all parties
and groups or without any party affiliation, and which will lead the liberated
people of the whole country in building an independent, free, democratic,
united, prosperous and powerful new China. In short, we must take the line
of unity and democracy, defeat the aggressors and build a new China.

We believe that this alone can give expression to the fundamental demands
of the Chinese people. Therefore, my report will deal mainly with these demands.
Whether or not a democratic coalition government should be set up has become
a matter of deep concern for the Chinese people and for democratic public
opinion in the allied countries. My report will therefore lay particular
stress on elucidating this question.

In the eight years of the War of Resistance Against Japan, the Communist
Party of China has overcome many difficulties and achieved great successes,
but as things stand serious difficulties still confront our Party and people.
The present situation demands that our Party should work still more solidly
and intensively and that it should continue to overcome the difficulties
and strive to fulfil the fundamental demands of the Chinese people.

II. THE INTERNATIONAL AND THE DOMESTIC SITUATION


Can the Chinese people translate these basic demands into reality? This will
depend on the level of their political consciousness, their unity and their
efforts. At the same time, the present international and domestic situation
offers extremely favourable opportunities. If the Chinese people can make
good use of these opportunities and continue to fight on staunchly, vigorously
and persistently, they will undoubtedly defeat the aggressors and build a
new China. They must redouble their efforts in their struggle to accomplish
their sacred tasks.

What is the present international situation?

The present military situation is that the Soviet Army is attacking Berlin,
and the allied forces of Britain, the United States and France are attacking
the Hitlerite remnants in co-ordination with this offensive, while the Italian
people are launching uprisings. All this will eliminate Hitler once and for
all. After Hitler is wiped out, the defeat of the Japanese aggressors will
not be far distant. Contrary to the predictions of the Chinese and foreign
reactionaries, the forces of fascist aggression will undoubtedly be overthrown
and the people's democratic forces will undoubtedly triumph. The world will
unquestionably take the road of progress and not the road of reaction. Of
course, we must remain very much on the alert and reckon with the possibility
of certain temporary or perhaps even serious twists and turns in the course
of events; in many countries there are still strong reactionary forces which
begrudge the people at home and abroad their unity, progress and liberation.
Anyone who loses sight of this possibility will make political mistakes.
The general trend of history, however, is already clearly decided and will
not change. This is bad only for the fascists and for the reactionaries of
all countries who are in fact their helpers, but it is a blessing for the
people and for the organized democratic forces in all countries. The people,
and the people alone, are the motive force of world history. The Soviet-people
have built up great strength and become the main force in the defeat of fascism.
It is their efforts, plus those of the people in the other anti-fascist allied
countries, which are making the destruction of fascism possible. War has
educated the people ant it is the people who will win the war, win the peace
and win progress.

This new situation is very different from that in World War I. The Soviet
Union was not yet in existence then and the people were not politically awakened
as they are in many countries today. The two world wars represent two entirely
different epochs.

This does not mean that there will be no more struggles after the defeat
of the fascist aggressor countries, the end of World War II and the establishment
of international peace. The remnant forces of fascism which are still widespread
will certainly continue to make trouble, while within the camp now fighting
fascist aggression there are forces which oppose democracy and oppress other
nations, and they will continue to oppress the people in various countries
and in the colonies and semi-colonies. Therefore, after international peace
is established, there will still be numerous struggles over the greater part
of the world--between the anti-fascist masses and the remnants of fascism,
between democracy and anti-democracy, between national liberation and national
oppression. The people will achieve the most extensive victory only through
long and sustained efforts, when the remaining forces of fascism, the
anti-demactatic forces and all the imperialist forces are overcome. To be
sure, that day will not come very quickly or easily, but come it surely will.
Victory in the anti-fascist Second World War will pave the way for the victory
of the people in their post-war struggles. A stable and lasting peace will
be ensured only when victory is won in these struggles.

What is the present domestic situation?

China's protracted war has exacted and will continue to exact great sacrifices
from the Chinese people, but at the same time this very war has tempered
them. It has awakened and united the Chinese people to a greater degree than
all their great struggles in the last hundred years. The Chinese people face
not only a formidable national enemy but also powerful domestic reactionary
forces which are in fact helping the enemy; this is one side of the picture.
But the other side is that the Chinese people are not only more politically
conscious than ever before but have built powerful Liberated Areas and a
nation-wide democratic movement that is growing day by day. These constitute
favourable domestic conditions. If the defeats and setbacks in the Chinese
people's struggles of the last hundred years were due to the absence of certain
necessary international and domestic conditions, then today the situation
is different--all the necessary conditions are present. There is every
possibility of avoiding defeat and winning victory. We shall be victorious
if we can unite the whole people in resolute struggle and give them proper
leadership.

The Chinese people now have much greater confidence that they can unite to
defeat the aggressors and build a new China. The time has come for them to
conquer all difficulties and achieve their fundamental demands, their great
historic aspirations. Is there any doubt about it? I think not.

Such is the general international and domestic situation today. 

III. TWO LINES IN THE ANTI-JAPANESE WAR


THE KEY TO CHINA'S PROBLEMS


In speaking of the domestic situation, we have also to make a specific analysis
of China's War of Resistance.

China is one of the five biggest countries taking part in the war against
fascism and it is the principal country fighting the Japanese aggressors
on the continent of Asia. Not only have the Chinese people played a very
great role in the war against Japan, but they will also play a very great
role in safeguarding peace in the post-war world and the decisive one in
safeguarding peace in the East. China has made very great efforts to liberate
herself and to help the allied countries during the eight years of the War
of Resistance Against Japan. These efforts have been made primarily by the
people of China. Vast numbers of officers and men in China's armies have
fought and shed their blood at the front; the workers, peasants, intellectuals
and industrialists of China have worked hard in the rear; the Chinese overseas
have made donations to support the war; and all the anti-Japanese political
parties, except for such of their members as are opposed to the people, have
played their part in the war. In short, with their blood and sweat, the Chinese
people have heroically fought the Japanese aggressors for eight long years.
But for a number of years the Chinese reactionaries have been spreading rumours
and misleading public opinion in order to prevent the world from knowing
the truth about the role played by the Chinese people in the war. Besides,
there has as yet been no comprehensive summing-up of the varied experience
gained by China during those eight years of war. Therefore, this congress
should make a proper summing-up of all this experience in order to educate
the people and provide our Party with a basis for the formulation of policy.

When it comes to such summing up, it is plain to all that there are two different
guiding lines in China. One leads to the defeat of the Japanese aggressors,
while the other not only makes their defeat impossible but in some respects
actually helps them and undermines our War of Resistance.

The Kuomintang government's policy of passive resistance to Japan and its
reactionary domestic policy of active repression of the people have resulted
in military setbacks, enormous territorial losses, financial and economic
crisis, oppression and hardship for the people and the disruption of national
unity. This reactionary policy has been an obstruction to mobilizing and
uniting all the anti-Japanese forces of the Chinese people for the effective
prosecution of the war, and has hindered the awakening and unity of the people.
Yet this political awakening and this unity have never ceased to develop,
but have moved forward along a tortuous course, under the twofold repression
of the Japanese aggressors and the Kuomintang government. Clearly, there
have been two lines in China for a long time, the Kuomintang government's
line of oppression of the people and of passive resistance, and the Chinese
people's line of enhancing their own consciousness and unity for the waging
of a people's war. Herein lies the key to all China's problems.

HISTORY FOLLOWS A TORTUOUS COURSE


To help people understand why this question of the two lines is the key to
all of China's problems, it is necessary to trace the history of our War
of Resistance Against Japan.

The Chinese people's War of Resistance has followed a tortuous course. It
began as far back as 1931. On September 18 of that year, the Japanese aggressors
occupied Shenyang, and within a few months they seized the three northeastern
provinces. The Kuomintang government adopted a policy of non-resistance.
But against the will of the Kuomintang government and led or assisted by
the Chinese Communist Party, the people and a patriotic section of the troops
of these provinces organized the Anti-Japanese Volunteers and the Anti-Japanese
United Army and engaged in heroic guerrilla warfare. At one time this heroic
guerrilla warfare grew to great dimensions and, despite many difficulties
and setbacks, it has never been put down by the enemy. When the Japanese
aggressors attacked Shanghai in 1932, a group of patriots in the Kuomintang
once again defied the will of the Kuomintang government and led the 19th
Route Army in resisting the Japanese aggressors. In 1933 the Japanese aggressors
invaded Jehol and Chahar Provinces, and for the third time a group of patriots
in the Kuomintang defied the will of the Kuomintang government and co-operated
with the Communist Party in organizing the Anti-Japanese Allied Army to resist
the enemy. But in all this fighting against Japan support came entirely from
the Chinese people, the Chinese Communist Party, other democratic groups
and the patriotic Chinese overseas, while the Kuomintang government with
its policy of non-resistance contributed nothing. On the contrary, the
anti-Japanese actions in Shanghai and Chahar were both wrecked by the Kuomintang
government itself. In 1933 it also destroyed the people's government which
had been established in Fukien by the 19th Route Army.

Why did the Kuomintang government of that day adopt a policy of non-resistance?
The main reason was that it had wrecked Kuomintang-Communist co-operation
and the unity of the Chinese people in 1927.

In 1924 Dr. Sun Yat-sen, accepting the proposals of the Chinese Communist
Party, called the First National Congress of the Kuomintang in which Communists
took part, adopted the Three Great Policies of alliance with Russia, co-operation
with the Communist Party and assistance to the peasants and workers, established
the Whampoa Military Academy and formed the national united front of the
Kuomintang, the Communist Party and all sections of the people. As a result,
the reactionary forces in Kwangtung Province were destroyed in 1924-25, the
triumphant Northern Expedition was carried out during 1926-27, most of the
areas along the Yangtse and Yellow Rivers were taken over, the Northern warlord
government was defeated, and the people's struggle for liberation was unfolded
on a scale never before seen in Chinese history. But at a critical moment
in the progress of the Northern Expedition, in the late spring and early
summer of 1927, the treacherous and reactionary policies of "party purge"
and massacre adopted by the Kuomintang authorities wrecked this national
united front--the united front of the Kuomintang, the Communist Party and
all sections of the people, which embodied the Chinese people's cause of
liberation--and all its revolutionary policies. Yesterday's allies, the Chinese
Communist Party and the Chinese people, were now regarded as enemies, and
yesterday's enemies, the imperialists and feudalists, were now regarded as
allies. So it came about that a sudden attack was perfidiously launched against
the Chinese Communist Party and the people, and the great, dynamic and vigorous
revolution was crushed. Thereupon unity was replaced by civil war, democracy
by dictatorship, and a China full of brightness by a China covered in darkness.
But the Chinese Communist Party and the Chinese people were neither cowed
nor conquered nor exterminated. They picked themselves up, wiped off the
blood, buried their fallen comrades and went into battle again. Holding high
the great standard of revolution, they rose in armed resistance and over
a vast territory in China they set up people's governments, carried out land
reform, built up a people's army--the Chinese Red Army-- and preserved and
expanded the revolutionary forces of the Chinese people. Dr. Sun Yat-sen's
revolutionary Three People's Principles, which the Kuomintang reactionaries
had discarded, were carried forward by the people, the Communist Party and
other democrats.

After the invasion of the three northeastern provinces by the Japanese
aggressors, the Chinese Communist Party in 1933, proposed to all the Kuomintang
forces then attacking the revolutionary base areas and the Red Army that
an armistice agreement be concluded to facilitate united resistance to Japan;
this proposal was made with three conditions--that the attacks should stop,
that the people should be granted democratic rights, and that the people
should be armed. But the Kuomintang authorities rejected it.

From then on the Kuomintang government's policy of civil war became increasingly
vicious, while the voice of the Chinese people grow increasingly powerful
in its demand for an end to civil war and for united resistance to Japan.
All kinds of popular patriotic organizations were formed in Shanghai and
many other places. Between 1934 and 1936, under the leadership of the Central
Committee of our Party, the main forces of the Red Army north and south of
the Yangtse River went through untold hardships and moved to northwestern
China, joining forces with the Red Army units there. It was in those two
years that the Chinese Communist Party decided on, and carried out, a new
and comprehensive political line in keeping with the new situation--the line
of the National United Front Against Japan, with united resistance to Japan
and the establishment of a new-democratic republic as the goal of struggle.
On December 9,1935, the student masses in Peiping launched a heroic patriotic
movement under our Party's leadership; they formed the Chinese National
Liberation Vanguard Corps [1] and spread this movement
to all the big cities in China. On December 12, 1936, two patriotic Kuomintang
groups which favoured resistance to Japan, the Northeastern Army and the
17th Route Army, together staged the famous Sian Incident in courageous
opposition to the reactionary Kuomintang policy of compromising with Japan
and massacring the people at home. Other patriots in the Kuomintang were
likewise dissatisfied with the policy of the Kuomintang authorities at the
time. These were the circumstances in which the Kuomintang authorities were
forced to abandon their policy of civil war and to acknowledge the demands
of the people. The peaceful settlement of the Sian Incident became the turning
point; under the new circumstances internal co-operation took shape and the
nationwide War of Resistance Against Japan began. In May 1937, shortly before
the Lukouchiao Incident, [2] our Party called the
historic national conference at which the new political line followed by
the Central Committee of the Party since 1935 was endorsed.

From the Lukouchiao Incident of July 7, 1937 to the fall of Wuhan in October
1938, the Kuomintang government was relatively active in the war against
Japan. During that period the large-scale Japanese attacks and the mounting
patriotic indignation of the whole people compelled the Kuomintang government
to make resistance to the Japanese aggressors the centre of gravity of its
policy, which made it easier to bring about an upsurge in the struggle of
the whole army and people against Japan, and for a time there was a new and
dynamic atmosphere. All the people, including the Communists and other democrats,
earnestly hoped that the Kuomintang government would seize the opportunity,
at a time when the nation was in peril and the people were filled with
enthusiasm, to institute democratic reforms and put Dr. Sun Yat-sen's
revolutionary Three People's Principles into practice. But their hopes came
to nought. Even in those two years of relatively active resistance, the
Kuomintang authorities continued to oppose the mobilization of the masses
for a people's war and to place restrictions on the people's spontaneous
efforts to unite for anti-Japanese and democratic action. While the Kuomintang
government had somewhat changed its previous attitude to the Chinese Communist
Party and the other anti-Japanese parties, it continued to deny them equal
status and restrict their activities in many ways. Patriotic political prisoners
were still kept in jail in large numbers. Above all, the Kuomintang government
still maintained the oligarchic dictatorship it had established after launching
the civil war in 1927, so that it was impossible to set up a democratic coalition
government representing the unanimous will of the nation.

At the very beginning of this period we Communists pointed out that there
were two alternative lines for China's war of Resistance Against Japan, an
all-embracing people's war leading to victory, or a partial war in which
the people remained oppressed, leading to defeat. We also pointed out that
the war would be protracted and would inevitably involve many obstacles and
hardships, but that by their exertions the Chinese people were sure to win
the final victory.
THE PEOPLE'S WAR


During the same period the main forces of the Communist-led Red Army, which
had moved to northwestern China, were redesignated as the Eighth Route Army
of the Chinese National Revolutionary Army, while the Chinese Red Army's
guerrilla units, which had remained in various places on both sides of the
Yangtse River, were redesignated as the New Fourth Army of the Chinese National
Revolutionary Army. The former went to fight on the northern China front
and the latter on the central China front. During the civil war period, the
Chinese Red Army, which had preserved and developed the democratic tradition
of the Whampoa Military Academy and of the National Revolutionary Army of
the Northern Expedition days, had at one time grown to several hundred thousand
men. But by the beginning of the War of Resistance Against Japan it had been
reduced to a few tens of thousands as a result of the ruthless destruction
wrought in our southern base areas by the Kuomintang government, our losses
during the Long March, and other causes. Consequently there were some who
looked down on this army and thought that the main reliance for resistance
to Japan should be placed on the Kuomintang. But the people are the best
judges. The people knew that despite their small number at the time, the
Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies were of high quality, that they alone
could wage a real people's war and that boundless prospects would open up
before them once they reached the anti-Japanese fronts and joined with the
broad masses there. And the people were right. By now, as I make this report,
our army has already expanded to 910,000 men, and the number of our rural
militia, who are not withdrawn from normal productive work, has grown to
more than 2,200,000. Despite the fact that our regular army is still numerically
much smaller than that of the Kuomintang (counting the Kuomintang units under
local as well as central control), it has already become the main force in
China's War of Resistance, judging by the number of Japanese and puppet forces
it is engaging and the extent of its battle fronts, by its combat effectiveness,
by the mass support it enjoys in its operations, and by its political quality,
cohesion and unity.

This army is powerful because all its members have a discipline based on
political consciousness; they have come together and they fight not for the
private interests of a few individuals or a narrow clique, but for the interests
of the broad masses and of the whole nation. The sole purpose of this army
is to stand firmly with the Chinese people and to serve them whole-heartedly.

Guided by this purpose, this army has an indomitable spirit and is determined
to vanquish all enemies and never to yield. No matter what the difficulties
and hardships, so long as a single man remains, he will fight on.

Guided by this purpose, this army has achieved remarkable unity in its own
ranks and with those outside its ranks. Internally, there is unity between
officers and men, between the higher and lower ranks, and between military
work, political work and rear service work, and externally, there is unity
between the army and the people, between the army and government organizations,
and between our army and the friendly armies. It is imperative to overcome
anything that impairs this unity.

Guided by this purpose, this army has a correct policy for winning over enemy
officers and men and for dealing with prisoners of war. Without exception
all members of the enemy forces who surrender, who come over to our side
or who, after laying down their arms, wish to join in fighting the common
foe, are welcomed and given proper education. It is forbidden to kill, maltreat
or insult any prisoner of war.

Guided by this purpose, this army has built up a system of strategy and tactics
which is essential for the people's war. It is skilled in flexible guerrilla
warfare conducted in accordance with the changing concrete conditions and
is also skilled in mobile warfare.

Guided by this purpose, this army has built up a system of political work
which is essential for the people's war and is aimed at promoting unity in
its own ranks, unity with the friendly armies and unity with the people,
and at disintegrating the enemy forces and ensuring victory in battle.

Guided by this purpose, the entire army, operating under conditions of guerrilla
warfare, is able to utilize, and has in fact utilized, the intervals between
battles and between training periods to produce grain and other necessities,
thus becoming wholly, half or at least partly self-supporting, so that economic
difficulties are overcome, living conditions improved and the burden on the
people lightened. Every possibility has been exploited to establish a number
of small-scale armament works in various military base areas.

Furthermore, this army is powerful because it has the people's self-defence
corps and the militia--the vast armed organizations of the masses--fighting
in co-ordination with it. In the Liberated Areas of China all men and women,
from youth to middle age, are organized in the people's anti-Japanese
self-defence corps on a voluntary and democratic basis and without giving
up their work in production. The cream of the self-defence corps, except
for those who join the army or the guerrilla units, is brought into the militia.
Without the cooperation of these armed forces of the masses it would be
impossible to defeat the enemy.

Finally, this army is powerful because of its division into two parts, the
main forces and the regional forces, with the former available for operations
in any region whenever necessary and the latter concentrating on defending
their own localities and attacking the enemy there in co-operation with the
local militia and the self-defence corps. This division of labour has won
the whole-hearted support of the people. Without this correct division of
labour--if, for example, attention were paid only to the role of the main
forces while that of the regional forces were neglected--it would likewise
be impossible to defeat the enemy in the conditions obtaining in China's
Liberated Areas. Under the regional forces, numerous armed working teams
have been organized, which are well trained and hence better qualified for
military, political and mass work; they penetrate into the rearmost areas
behind the enemy lines, strike at the enemy and arouse the masses to
anti-Japanese struggle, thus giving support to the frontal military operations
of the various Liberated Areas. In all this they have achieved great success.

Under the leadership of their democratic governments, all the anti-Japanese
people in the Liberated Areas of China are called upon to join organizations
of workers, peasants, youth and women, and cultural, professional and other
organizations, which will wholeheartedly perform various tasks in support
of the armed forces. Those tasks are not limited to rallying the people to
join the army, transporting grain for it, caring for soldiers' families and
helping the troops in meeting their material needs. They also include mobilizing
the guerrilla units, militia and self-defence corps to make widespread raids
and lay land mines against the enemy, gather intelligence about him, comb
out traitors and spies, transport and protect the wounded and take direct
part in the army's operations. At the same time, the people in all the Liberated
Areas are enthusiastically taking up various kinds of political, economic,
cultural and health work. The most important thing in this connection is
to mobilize everybody for the production of grain and other necessities and
to ensure that all government institutions and schools, except in special
cases, devote their free time to production for their own support in order
to supplement the self-suffidency production campaigns of the army and the
people and thus help to create a great upsurge of production to sustain the
protracted War of Resistance. In China's Liberated Areas, the enemy has wrought
great havoc, and floods, droughts and damage by insect pests have been frequent.
However, the democratic governments there have been leading the people in
overcoming these difficulties in an organized way, and unprecedented results
have been achieved by the great mass campaigns for pest extermination, flood
control and disaster relief, thus making it possible to persevere in the
protracted War of Resistance. In a word, everything for the front, everything
for the defeat of the Japanese aggressors and for the liberation of the Chinese
people--this is the general slogan, the general policy for the whole army
and the whole people in the Liberated Areas of China.

Such is a real people's war. Only by waging such a people's war can we defeat
the national enemy. The Kuomintang has failed precisely because of its desperate
opposition to a people's war.

Once it is equipped with modern weapons, the army of China's Liberated Areas
will become still more powerful and will be able to accomplish the final
defeat of the Japanese aggressors.
TWO BATTLE FRONTS


From the very beginning there have been two fronts in China's War of Resistance,
the Kuomintang front and the front of the Liberated Areas.

After the fall of Wuhan in October 1938, the Japanese aggressors stopped
their strategic offensive against the Kuomintang front and gradually shifted
their main forces to the front of the Liberated Areas; at the same time,
taking advantage of the defeatist sentiments of the Kuomintang government,
they declared their willingness to arrive at a compromise peace with it,
and, adopting a policy designed to deceive the Chinese nation, they induced
the traitor Wang Ching-wei to leave Chungking and establish a puppet government
in Nanking. The Kuomintang government then began to change its policy, gradually
shifting the emphasis from resistance to Japan to opposition to the Communist
Party and the people. This shift first made itself apparent in the military
sphere. To conserve its own military strength, the Kuomintang government
adopted the policy of passive resistance to Japan; it threw the burden of
fighting onto the front of the Liberated Areas by letting the Japanese invaders
attack the Liberated Areas in force, while itself "sitting on top of the
mountain to watch the tigers fight".

In 1939, the Kuomintang government adopted the reactionary "Measures for
Restricting the Activities of Alien Parties" and completely deprived the
people and the anti-Japanese parties of whatever rights they had won during
the early period of the War of Resistance. From then on, in the Kuomintang
areas, all the democratic parties, and first and foremost the Communist Party
of China, have been driven underground by the Kuomintang government. In every
province in those areas the prisons and concentration camps are packed with
Communists, young patriots and other fighters for democracy. In the five
years from 1939 to the autumn of 1943, the Kuomintang government launched
three anti-Communist onslaughts [3] to split national
unity, and thus created serious danger of civil war. It was in this period
that the "disbanding" of the New Fourth Army was ordered and more than nine
thousand of its troops in southern Anhwei were annihilated--an event which
shocked the world. To this very moment the attacks by Kuomintang troops on
the forces of the Liberated Areas have not ceased, nor is there any sign
that they will. At the same time, the Kuomintang reactionaries have been
pouring out slanders and calumnies of all sorts. It is they who have fabricated
such labels and expressions as "traitor party", "traitor army", "traitor
areas", and "sabotaging the War of Resistance and endangering the state",
for the purpose of maligning the Communist Party, the Eighth Route and New
Fourth Armies and the Liberated Areas. To meet the crisis, on July 7, 1939
the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party issued a manifesto setting
forth the following slogans, "Persist in resistance and oppose capitulation!
Persist in unity and oppose a split! Persist in progress and oppose
retrogressions!" In those five years, our Party, acting on these timely slogans,
vigorously repulsed the three reactionary and anti-popular anti-Communist
onslaughts and overcame the crisis on each occasion.

There was actually no serious fighting on the Kuomintang front during those
years. The sword-edge of Japanese aggression was mainly directed against
the Liberated Areas. By 1943, the army and the people of the Liberated Areas
were pinning down 64 per cent of the Japanese forces invading China and 95
per cent of the puppet troops, while the Kuomintang front faced only 36 per
cent of the former and 5 per cent of the latter.

In 1944 the Japanese aggressors launched operations to force China's north-south
trunk railways open for through traffic;[4]
panic-stricken, the Kuomintang forces were totally incapable of offering
resistance. Within a few months extensive areas in Honan, Hunan, Kwangsi
and Kwangtung Provinces had fallen into the enemy's hands. It was not until
then that some change took place in the proportion of enemy forces engaged
on the two fronts. Even so, at the moment of making this report, of the 40
divisions comprising 580,000 Japanese soldiers in China (not counting those
in the three northeastern provinces), 22 1/2 divisions, comprising 320,000
men or 56 per cent of the total forces, are engaged on the front of the Liberated
Areas, and no more than 17 1/2 divisions, comprising 260,000 men or 44 per
cent, are engaged on the Kuomintang front. As for the puppet troops engaged
on the two fronts, the ratio has not changed at all.

It should also be pointed out that the puppet troops, numbering more than
800,000 men (in both the regular and the local forces), are chiefly composed
either of units that surrendered under their Kuomintang commanders or of
units organized by the Kuomintang officers after their surrender. The Kuomintang
reactionaries have furnished these puppet troops in advance with a false
and traitorous theory, namely, "saving the nation by a devious path", and
have given them moral and organizational support since their surrender, directing
them to attack the Chinese people's Liberated Areas in co-ordination with
the Japanese aggressors. These reactionaries have also mustered large forces,
totalling no less than 797,000 men, to blockade and attack the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and other Liberated Areas. This grave
situation is being kept from the knowledge of many Chinese and foreigners
by the Kuomintang government's policy of suppressing news.
CHINA'S LIBERATED AREAS


China's Liberated Areas, led by the Communist Party, now have a population
of 95,500,000. They exist from Inner Mongolia in the north to Hainan Island
in the south; almost everywhere the enemy goes, he finds the Eighth Route
Army, the New Fourth Army or some other people's forces in operation. This
vast liberated territory consists of nineteen major Liberated Areas, covering
greater or lesser parts of the provinces of Liaoning, Jehol, Chahar, Suiyuan,
Shensi, Kansu, Ningsia, Shansi, Hopei, Honan, Shantung, Kiangsu, Chekiang,
Anhwei, Kiangsi, Hupeh, Hunan, Kwangtung and Fukien. Yenan is the centre
from which guidance is given to all those Liberated Areas. The
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region west of the Yellow River, with a population
of only 1,500,000, is but one of the nineteen areas forming this vast liberated
part of China and, indeed, the smallest in population except for one in eastern
Chekiang Province and another on Hainan Island. Unaware of this, some people
think China's liberated territory consists chiefly of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region. This misconception arises from the Kuomintang government's
blockade. In every one of the Liberated Areas, all the requisite policies
of the Anti-Japanese National United Front have been put into practice, and
popularly elected governments, that is, local coalition governments, have
been or are being set up, in which Communists and representative personalities
of other anti-Japanese parties or without any party affiliation are co-operating.
The entire strength of the people has been mobilized in the Liberated Areas.
As a result, despite the formidable pressure of the enemy, the Kuomintang's
military blockade and attacks and the complete absence of outside help, China's
Liberated Areas have stood firm and have grown steadily, reducing the territory
occupied by the enemy and extending their own; they have become the model
for a democratic China and the main force driving out the Japanese aggressors
and liberating the Chinese people in military co-operation with the allied
countries. The armed forces of China's Liberated Areas, the Eighth Route
Army, the New Fourth Army and the other armed forces of the people, have
not only set a heroic example in fighting Japan, but have also set an example
in carrying out the democratic policies of the Anti-Japanese National United
Front. The declaration issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of China on September 22, 1937 affirming that "Dr. Sun Yat-sen's Three People's
Principles being what China needs today, our Party is ready to fight for
their complete realization", has been completely carried into effect in China's
Liberated Areas.
THE KUOMINTANG AREAS


Persisting in its dictatorial rule, the chief ruling clique of the Kuomintang
has followed a policy of passive resistance to Japan and a domestic policy
directed against the people. In consequence, its armed forces have shrunk
to less than half their original size and most of them have virtually lost
their combat effectiveness; there is a profound rift between this clique
and the broad masses and a grave crisis of mass impoverishment, seething
discontent and widespread revolt; not only has its role in the war been sharply
reduced, but it has also become an obstacle to the mobilization and unity
of all the anti-Japanese forces of the Chinese people.

Why has such a grave situation arisen under the leadership of the Kuomintang's
chief ruling clique? It has arisen because that clique represents the interests
of China's big landlords, big bankers and big compradors. The handful of
people forming this reactionary stratum monopolize all the important military,
political, economic and cultural organizations under the Kuomintang government.
They place the safeguarding of their own interests above resistance to Japan.
They too say "the nation above all", but their actions do not accord with
the demands of the great majority of the nation. They too say "the state
above all", but what they mean is the feudal-fascist dictatorship of the
big landlords, big bankers and big compradors, and not a democratic state
of the people. Therefore they are afraid of the rise of the people, afraid
of the democratic movement and afraid of full mass mobilization for war against
Japan. Herein lies the root cause of their policy of passive resistance to
Japan and their reactionary domestic policy against the people, democracy
and the Communist Party. They have a double-faced policy in everything. For
instance, on the one hand they are resisting Japan but on the other they
are pursuing a passive war policy, and moreover they are the constant target
of Japanese inducements to surrender. They talk about developing China's
economy, but in fact they build up their own bureaucrat-capital, i.e., the
capital of the big landlords, bankers and compradors, and monopolize the
lifelines of China's economy, ruthlessly oppressing the peasants, the workers,
the petty bourgeoisie and the non-monopoly bourgeoisie. They talk about putting
"democracy" into practice and "handing state power back to the people", yet
they ruthlessly suppress the people's movement for democracy and refuse to
introduce the mildest democratic reform. They say that "the Communist problem
is a political one and should be solved politically", yet they ruthlessly
suppress the Chinese Communist Party militarily, politically and economically,
regarding it as "enemy No. 1" and the Japanese aggressors as only "enemy
No. 2", and day in and day out they busy themselves with preparations for
a civil war and plots to annihilate the Communist Party. They say they will
establish a "modern state", yet they work desperately to maintain the
feudal-fascist dictatorship of the big landlords, bankers and compradors.
While maintaining formal diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, they
are in fact hostile to it. They chant "Asia before Europe" in chorus with
the U.S. isolationists in order to prolong the life of fascist Germany, which
amounts to prolonging the life of fascists everywhere, including their own
fascist rule over the Chinese people, yet at the same time they indulge in
diplomatic manoeuvres, masquerading as anti-fascist heroes. If you look for
the root of these contradictory double-faced policies, you will find they
all stem from the social stratum of the big landlords, bankers and compradors.

Nevertheless, the Kuomintang is not a homogeneous political party. Though
it is controlled and led by the reactionary clique representing the stratum
of the big landlords, bankers and compradors, it must not be entirely identified
with this clique. Some Kuomintang leaders do not belong to this clique by
which they are even slighted, pushed aside or attacked. Many of its cadres
and rank and file and many members of the Three People's Principles Youth
League are dissatisfied with the leadership of this clique, and some even
oppose it. The same is true of all the Kuomintang armies, government organs
and economic and cultural institutions which this reactionary clique controls.
There are quite a number of democratic elements in all of them. Moreover,
the reactionary clique itself, divided as it is into several contending factions,
is not a close-knit body. Undoubtedly it is wrong to regard the Kuomintang
as a homogeneous body of reactionaries.
A CONTRAST


The Chinese people have come to see the sharp contrast between the Liberated
Areas and the Kuomintang areas.

Are not the facts clear enough? Here are two lines, the line of a people's
war and the line of passive resistance, which is against a people's war;
one leads to victory even in the difficult conditions in China's Liberated
Areas with their total lack of outside aid, and the other leads to defeat
even in the extremely favourable conditions in the Kuomintang areas with
foreign aid available.

The Kuomintang government attributes its failures to lack of arms.

Yet one may ask, which of the two are short of arms, the Kuomintang troops
or the troops of the Liberated Areas? Of all China's forces, those of the
Liberated Areas lack arms most acutely, their only weapons being those they
capture from the enemy or manufacture under the most adverse conditions.

Is it not true that the forces directly under the Kuomintang central government
are far better armed than the provincial troops? Yet in combat effectiveness
most of the central forces are inferior to the provincial troops.

The Kuomintang commands vast reserves of manpower, yet its wrong recruiting
policy makes manpower replenishment very difficult. Though cut off from each
other by the enemy and engaged in constant fighting, China's Liberated Areas
are able to mobilize inexhaustible manpower because the militia and self-defence
corps system, which is well-adapted to the needs of the people, is applied
everywhere, and because misuse and waste of manpower are avoided.

Although the Kuomintang controls vast areas abounding in grain and the people
supply it with 70-100 million tan annually, its army is always short
of food and its soldiers are emaciated because the greater part of the grain
is embezzled by those through whose hands it passes. But although most of
China's Liberated Areas, which are located in the enemy rear, have been
devastated by the enemy's policy of "burn all, kill all, loot all", and although
some regions like northern Shensi are very arid, we have successfully solved
the grain problem through our own efforts by increasing agricultural production.

The Kuomintang areas are facing a very grave economic crisis; most industries
are bankrupt, and even such necessities as cloth have to be imported from
the United States. But China's Liberated Areas are able to meet their own
needs in cloth and other necessities through the development of industry.

In the Kuomintang areas, the workers, peasants, shop assistants, government
employees, intellectuals and cultural workers live in extreme misery. In
the Liberated Areas all the people have food, clothing and work.

It is characteristic of the Kuomintang areas that, exploiting the national
crisis for profiteering purposes, officials have concurrently become traders
and habitual grafters without any sense of shame or decency. It is characteristic
of China's Liberated Areas that, setting an example of plain living and hard
work, the cadres take part in production in addition to their regular duties;
honesty is held in high esteem while graft is strictly prohibited.

In the Kuomintang areas the people have no freedom at all. In China's Liberated
Areas the people have full freedom.

Who is to blame for all the anomalies which confront the Kuomintang rulers?
Are others to blame, or they themselves? Are foreign countries to blame for
not giving them enough aid, or are the Kuomintang government's dictatorial
rule, corruption and incompetence to blame? Isn't the answer obvious?
WHO IS "SABOTAGING THE WAR OF RESISTANCE AND ENDANGERING THE
  STATE"?


In the light of the indisputable evidence, is it not the Kuomintang government
itself that has been sabotaging the Chinese people's War of Resistance and
endangering our country? For fully ten years that government devoted itself
wholly to civil war, turning the edge of its sword against the people while
utterly neglecting national defence, and by its policy of non-resistance
it gave away the four northeastern provinces. When the Japanese aggressors
drove south of the Great Wall, it put up a flurry of resistance and then
retreated from Lukouchiao all the way to the province of Kweichow. Yet the
Kuomintang alleges that "the Communist Party is sabotaging the War of Resistance
and endangering the state" (see resolutions of the Eleventh Plenary Session
of the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang, held in September 1943).
Its only evidence is that the Communist Party has united with all sections
of the people to create the Liberated Areas which are heroically resisting
Japan. The logic of the Kuomintang is so different from that of the Chinese
people that the failure to arrive at a common language on many problems is
not to be wondered at.

Here are two questions.

First, what exactly has made the Kuomintang government abandon so vast and
so well populated a territory, stretching from Heilungkiang Province to
Lukouchiao and from Lukonchiao to Kweichow? Can it be anything other than
its policy first of non-resistance and then of passive resistance to Japan,
and its domestic policy of opposing the people?

Second, what exactly has enabled China's Liberated Areas to smash the ruthless
and prolonged attacks of the Japanese and puppet forces, to recover such
vast territories and liberate such an immense population from the grip of
the national enemy? Can it be anything other than our correct line, the line
of a people's war?
"DISOBEDIENCE TO GOVERNMENTAL AND MILITARY ORDERS"


The Kuomintang government also constantly accuses the Chinese Communist Party
of "disobedience to governmental and military orders". All we need say is
that fortunately the Chinese Communists, sharing the common sense of the
Chinese people, have not obeyed such "governmental and military orders" as
in fact would have meant handing over to the Japanese aggressors the Liberated
Areas which the Chinese people had recaptured from them amid great difficulties
and hardships. Some examples are the "Measures for Restricting the Activities
of Alien Parties" in 1939, the orders for the "disbandment of the New Fourth
Army" and for its "withdrawal north of the old course of the Yellow River"
in 1941, the order for the "dissolution of the Communist Party of China"
in 1943, the order for us to "disband all the troops except for ten divisions
within a definite time limit" in 1944, and the proposal which the Kuomintang
government called "a concession" in the recent talks with us and which would
require us to hand over our armed forces and local governments in exchange
for a few posts in its dictatorial government, but without the formation
of a coalition government. Fortunately we have not submitted to this sort
of thing and have thus preserved an undefiled stretch of soil and a heroic
anti-Japanese army for the Chinese people. Should not the Chinese people
congratulate themselves on such "disobedience"? Does not the Kuomintang
government feel it has done enough after presenting the Japanese aggressors
with the vast populated area from Heilungklang to Kweichow through its own
fascist government decrees and defeatist military orders? The Japanese aggressors
and the reactionaries welcome these "governmental and military orders", but
can such things be welcomed by any upright Chinese patriot? Unless there
is a coalition government, not in form but in fact, not a fascist dictatorship
but a democratic government, is it conceivable that the Chinese people would
permit the Chinese Communists to hand over the Liberated Areas where the
people have won freedom as well as the people's armies that have performed
signal service in the War of Resistance to the present Kuomintang government,
which is defeatist, fascist and dictatorial? Without the Liberated Areas
and the people's army, could the anti-Japanese cause of the Chinese people
be what it is today? And can one possibly conceive what the future of the
Chinese nation would be?
THE DANGER OF CIVIL WAR


To this day the chief ruling clique in the Kuomintang is persisting in its
reactionary policy of dictatorship and civil war. There are many signs that
it has long been making, and is now stepping up, preparations to unleash
civil war as soon as the forces of a certain allied country have cleared
a considerable part of the Chinese mainland of the Japanese aggressors. It
also hopes that the generals of certain allied countries will do the same
job in China as the British General Scobie [5]
has been doing in Greece. It applauds the butchery perpetrated by Scobie
and the reactionary Greek government. It is planning to plunge China once
again into the maelstrom of civil war, as in 1927-37. Behind the smokescreen
of "convening the national assembly" and "political settlement", it is secretly
preparing civil war. If our fellow-countrymen fail to take note, fail to
expose its schemes and put a stop to these preparations, then one fine morning
they will hear the cannonade of civil war.
NEGOTIATIONS


After obtaining the consent of other democratic parties, the Communist Party
of China put forward the demand at the People's Political Council in September
1944 that the Kuomintang one-party dictatorship be abolished immediately
and a democratic coalition government be formed for the purpose of defeating
the Japanese aggressors, building a new China and preventing civil war. This
was undoubtedly a timely demand, and in the space of a few months it has
won the warm response of the broad masses.

We have had many rounds of negotiations with the Kuomintang government on
the question of abolishing the one-party dictatorship, forming a coalition
government and instituting essential democratic reforms, but it has rejected
all our proposals. Not only is the Kuomintang unwilling to abolish the one-party
dictatorship and form a coalition government, it is unwilling to introduce
a single one of the urgently needed democratic reforms, such as the abolition
of the secret police, the annulment of the reactionary laws and decrees that
suppress the people's freedom, the release of political prisoners, recognition
of the legal status of the political parties, recognition of the Liberated
Areas and the withdrawal of the armies blockading and attacking them.
Consequently political relations in China have become very strained.
TWO PROSPECTS


In the light of the situation as a whole and of the above analysis of the
actual international and domestic state of affairs, I would ask everyone
here to be on the alert and not to expect that our cause will proceed smoothly
and easily. No, it will not. Actually there are two possibilities, two prospects,
one good and one bad. One possibility or prospect is that the fascist
dictatorship will continue and democratic reforms will not be allowed, that
the stress will be on opposing the people instead of the Japanese aggressors,
and even that civil war may break out after the Japanese aggressors are defeated,
dragging China back into her old miserable state, without independence, freedom,
democracy, unity, prosperity or strength. This possibility or prospect is
still there, and it has not ceased to exist or has not automatically vanished
simply because of the favourable international situation and the increased
political consciousness and organized strength of our people. Those who hope
that this possibility or prospect will become a reality in China are the
reactionary clique within the Kuomintang at home and the imperialist-minded
reactionaries abroad. This is one aspect which must be taken into account.

But there is another aspect and, again in the light of the situation as a
whole and the foregoing analysis of the international and domestic state
of affairs, we can gain added confidence and courage in striving for the
second possibility or prospect. It is that of overcoming all difficulties,
uniting the whole people, abolishing the Kuomintang's fascist dictatorship,
carrying out democratic reforms, consolidating and expanding the anti-Japanese
forces, thoroughly defeating the Japanese aggressors and building an independent,
free, democratic, united, prosperous and powerful new China. Those who hope
that this possibility or prospect will become a reality in China are the
masses, the Communist Party and the other democratic parties at home, and
all the nations that treat us as equals and the progressives and the masses
abroad.

We know full well that we Communists together with the whole Chinese people
still face great difficulties and many obstacles and have a long and tortuous
road to travel. But we know equally well that, together with the whole Chinese
people, we shall overcome all the difficulties and obstacles and accomplish
the task which history has entrusted China. The great task for us and for
the whole people is to avert the first possibility or prospect and work for
the second with every ounce of our energy. Essentially the international
and domestic situation favours us Communists together with the Chinese people
as a whole. This I have already made quite clear. We hope that the Kuomintang
authorities will have the courage to change their present wrong policies
in view of the general world trend and the popular feeling in China, so that
the war can be won, the sufferings of the Chinese people can be reduced and
a new China can soon be brought into being. It must be understood that, however
tortuous the road, the Chinese people will certainly accomplish the task
of achieving independence and liberation, and that the time has come for
them to do so. It falls to our generation to fulfil the great aspirations
cherished by countless martyrs in the past century, and any attempt to stop
us will undoubtedly end in failure.

IV. THE POLICY OF THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY


I have analysed the two lines in China's War of Resistance. Such an analysis
is absolutely necessary. For up to this very moment many Chinese people still
do not know what is really going on in this war. Many people in the Kuomintang
areas and in foreign countries are being kept in the dark by the Kuomintang
government's policy of blockade. They knew practically nothing about China's
Liberated Areas until a group of Chinese and foreign correspondents came
here in 1944 on a tour of observation. As soon as this group returned, the
Kuomintang government, which was very much afraid of the true situation in
the Liberated Areas becoming known outside, bolted the door and refused to
let any other correspondent come here. Similarly it has suppressed the truth
about the Kuomintang areas. Therefore I feel that we have the duty to give
the public as much of the true picture of "the two areas" as possible. Only
when people see the whole situation in China clearly will they understand
why there is such a difference in policy between the Communist Party and
the Kuomintang, the two biggest political parties in China, and why there
is such a struggle between the two lines. Only then will people understand
that the dispute between the two parties is not an unnecessary or unimportant
or merely captious dispute, as some have alleged, but is one of principle
on which the lives of hundreds of millions of people depend.

In China's present grave situation, the people, the democrats and democratic
parties at home and the people in other countries who are concerned about
the Chinese situation all hope that unity will replace disunity and that
democratic reforms will be introduced, and they all want to know what the
policy of the Chinese Communist Party is for solving the many vital problems
of today. The members of our Party, of course, have a still deeper interest
in these matters.

Our policies of the Anti-Japanese National United Front in the war have always
been clear and definite, and they have been tested in the eight years of
war. Our congress should draw conclusions from them as a guide for our future
struggles.

Here I shall explain a number of the definite conclusions arrived at by our
Party concerning the major policies for solving China's problems.
OUR GENERAL PROGRAMME


An agreed common programme is urgently needed by the Chinese people, the
Chinese Communist Party and all the anti-Japanese democratic parties for
the purpose of mobilizing and uniting all the anti-Japanese forces of the
Chinese people, completely wiping out the Japanese aggressors and building
a new China that is independent, free, democratic, united, prosperous and
powerful.

Such a common programme may be divided into two parts, the general and the
specific. Let us consider first the general and then the specific programme.

On the major premise that the Japanese aggressors must be completely destroyed
and a new China must be built, we Communists and the overwhelming majority
of the population are agreed on the following fundamental propositions at
the present stage of China's development. First, China should not have a
feudal, fascist and anti-popular state system under the dictatorship of the
big landlords and big bourgeoisie, because eighteen years of government by
the chief ruling clique of the Kuomintang have already proved its complete
bankruptcy. Second, China cannot possibly establish the old type of democratic
dictatorship--a purely national-bourgeois state--and therefore should not
attempt to do so, because on the one hand the Chinese national bourgeoisie
has proved itself very flabby economically and politically, and on the other,
for a long time now a new factor has been present, namely, the awakened Chinese
proletariat with its leader, the Chinese Communist Party, which has demonstrated
great capacity in the political arena and assumed leadership of the peasant
masses, the urban petty bourgeoisie, the intelligentsia and other democratic
forces. Third, it is likewise impossible for the Chinese people to institute
a socialist state system at the present stage when it is still their task
to fight foreign and feudal oppression and the necessary social and economic
conditions for a socialist state are still lacking.

What then do we propose? We propose the establishment, after the thorough
defeat of the Japanese aggressors, of a state system which we call New Democracy,
namely, a united-front democratic alliance based on the overwhelming majority
of the people, under the leadership of the working class.

It is this kind of state system that truly meets the demands of the overwhelming
majority of the Chinese population, because it can win and indeed has been
winning the approval, first, of millions of industrial workers and tens of
millions of handicraftsmen and farm labourers, second, of the peasantry,
which constitutes 80 per cent of China's population, i.e., 360 million out
of a population of 450 million, and third, of the large numbers of the urban
petty bourgeoisie as well as the national bourgeoisie, the enlightened gentry
and other patriots.

Of course, there are still contradictions among those classes, notably the
contradiction between labour and capital, and consequently each has its own
particular demands. It would be hypocritical and wrong to deny the existence
of these contradictions and differing demands. But throughout the stage of
New Democracy, these contradictions, these differing demands, will not grow
and transcend the demands which all have in common and should not be allowed
to do so; they can be adjusted. Given such adjustment, these classes can
together accomplish the political, economic and cultural tasks of the
new-democratic state.

The politics of New Democracy which we advocate consists in the overthrow
of external oppression and of internal feudal and fascist oppression, and
then the setting up not of the old type of democracy but of a political system
which is a united front of all the democratic classes. These views of ours
are completely in accord with the revolutionary views of Dr. Sun Yat-sen.
In the Manifesto of the First National Congress of the Kuomintang, Dr. Sun
wrote:

  The so-called democratic system in modern states is usually monopolized by
  the bourgeoisie and has become simply an instrument for oppressing the common
  people. On the other hand, the Kuomintang's Principle of Democracy means
  a democratic system shared by all the common people and not privately owned
  by the few.


This is a great political injunction of Dr. Sun's. The Chinese people, the
Chinese Communist Party and all other democrats must respect it, firmly put
it into practice and wage a determined fight against all individuals and
groups that violate or oppose it, and so defend and develop this perfectly
correct political principle of New Democracy.

The organizational principle of the new-democratic state should be democratic
centralism, with the people's congresses determining the major policies and
electing the governments at the various levels. It is at once democratic
and centralized, that is, centralized on the basis of democracy and democratic
under centralized guidance. This is the only system that can give full expression
to democracy with full powers vested in the people's congresses at all levels
and, at the same time, guarantee centralized administration with the governments
at each level exercising centralized management of all the affairs entrusted
to them by the people's congresses at the corresponding level and safeguarding
whatever is essential to the democratic life of the people.

The army and the other armed forces constitute an important part of the apparatus
of the new-democratic state power, without which the state cannot be defended.
As with all other organs of power, the armed forces of the new-democratic
state belong to the people and protect the people; they have nothing in common
with the army, police, etc. of the old type which belong to the few and oppress
the people.

The economy of New Democracy which we advocate is likewise in accord with
Dr. Sun's principles. On the land question, Dr. Sun championed "land to the
tiller". On the question of industry and commerce, Dr. Sun stated in the
Manifesto quoted above:

  Enterprises, such as banks, railways and airlines, whether Chinese-owned
  or foreign-owned, which are either monopolistic in character or too big for
  private management, shall be operated and administered by the state, so that
  private capital cannot dominate the livelihood of the people: this is the
  main principle of the regulation of capital.


In the present stage, we fully agree with these views of Dr. Sun's on economic
questions.

Some people suspect that the Chinese Communists are opposed to the development
of individual initiative, the growth of private capital and the protection
of private property, but they are mistaken. It is foreign oppression and
feudal oppression that cruelly fetter the development of the individual
initiative of the Chinese people, hamper the growth of private capital and
destroy the property of the people. It is the very task of the New Democracy
we advocate to remove these fetters and stop this destruction, to guarantee
that the people can freely develop their individuality within the framework
of society and freely develop such private capitalist economy as will benefit
and not "dominate the livelihood of the people", and to protect all appropriate
forms of private property.

In accordance with Dr. Sun's principles and the experience of the Chinese
revolution, China's national economy at the present stage should be composed
of the state sector, the private sector and the co-operative sector. But
the state here must certainly not be one "privately owned by the few", but
a new-democratic state "shared by all the common people" under the leadership
of the proletariat.

The culture of New Democracy should likewise be "shared by all the common
people", that is, it should be a national, scientific and mass culture, and
must under no circumstances be a culture "privately owned by the few".

Such is the general or fundamental programme which we Communists advocate
for the present stage, the entire stage of the bourgeois-democratic revolution.
This is our minimum programme as against our future or maximum programme
of socialism and communism. Its realization will carry the Chinese state
and Chinese society a step forward, from a colonial, semi-colonial and
semi-feudal to a new-democratic state and society.

The political leadership of the proletariat and the proletarian-led state
and co-operative sectors of the economy required by our programme are socialist
factors. Yet the fulfilment of this programme will not turn China into a
socialist society.

We Communists do not conceal our political views. Definitely and beyond all
doubt, our future or maximum programme is to carry China forward to socialism
and communism. Both the name of our Party and our Marxist world outlook
unequivocally point to this supreme ideal of the future, a future of incomparable
brightness and splendour. On joining the Party, every Communist has two
clearly-defined objectives at heart, the new-democratic revolution now and
socialism and communism in the future, and for these he will fight despite
the animosity of the enemies of communism and their vulgar and ignorant calumny,
abuse and ridicule, which we must firmly combat. As for the well-meaning
sceptics, we should explain things to them with goodwill and patience and
not attack them. All this is very clear, definite and unequivocal.

But all Communists and sympathizers with communism in China must struggle
to achieve the objective of the present stage; they must struggle against
foreign and feudal oppression to deliver the Chinese people from their miserable
colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal plight and establish a proletarian-led
new-democratic China whose main task is the liberation of the peasantry,
a China of the revolutionary Three People's Principles of Dr. Sun Yat-sen,
a China which is independent, free, democratic, united, prosperous and powerful.
This is what we have actually been doing. Together with the masses of the
Chinese people, we Communists have been fighting heroically for this objective
for the past twenty-four years.

If any Communist or Communist sympathizer talks about socialism and communism
but fails to fight for this objective, if he belittles this bourgeois-democratic
revolution, relaxes or slows down ever so slightly and shows the least disloyalty
and coolness or is reluctant to shed his blood or give his life for it, then
wittingly or unwittingly, such a person is betraying socialism and communism
to a greater or lesser extent and is certainly not a politically conscious
and staunch fighter for communism. It is a law of Marxism that socialism
can be attained only via the stage of democracy. And in China the fight for
democracy is a protracted one. It would be a sheer illusion to try to build
a socialist society on the ruins of the colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal
order without a united new-democtatic state, without the development of the
state sector of the new-democratic economy, of the private capitalist and
the co-operative sectors, and of a national, scientific and mass culture,
i.e., a new-democratic culture, and without the liberation and the development
of the individuality of hundreds of millions of people--in short, without
a thoroughgoing bourgeois-democratic revolution of a new type led by the
Communist Party.

Some people fail to understand why, so far from fearing capitalism, Communists
should advocate its development in certain given conditions. Our answer is
simple. The substitution of a certain degree of capitalist development for
the oppression of foreign imperialism and domestic feudalism is not only
an advance but an unavoidable process. It benefits the proletariat as well
as the bourgeoisie, and the former perhaps more. It is not domestic capitalism
but foreign imperialism and domestic feudalism which are superfluous in China
today; indeed, we have too little of capitalism. Strangely enough, some spokesmen
of the Chinese bourgeoisie fight shy of openly advocating the development
of capitalism, but refer to it obliquely. There are other people who flatly
deny that China should permit a necessary degree of capitalist development
and who talk about reaching socialism in one stride and "accomplishing at
one stroke" the tasks of the Three People's Principles and socialism. Obviously,
these opinions either reflect the weakness of the Chinese national bourgeoisie
or are a demagogic trick on the part of the big landlords and the big
bourgeoisie. From our knowledge of the Marxist laws of social development,
we Communists clearly understand that under the state system of New Democracy
in China it will be necessary in the interests of social progress to facilitate
the development of the private capitalist sector of the economy (provided
it does not dominate the livelihood of the people) besides the development
of the state sector and of the individual and co-operative sectors run by
the labouring people. We Communists will not let empty talk or deceitful
tricks befuddle us.

There are some people who doubt whether we Communists are sincere when we
declare that "the Three People's Principles being what China needs today,
our Party is ready to fight for their complete realization". This is the
result of their failure to understand that the basic tenets of the Three
People's Principles, which Dr. Sun Yat-sen enunciated in the Manifesto of
the First National Congress of the Kuomintang in 1924 and which we have accepted,
coincide with certain basic tenets of our Party's programme for the present
stage, that is, of our minimum programme. It should be pointed out that these
Three People's Principles of Dr. Sun Yat-sen coincide with our Party's programme
for the present stage only in certain basic tenets and not in everything.
Our Party's programme of New Democracy is of course much more comprehensive
than Dr. Sun's principles, particularly as our Party's theory, programme
and practice of New Democracy have greatly developed with the development
of the Chinese revolution in the twenty years since Dr. Sun's death, and
will develop still further. In essence, however, these Three People's Principles
are a programme of New Democracy, as distinguished from the previous, old
Three People's Principles; naturally they are "what China needs today" and
naturally "our Party is ready to fight for their complete realization". To
us Chinese Communists, the struggle for our Party's minimum programme and
the struggle for Dr. Sun's revolutionary, or new, Three People's Principles
are basically (though not in every respect) one and the same thing. Therefore,
as in the past and the present, the Chinese Communists will prove to be the
most sincere and thoroughgoing executors of the revolutionary Three People's
Principles in the future as well.

Some people are suspicious and think that once in power, the Communist Party
will follow Russia's example and establish the dictatorship of the proletariat
and a one-party system. Our answer is that a new-democratic state based on
an alliance of the democratic classes is different in principle from a socialist
state under the dictatorship of the proletariat. Beyond all doubt, our system
of New Democracy will be built under the leadership of the proletariat and
of the Communist Party, but throughout the stage of New Democracy China cannot
possibly have a one-class dictatorship and one-party government and therefore
should not attempt it. We have no reason for refusing to co-operate with
all political parties, social groups and individuals, provided their attitude
to the Communist Party is cooperative and not hostile. The Russian system
has been shaped by Russian history; in Russia the exploitation of man by
man has been abolished as a social system, the political, economic and cultural
system of the newest type of democracy, i.e. socialism, has been put into
effect, and the people support the Bolshevik Party alone, having discarded
all the anti-socialist parties. All this has shaped the Russian system, which
is perfectly necessary and reasonable there. But even in Russia, where the
Bolshevik Party is the sole political party, the system practised in the
organs of state power is still one of an alliance of workers, peasants and
intellectuals and an alliance of Party members and non-Party people, and
not a system in which the working class and the Bolsheviks alone may work
in the organs of government. The Chinese system for the present stage is
being shaped by the present stage of Chinese history, and for a long time
to come there will exist a special form of state and political power, a form
that is distinguished from the Russian system but is perfectly necessary
and reasonable for us, namely, the new-democratic form of state and political
power based on the alliance of the democratic classes.
OUR SPECIFIC PROGRAMME


Our Party must also have a specific programme for each period based on this
general programme. Our general programme of New Democracy will remain unchanged
throughout the stage of the bourgeois-democratic revolution, that is, for
several decades. But from phase to phase during this stage, conditions have
changed or are changing and it is only natural that we have to change our
specific programme accordingly. For example, our general programme of New
Democracy has remained the same throughout the periods of the Northern
Expedition, the Agrarian Revolutionary War and the War of Resistance Against
Japan, but there have been changes in our specific programme, because our
friends and enemies have not remained the same in the three periods.

The Chinese people now find themselves in the following situation:

  (1) the Japanese aggressors have not yet been defeated;


  (2) the Chinese people urgently need to work together for a democratic change
  in order to achieve national unity, rapidly mobilize and unite all anti-Japanese
  forces, and defeat the Japanese aggressors in co-operation with the allies;
  and


  (3) the Kuomintang government is disrupting national unity and obstructing
  such a democratic change.


What is our specific programme in the circumstances or, in other words, what
are the immediate demands of the people?

We consider the following to be appropriate and minimum demands:

  Mobilize all available forces for the thorough defeat of the Japanese aggressors
  and the establishment of international peace in co-operation with the allies;


  Abolish the Kuomintang one-party dictatorship and establish a democratic
  coalition government and a joint supreme command;


  Punish the pro-Japanese elements, fascists and defeatists who are opposing
  the people and disrupting national unity, and so help to build national unity;


  Punish the reactionaries who are creating the danger of civil war, and so
  help to ensure internal peace;


  Punish the traitors, take punitive action against officers who surrender
  to the enemy, and punish the agents of the Japanese;


  Liquidate the reactionary secret service and all its repressive activities
  and abolish the concentration camps;


  Revoke all reactionary laws and decrees aimed at suppressing the people's
  freedom of speech, press, assembly, association, political conviction and
  religious belief and freedom of the person, and guarantee full civil rights
  to the people;


  Recognize the legal status of all democratic parties and groups;


  Release all patriotic political prisoners;


  Withdraw all troops encircling and attacking China's Liberated Areas and
  dispatch them to the anti-Japanese front;


  Recognize the anti-Japanese armed forces and popularly elected governments
  of China's Liberated Areas;


  Consolidate and expand the Liberated Areas and their armed forces, and recover
  all lost territory;


  Help the people in the Japanese-occupied areas to organize underground armed
  forces for armed uprisings;


  Allow the Chinese people to arm themselves and defend their homes and their
  country;


  Bring about the political and military transformation of those armies directly
  under the Kuomintang supreme command, which constantly lose battles, oppress
  the people and discriminate against armies not directly under it, and punish
  the commanders who are responsible for disastrous defeats;


  Improve the recruiting system and the living conditions of the officers and
  men;


  Give preferential treatment to the families of the soldiers fighting in the
  anti-Japanese war, so that the officers and men at the front are free from
  domestic worries;


  Provide preferential treatment for disabled soldiers and for the families
  of the soldiers who give their lives for the country, and help demobilized
  soldiers to settle down and earn a living;


  Develop war industries to facilitate the prosecution of the war;


  Distribute the military and financial aid received from the allies impartially
  to all the armies fighting in the War of Resistance;


  Punish corrupt officials and institute clean government;


  Improve the pay of the middle and lower grade government employees;


  Give the Chinese people democratic rights;


  Abolish the oppressive pao-chia system;
  [6]


  Provide the war refugees and the victims of natural disasters with relief;


  Appropriate substantial funds after the recovery of China's lost territory
  for the extensive relief of people who have suffered under enemy occupation;


  Abolish exorbitant taxes and miscellaneous levies and establish a consolidated
  progressive tax;


  Introduce rural reforms, reduce rent and interest, provide suitable safeguards
  for the rights of tenants, grant low-interest loans to impoverished peasants
  and help the peasants to organize, in order to facilitate the expansion of
  agricultural production;


  Outlaw bureaucrat-capital;


  Abolish the present policy of economic controls;


  Check the unbridled inflation and rocketing prices;


  Assist private industry and provide it with facilities for obtaining loans,
  purchasing raw materials and marketing its products;


  Improve the livelihood of the workers, provide relief for the unemployed
  and help the workers to organize, in order to facilitate the expansion of
  industrial production;


  Abolish Kuomintang indoctrination in education and promote a national, scientific
  and mass culture and education;


  Guarantee the livelihood of the teachers and other staff members of educational
  institutions and guarantee academic freedom; protect the interests of the
  youth, women and children--provide assistance to young student refugees,
  help the youth and women to organize in order to participate on an equal
  footing in all work useful to the war effort and to social progress, ensure
  freedom of marriage and equality as between men and women, and give young
  people and children a useful education;


  Give the minority nationalities in China better and grant them autonomous
  rights;


  Protect the interests of the overseas Chinese and assist those who have returned
  to the motherland;


  Protect foreign nationals who have fled to China from the Japanese oppression
  and support their struggle against the Japanese aggressors;


  Improve Sino-Soviet relations.


To achieve these demands, the most important thing is the immediate abolition
of the Kuomintang one-party dictatorship and the establishment of a democratic
provisional central government, a coalition government enjoying nation-wide
support and including representatives of all the anti-Japanese parties and
people without party affiliation. Without this prerequisite it is impossible
to make any genuine change in the Kuomintang areas, and therefore in the
country as a whole.

These demands voice the desires of the Chinese masses and also of broad sections
of democratic public opinion in the allied countries.

A minimum specific programme which is agreed upon by all the anti-Japanese
democratic parties is absolutely indispensable, and we are prepared to consult
with them on the basis of the programme outlined above. Different parties
may have different demands, but all should reach agreement on a common programme.

As far as the Kuomintang areas are concerned, such a programme is still at
the stage of being a demand of the people; as far as the Japanese-occupied
areas are concerned, it is a programme whose fulfilment must await their
recovery, except for the item on the organization of underground forces for
armed uprisings; as far as the Liberated Areas are concerned, it is a programme
which has already been, is being and should continue to be, put into practice.

The immediate demands or specific programme of the Chinese people outlined
above involve many vital war-time and post-war problems which require further
elucidation. In explaining these problems below we shall criticize some of
the wrong viewpoints held by the chief ruling clique of the Kuomintang and
at the same time answer some questions raised by other people.
1. Destroy the Japanese Aggressors Completely, Allow No Compromise
  Halfway


The Cairo conference [7] rightly decided that the
Japanese aggressors mast be made to surrender unconditionally. But the Japanese
aggressors are now working behind the scenes for a compromise peace, while
the pro-Japanese elements in the Kuomintang government are hitching up with
Japan's secret emissaries through the Nanking puppet government, and no stop
has been put to this. Hence the danger of a halfway compromise is not yet
entirely over. The Cairo conference made another good decision, namely, that
the four northeastern provinces, Taiwan and the Penghu Islands should be
returned to China. But, given its present policies, the Kuomintang government
cannot possibly be relied upon to fight all the way to the Yalu River and
recover all our lost territory. What should the Chinese people do in these
circumstances? They should demand that the Kuomintang government should destroy
the Japanese aggressors completely and allow no compromise halfway. All intrigues
for a compromise must immediately be stopped. The Chinese people should demand
that the Kuomintang government should change its present policy of passive
resistance and employ all its military strength in active warfare against
Japan. They should expand their own armed forces--the Eighth Route Army,
the New Fourth Army and the other armed units of the people--and on their
own initiative develop anti-Japanese armed forces on an extensive scale wherever
the enemy has reached, and they should prepare to recover all the lost territory
by fighting in direct co-operation with the allies; under no circumstances
must they place their reliance solely on the Kuomintang. It is the sacred
right of the Chinese people to defeat the Japanese aggressors. If the
reactionaries try to deprive them of this right, suppress their anti-Japanese
activities or undermine their strength, then the Chinese people should firmly
strike back in self-defence if persuasion proves unavailing. For such acts
of national treachery on the part of the Chinese reactionaries only aid and
abet the Japanese aggressors.
2. Abolish the Kuomintang One-Party Dictatorship, Establish
  a Democratic Coalition Government


To wipe out the Japanese aggressors it is necessary to effect democratic
reforms throughout the country. Yet this will be impossible unless the one-party
dictatorship of the Kuomintang is abolished and a democratic coalition government
is established.

The one-party dictatorship of the Kuomintang is in reality the dictatorship
of the anti-popular clique within the Kuomintang, and this dictatorship is
the disrupter of China's national unity, the author of the defeats on the
Kuomintang front in the war, and the basic obstacle to the mobilization and
unification of the anti-Japanese forces of the Chinese people. The Chinese
people have become fully aware of the evils of this dictatorship through
eight years of bitter experience in the War of Resistance, and they naturally
demand its immediate abolition. This reactionary dictatorship is also the
breeder of civil war and, unless it is immediately abolished, it will again
bring the calamity of civil war upon them.

So widespread and resounding is the outcry of the Chinese people for the
abolition of the anti-popular dictatorship that the Kuomintang authorities
themselves have been forced to agree publicly to the "earlier termination
of political tutelage", which shows how far this "political tutelage" or
one-party dictatorship has forfeited popular support and prestige. There
is not a single person in China who still dares to assert that "political
tutelage" or one-party dictatorship is any good or that it should not be
abolished or "terminated", and that marks a great change in the situation.

It is definite and beyond all doubt that it should be "terminated". But opinions
differ as to how to do it. Some say, terminate it at once and establish a
provisional democratic coalition government. Others say, wait a bit, convene
the "national assembly", and "hand state power back to the people" and not
to a coalition government.

What does this mean?

It means there are two ways of doing things, the honest way and the dishonest
way.

First, the honest way. The honest way is immediately to proclaim the abolition
of the Kuomintang one-party dictatorship, to establish a provisional central
government composed of representatives of the Kuomintang, the Communist Party,
the Democratic League and people with no party affiliation, and to promulgate
a democratic programme of political action such as the immediate demands
of the Chinese people which we have set forth above, with the aim of restoring
national unity and defeating the Japanese aggressors. A roundtable conference
of the representatives of the various parties and people with no party
affiliation should be convened to discuss and reach agreement on these matters,
and action should then be taken accordingly. This is the road of unity, which
the Chinese people will firmly support.

Second, the dishonest way. The dishonest way is to disregard the demands
of the masses and of all the democratic parties and to insist on convening
a so-called national assembly stage-managed by the anti-popular clique in
the Kuomintang and have it adopt a "constitution" which in practice will
be anti-democratic and will buttress the dictatorship of this clique, for
the purpose of providing a cloak of legality for an illegal "National
Government"--a government formed privately through the appointment of a few
dozen Kuomintang members, imposed on the people and utterly devoid of any
foundation in the popular will--thus making a pretence of "handing state
power back to the people" while actually "handing it back" to the selfsame
reactionary clique within the Kuomintang. Whoever disapproves will be accused
of sabotaging "democracy" and "unity", which will then be a "reason" for
ordering punitive action against him. This is the road of disruption, which
the Chinese people will firmly oppose.

The steps our reactionary heroes are preparing to take in line with this
splitting policy will probably lead them to destruction. They are putting
a noose round their own necks and fastening it there, and this noose is the
"national assembly". Their intention is to use the "national assembly" as
a magic weapon, first, to prevent the formation of a coalition government,
second, to maintain their dictatorship, and third, to prepare a justification
of civil war. However, the logic of history runs counter to their wishes,
and they will be "lifting a rock only to drop it on their own toes". For
it is now obvious to all that the people in the Kuomintang areas have no
freedom and the people in the Japanese-occupied areas cannot take part in
elections, while the Liberated Areas which have freedom are not recognized
by the Kuomintang government. Such being the case, how can there be national
delegates? How can there be a "national assembly"? The national assembly
they are clamouring for is the one the Kuomintang dictatorship rigged up
in every detail eight years ago during the civil war period. If such an assembly
is convened, the whole nation will inevitably rise up against it, and how,
it may be asked, will our reactionary heroes get out of that predicament?
All in all, the convening of the bogus national assembly will only lead them
to destruction.

We Communists propose two steps for the termination of the Kuomintang one-party
dictatorship. First, at the present stage, to establish a provisional coalition
government through common agreement among representatives of all parties
and people with no party affiliation. Second, in the next stage, to convene
a national assembly after free and unrestricted elections and form a regular
coalition government. In both cases there will be a coalition government
in which the representatives of all classes and political parties willing
to take part are united on a democratic common programme in the fight against
Japan today and for national construction tomorrow.

This is the only course China can take, whatever the intentions of the Kuomintang
or other parties, groups or individuals, whether they like it or not, and
whether or not they are conscious of it. This is a historical law, an inexorable
trend which no force can reverse.

On this and all other problems of democratic reform, we Communists declare
that although the Kuomintang authorities are still stubbornly persisting
in their wrong policies and using negotiations to play for time and allay
public opinion, we are ready to resume negotiations with them the moment
they show willingness to renounce their present wrong policies and agree
to democratic reforms. But the negotiations must be based on the general
principle of resistance, unity and democracy, and we will not agree to any
so-called measures, plans or empty pronouncements that depart from this general
principle, however pleasing they may sound.
3. Freedom for the People


At present the Chinese people's struggle for freedom is primarily directed
against the Japanese aggressors. But the Kuomintang government is preventing
them from fighting the Japanese aggressors by depriving them of their freedom
and binding them hand and foot. Unless this problem is solved, it will be
impossible to mobilize and unify all the anti-Japanese forces of the nation.
It is precisely to untie the people's bonds so that they can have the freedom
to resist Japan, to unite and to win democracy that our programme puts forward
such demands as the abolition of the one-party dictatorship; the establishment
of a coalition government; the liquidation of the secret police; the revocation
of repressive laws and decrees; the punishment of traitors, spies, pro-Japanese
elements, fascists and corrupt officials; the release of political prisoners;
the recognition of the legal status of all the democratic parties; the withdrawal
of troops encircling or attacking the Liberated Areas; the recognition of
the Liberated Areas the abolition of the pao-chia system; and the
many other demands relating to the economy, culture and the mass movement.

Freedom is won by the people through struggle, it is not bestowed by anyone
as a favour. The people in China's Liberated Areas have already won freedom,
and the people can and must win freedom in the other areas too. The greater
the freedom of the Chinese people and the stronger their organized democratic
forces, the greater the possibility of forming a provisional and unified
coalition government. Once formed, this coalition government will in its
turn provide full freedom for the people and so consolidate its own foundations.
Only then will it be possible to hold free and unrestricted elections throughout
the land after the overthrow of the Japanese aggressors, to create a democratic
national assembly and to establish a regular and unified coalition government.
Unless the people have freedom, there can be no national assembly or government
genuinely elected by the people. Is this not clear enough?

Freedom of speech, press, assembly, association, political conviction and
religious belief and freedom of the person are the people's most important
freedoms. In China only the Liberated Areas have given full effect to these
freedoms.

In 1925 Dr. Sun Yat-sen declared in his deathbed Testament:

  For forty years I have devoted myself to the cause of the national revolution
  with the aim of winning freedom and equality for China. My experience during
  these forty years has firmly convinced me that to achieve this aim we must
  arouse the masses of the people and unite in a common fight with those nations
  of the world who treat us as equals.


The unworthy successors of Dr. Sun, who have betrayed him, oppress the masses
of the people instead of arousing them, and deprive them of all their freedom
of speech, press, assembly, association, political conviction and religious
belief and freedom of the person. They attach the labels "traitor party",
"traitor army", and "traitor areas" to the Communist Party, the Eighth Route
and New Fourth Armies and the Liberated Areas, which are all genuinely arousing
the masses of the people and protecting their freedoms and rights. We hope
that there will soon be an end to this reversal of right and wrong. If it
lasts much longer, the Chinese people will lose all patience.
4. Unity of the People


It is imperative to turn a divided China into a united China in order to
destroy the Japanese aggressors, prevent civil war and build a new China;
such is the historical task of the Chinese people.

But how is China to be united? Through autocratic unification by a dictator
or democratic unification by the people? From the time of Yuan Shih-kai
[8] the Northern warlords concentrated on autocratic
unification. But what was the result? Contrary to their desires, what they
obtained was not unification but division, and finally they tumbled from
power. Following in Yuan Shih-kai's footsteps, the anti-popular clique of
the Kuomintang sought autocratic unification and waged civil war for fully
ten years, only to let in the Japanese aggressors while they themselves withdrew
to Mount Omei. [9] And now from their mountain
top they are again shouting about their theory of autocratic unification.
To whom are they shouting? Will any upright patriotic Chinese listen to them?
Having lived through sixteen years of Northern warlord rule and eighteen
years of dictatorial Kuomintang rule, the people have acquired ample experience
and discerning eyes. They want democratic unification by the masses and not
autocratic unification by a dictator. As early as 1935, we Communists put
forward the policy of the Anti-Japanese National United Front, and we have
fought for it ever since. In 1939, when the Kuomintang was enforcing its
reactionary "Measures for Restricting the Activities of Alien Parties", thus
creating the imminent danger of capitulation, split and retrogression, and
when it was shouting about its theory of autocratic unification, we again
declared: There must be unification based on resistance and not on capitulation,
on unity and not on splitting, on progress and not on retrogression. Only
unification based on resistance, unity and progress is genuine and any other
kind would be a sham. Six years have passed, but the issue remains the same.

Can there be unity if the people have no freedom or democracy? There will
be unity as soon as they have both. The Chinese people's movement for freedom,
democracy and a coalition government is at the same time a movement for unity.
When we put forward many demands for freedom, democracy and a coalition
government in our specific programme, we are at the same time aiming at unity.
It is plain common sense that unless the dictatorship of the anti-popular
Kuomintang clique is abolished and a democratic coalition government is formed,
not only will it be impossible to carry out any democratic reform in the
Kuomintang areas or to mobilize the armies and the people there for the defeat
of the Japanese aggressors, but the calamity of civil war will ensue. Why
do so many democrats, with and without party affiliation, including many
in the Kuomintang, unanimously demand a coalition government? Because they
are clearly aware of the present crisis and realize that there is no other
way to overcome it and achieve both unity against the enemy and unity for
national construction.
5. The People's Army


Without an army standing on the people's side, it is impossible for the Chinese
people to win freedom and unification, establish a coalition government,
thoroughly defeat the Japanese aggressors and build a new China. At present
the only armed forces that stand wholly on the people's side are the Liberated
Areas' Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies, which are not very large; they
are far from sufficient. Yet the Kuomintang group which opposes the people
is ceaselessly intriguing to undermine and destroy the armies of the Liberated
Areas. In 1944 the Kuomintang government presented a so-called memorandum
demanding that the Communist Party should "disband, within a definite time
limit", four-fifths of the armed forces of the Liberated Areas. In 1945,
during the most recent negotiations, it has further demanded the handing
over of all the armed forces of the Liberated Areas by the Communist Party,
after which it would grant the Communist Party "legal status".

These people tell the Communists, "Hand over your troops and we will grant
you freedom." According to their theory, a political party that does not
have any army should enjoy freedom. Yet whatever freedom the Chinese Communist
Party enjoyed during 1924-27, when it had only a small armed force, vanished
with the Kuomintang government's policies of "party purge" and massacre.
And today, the China Democratic League and the democrats within the Kuomintang,
who have no armed forces, have no freedom either. Let us take the workers,
peasants and students and the progressively inclined people in cultural,
educational and industrial circles under the Kuomintang regime--for the last
eighteen years none of them have had any armed forces, and none of them have
had any freedom. Can it be that all these democratic parties and people have
been denied freedom because they organized armies, perpetrated "feudal
separatism", created "traitor areas" and violated "governmental and military
orders"? Not in the least. On the contrary, they have been denied freedom
precisely because they have done none of these things.

"The army belongs to the state"--that is perfectly true, and there is not
an army in the world that does not belong to a state. But what kind of state?
A state under the feudal and fascist dictatorship of the big landlords, big
bankers and big compradors, or a new-democratic state of the broad masses
of the people? The only kind of state for China to establish is a new-democratic
state and, on this basis, she should establish a new-democratic coalition
government; all the armed forces of China must belong to such a government
of such a state so that they may safeguard the people's freedom and effectively
fight foreign aggressors. The moment a new-democratic coalition government
comes into being in China, the Liberated Areas of China will hand their armed
forces over to it. But all the Kuomintang armed forces will have to be handed
over to it at the same time.

In 1924 Dr. Sun Yat-sen said, "Today should mark the beginning of a new epoch
in the national revolution.... The first step is to unite the armed forces
with the people, and the next step is to turn them into the armed forces
of the people." [10] It is because they have applied
this policy that the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies have become "the
armed forces of the people", that is, the people's army, and have been able
to win victories. During the earlier period of the Northern Expedition, the
Kuomintang armies took Dr. Sun's "first step", and hence won victories. In
the latter period of the Northern Expedition they abandoned even the "first
step", took a stand against the people, and hence from that time right down
to the present they have become more and more corrupt and degenerate; in
their element when fighting internal war, they cannot but be out of their
element when it comes to fighting external war. Every patriotic officer in
the Kuomintang army who has a conscience should set about reviving the Sun
Yat-sen spirit and transforming his troops.

In the work of transforming the old armies, a suitable education should be
given to all officers who are capable of being reeducated to help them to
get rid of their obsolete outlook and acquire a correct outlook, so that
they can remain and serve in the people's army.

It is the duty of the whole nation to struggle for the creation of the army
of the Chinese people. Without a people's army the people have nothing. On
this question there must be no empty theorizing whatsoever.

We Communists are ready to give our support to the task of transforming the
Chinese army. All those military forces which are willing to unite with the
people and to oppose the Japanese aggressors instead of opposing the armed
forces of the Chinese Liberated Areas should be regarded as friendly troops
and be given proper assistance by the Eighth Route and New Fourth Armies.
6. The Land Problem


To wipe out the Japanese aggressors and build a new China, it is imperative
to reform the land system and emancipate the peasants. Dr. Sun Yat-sen's
thesis of "land to the tiller" is correct for the present period of our
revolution, which is bourgeois-democratic in nature.

Why do we say our revolution in the present period is bourgeois-democratic
in nature? We mean that the target of this revolution is not the bourgeoisie
in general but national and feudal oppression, that the measures taken in
this revolution are in general directed not at abolishing but at protecting
private property, and that as a result of this revolution the working class
will be able to build up the strength to lead China in the direction of
socialism, though capitalism will still be enabled to grow to an appropriate
extent for a fairly long period. "Land to the tiller" means transferring
the land from the feudal exploiters to the peasants, turning the private
property of the feudal landlords into the private property of the peasants
and emancipating them from feudal agrarian relations, thereby making possible
the transformation of an agricultural country into an industrial country.
Thus, "land to the tiller" is in the nature of a bourgeois-democratic and
not a proletarian-socialist demand; it is the demand of all revolutionary
democrats and not the demand of us Communists alone. The difference is that,
in China's circumstances, we Communists alone treat this demand with special
seriousness, and do not just talk about it but put it into practice. Who
are the revolutionary democrats? Apart from the proletariat who are the most
thoroughgoing of the revolutionary democrats, the peasants form by far the
largest group. The overwhelming majority of the peasants, that is, all except
the rich peasants who have a feudal tail, actively demand "land to the tiller".
The urban petty bourgeoisie are also revolutionary democrats and "land to
the tiller" will prove to be to their advantage as well, for it will help
to develop the productive forces in agriculture. The national bourgeoisie
are a vacillating class--they also approve of "land to the tiller" because
they need markets, but many of them are afraid of it because for the most
part they have ties with landed property. Dr. Sun Yat-sen was the earliest
revolutionary democrat in China. Representing the revolutionary section of
the national bourgeoisie as well as the urban petty bourgeoisie and the peasants,
he carried out an armed revolution and put forward his thesis of "equalization
of landownership" and "land to the tiller". But unfortunately he did not
take the initiative and reform the land system when he was in power. And
when the anti-popular clique of the Kuomintang took power, it completely
betrayed what he stood for. It is this clique that is now stubbornly opposing
"land to the tiller" because it represents the stratum of big landlords,
bankers and compradors. As China has no political party exclusively representing
the peasants and the political parties of the national bourgeoisie have no
thoroughgoing land programme, the Chinese Communist Party has become the
leader of the peasants and all the other revolutionary democrats, being the
only party that has formulated and carried out a thoroughgoing land programme,
fought earnestly for the peasants' interests and therefore won the overwhelming
majority of the peasants as its great ally.

From 1927 to 1936, the Chinese Communist Party adopted various measures for
the thorough reform of the land system and put Dr. Sun's "land to the tiller"
into effect. It was precisely the reactionary clique of the Kuomintang, that
gang of unworthy followers of Dr. Sun Yat-sen, who bared their teeth, showed
their claws and fought against "land to the tiller" in ten years of war against
the people.

The Communist Party has made a major concession in the anti-Japanese war
period by changing the policy of "land to the tiller" to one of reducing
rent and interest. This concession is a correct one, for it helped to bring
the Kuomintang into the war against Japan and lessened the resistance of
the landlords in the Liberated Areas to our mobilization of the peasants
for the war. If no special obstacle arises, we are prepared to continue this
policy after the war, first extending rent and interest reduction to the
whole country and then taking proper measures for the gradual achievement
of "land to the tiller".

However, those who have betrayed Dr. Sun oppose the reduction of rent and
interest, let alone "land to the tiller". The Kuomintang government has not
carried out the decree for a "25 per cent reduction in rent" and similar
decrees which it has promulgated itself; only we in the Liberated Areas have
enforced them, and for this crime the Liberated Areas have been labelled
"traitor areas".

In the course of the anti-Japanese war a so-called theory of two stages,
a stage of "national revolution" and a stage of "revolution for democracy
and the people's livelihood", has made its appearance. This theory is wrong.

"Faced with a formidable enemy, we should not raise the question of democratic
reforms or the people's livelihood; better wait until the Japanese are
gone"--such is the absurd theory put forward by the reactionary clique of
the Kuomintang for the purpose of preventing complete victory in the war.
Yet there are people who have been echoing this theory and have become its
servile adherents.

"Faced with a formidable enemy, it is impossible for us to build up bases
against the Japanese and resist their attacks unless we settle the question
of democracy and the people's livelihood"--this is what the Chinese Communist
Party has been advocating and, moreover, has already put into practice with
excellent results.

In the period of the anti-Japanese war, reduction of rent and interest and
the other democratic reforms all serve the war. In order to lessen the landlords'
resistance to the war effort we have abstained from abolishing their ownership
of land and have only reduced rent and interest; at the same time, we have
encouraged them to transfer their assets to industry and given the enlightened
gentry the opportunity to take part in public activities for the war and
in the work of government alongside other representatives of the people.
As for the rich peasants, we have encouraged them to develop production.
All this is part of the resolute line of democratic reforms in the rural
areas and is absolutely necessary.

There are two lines. Either stubbornly oppose the Chinese peasants' endeavour
to settle the problem of democracy and the people's livelihood, and become
corrupt, ineffectual and utterly incapable of fighting Japan; or firmly support
the Chinese peasants in their endeavour, and gain the greatest of allies,
constituting 80 per cent of the population, thereby forging tremendous fighting
strength. The former is the line of the Kuomintang government, the latter
is the line of China's Liberated Areas.

The line of the opportunists is to vacillate between the two, to profess
support for the peasants and yet lack the resolve to reduce rent and interest,
arm the peasants or establish democratic political power in the rural areas.

Using all the forces at its command, the anti-popular clique of the Kuomintang
has directed every kind of vicious attack, open and secret, military and
political, both with bloodshed and without, against the Chinese Communist
Party. Taken in its social setting, the dispute between the two parties is
essentially over this issue of agrarian relations. Where exactly did we give
offence to the Kuomintang reactionary clique? Is it not on this score? Has
it not been precisely by rendering the Japanese aggressors great help on
this score that this clique has won favour and encouragement from them? Have
not all the charges against the Chinese Communist Party--"sabotaging the
War of Resistance and endangering the state", "traitor party", "traitor army",
"traitor areas", and "disobedience to governmental and military orders"--been
levelled precisely because it has done conscientious work in the true interests
of the nation in this sphere?

It is the peasants who are the source of China's industrial workers. In the
future, additional tens of millions of peasants will go to the cities and
enter factories. If China is to build up powerful national industries and
many large modern cities, there will have to be a long process of transformation
of rural into urban inhabitants.

It is the peasants who constitute the main market for China's industry. Only
they can supply foodstuffs and raw materials in great abundance and absorb
manufactured goods in great quantities.

It is the peasants who are the source of the Chinese army. The soldiers are
peasants in military uniform, the mortal enemies of the Japanese aggressors.

It is the peasants who are the main political force for democracy in China
at the present stage. Chinese democrats will achieve nothing unless they
rely on the support of the 360 million peasants.

It is the peasants who are the chief concern of China's cultural movement
at the present stage. If the 360 million peasants are left out, do not the
"elimination of illiteracy", "popularization of education", "literature and
art for the masses" and "public health" become largely empty talk?

In saying this, I am of course not ignoring the political, economic and cultural
importance of the rest of the people numbering about 90 million, and in
particular am not ignoring the working class, which is politically the most
conscious and therefore qualified to lead the whole revolutionary movement.
Let there be no misunderstanding.

It is absolutely necessary not only for Communists but for every democrat
in China to grasp these points.

When there is reform of the land system--even such an elementary reform as
reduction of rent and interest--the peasants become more interested in
production. Then as the peasants are helped to organize farming and other
co-operatives step by step on a voluntary basis, the productive forces will
grow. The farming co-operatives at present can only be collective, mutual-aid
labour organizations based on an individual peasant economy (i.e., on private
ownership by the peasants), such as labour-exchange teams, mutual-aid teams
and work-exchange groups; even so the increase in labour productivity and
output is already astonishing. Such organizations have been widely developed
in China's Liberated Areas and from now on should be spread as much as possible.

It might be mentioned that co-operative organization of the labour-exchange
team type has existed among the peasants for a long time, but in the past
it was only a means by which they tried to alleviate their wretchedness.
Today the labour-exchange teams in China's Liberated Areas are different
both in form and in content; they have become a means by which the peasant
masses increase production and strive for a better life.

In the last analysis, the impact, good or bad, great or small, of the policy
and the practice of any Chinese political party upon the people depends on
whether and how much it helps to develop their productive forces, and on
whether it fetters or liberates these forces. The social productive forces
of China can be liberated only by destroying the Japanese aggressors, carrying
out land reform, emancipating the peasants, developing modern industry and
establishing an independent, free, democratic, united, prosperous and powerful
new China--and this will win the approbation of the Chinese people.

It should be pointed out further that it is not easy for city intellectuals
who come to work in the countryside to understand the characteristics of
the rural areas, i.e., that they are still based on a scattered and backward,
individual economy, and that, moreover, the Liberated Areas are temporarily
cut off from one another by the enemy and involved in a guerrilla war. Failing
to understand these characteristics, they often inappropriately approach
and handle rural problems and rural work from the viewpoint of life and work
in the cities, and so divorce themselves from the realities of the countryside
and fail to identify themselves with the peasants. It is necessary to overcome
this by education.

China's numerous revolutionary intellectuals must awaken to the necessity
of becoming one with the peasants. The peasants need them and await their
help. They should go to the countryside enthusiastically, doff their student
garb and put on rough clothing, and willingly start with any work however
trivial; they should learn what the peasants want and help to arouse and
organize them in the struggle to accomplish the democratic revolution in
the countryside, which is one of the most important tasks in China's democratic
revolution.

After the Japanese aggressors are wiped out, we should confiscate the land
usurped by them and the chief traitors and distribute it among those peasants
who have little or no land.
7. The Problem of Industry


In order to defeat the Japanese aggressors and build a new China it is necessary
to develop industry. But under the Kuomintang government there is dependence
on foreign countries for everything, and its financial and economic policy
is ruining the entire economic life of the people. A few small industrial
enterprises are all that is to be found in the Kuomintang areas, and in most
cases they have been unable to avoid bankruptcy. In the absence of political
reforms all the productive forces are being ruined, and this is true both
of agriculture and of industry.

By and large, it will be impossible to develop industry unless China is
independent, free, democratic and united. To wipe out the Japanese aggressors
is to seek independence. To abolish the Kuomintang's one-party dictatorship,
establish a democratic and united coalition government, transform all China's
troops into a people's armed force, carry out land reform and emancipate
the peasants is to seek freedom, democracy and unity. Without independence,
freedom, democracy and unity it is impossible to build industry on a really
large scale. Without industry there can be no solid national defence, no
well-being for the people, no prosperity or strength for the nation. The
history of the 105 years since the Opium War of 1840,
[11] and especially of the eighteen years since
the Kuomintang came to power, has brought this important point home to the
Chinese people. A China that is not poor and weak but prosperous and strong
implies a China that is not colonial or semi-colonial but independent, not
semi-feudal but free and democratic, not divided but united. In semi-colonial,
semi-feudal and divided China, many people have for years dreamed of developing
industry, building up national defence, and bringing well-being to the people
and prosperity and power to the nation, but all their dreams have been shattered.
Many well-intentioned educators, scientists and students have buried themselves
in their own work or studies and paid no attention to politics in the belief
that they could serve the country with their knowledge, but this too has
turned out to be a dream, a dream that has been shattered. This indeed is
a good sign, for the shattering of these childish dreams marks a starting-point
on China's road towards prosperity and strength. The Chinese people have
learned many things in the war; they know that after the defeat of the Japanese
aggressors they must build a new-democratic China enjoying independence,
freedom, democracy, unity, prosperity and strength, all of which are interrelated
and indispensable. If they do so, then a bright future lies before China.
The productive forces of the Chinese people will be released and given every
possibility to develop only when the political system of New Democracy obtains
in all parts of China. More and more people are coming to understand this
point every day.

When the political system of New Democracy is won, the Chinese people and
their government will have to adopt practical measures in order to build
heavy and light industry step by step over a number of years and transform
China from an agricultural into an industrial country. The new-democratic
state cannot be consolidated unless it has a solid economy as its base, a
much more advanced agriculture than at present, and a large-scale industry
occupying a predominant position in the national economy, with communications,
trade and finance to match.

We Communists are ready to fight for this objective in co-operation with
all the democratic parties and industrial circles throughout the country.
The Chinese working class will play a great role in this undertaking.

Ever since World War I, the Chinese working class has consciously fought
for the independence and liberation of China. The year 1921 witnessed the
birth of the Communist Party of China, the vanguard of the working class,
and China's struggle for liberation then entered a new stage. During the
ensuing three periods, the Northern Expedition, the Agrarian Revolutionary
War and the War of Resistance Against Japan, the working class and Communist
Party of China have worked extremely hard and made an invaluable contribution
to the cause of the liberation of the Chinese people. In the struggle for
the final defeat of the Japanese aggressors, and especially for the recovery
of the big cities and important lines of communications, the Chinese working
class will play a very great role. And it can be predicted that after the
anti-Japanese war, the effort and contribution of the Chinese working class
will be even greater. The task of the Chinese working class is to struggle
not only for the establishment of a new-democratic state but also for China's
industrialization and the modernization of her agriculture.

The policy of adjusting the interests of labour and capital will be adopted
under the new-democratic state system. On the one hand, it will protect the
interests of the workers, institute an eight- to ten-hour working day according
to circumstances, provide suitable unemployment relief and social insurance
and safeguard trade union rights; on the other hand, it will guarantee legitimate
profits to properly managed state, private and co-operative enterprises--so
that both the public and the private sectors and both labour and capital
will work together to develop industrial production.

The enterprises and property in China of the Japanese aggressors and of the
chief traitors will be confiscated and placed at the disposal of the government
when Japan is defeated.
8. The Problem of Culture, Education and the Intellectuals


The calamities brought upon the Chinese people by foreign and feudal oppression
also affect our national culture. The progressive cultural and educational
institutions and progressive cultural workers and educators have particularly
suffered. To sweep away foreign and feudal oppression and build a new-democratic
China, we need large numbers of educators and teachers for the people, and
also people's scientists, engineers, technicians, doctors, journalists, writers,
men of letters, artists and rank-and-file cultural workers. They must be
imbued with the spirit of serving the people and must work hard. Provided
they serve the people creditably, all intellectuals should be esteemed and
regarded as valuable national and social assets. The problem of the intellectuals
becomes particularly important in China because the country is culturally
backward as a result of foreign and feudal oppression and because intellectuals
are urgently needed in the people's struggle for liberation. The numerous
revolutionary intellectuals have played a very great role in the people's
struggle for liberation in the past half-century, and especially since the
May 4th Movement of 1919 and in the eight years of the anti-Japanese war.
They will play an even greater role in the struggles to come. Therefore,
the task of a people's government is systematically to develop all kinds
of intellectually equipped cadres from among the ranks of the people and
at the same time take care to unite with and re-educate all the useful
intellectuals already available.

The elimination of illiteracy among 80 per cent of the population is a vital
task for the new China.

Proper and firm steps should be taken to eliminate all enslaving feudal and
fascist culture and education.

Vigorous action should be taken to prevent and cure endemic and other diseases
among the people and to expand the people's medical and health services.

The old type of cultural and educational workers and doctors should be given
suitable re-education so that they can acquire a new outlook and new methods
to serve the people.

The Chinese people's culture and education should be new-democratic, that
is to say, China should establish her own new national, scientific and mass
culture and education.

As for foreign culture, it would be a wrong policy to shut it out, rather
we should as far as possible draw on what is progressive in it for use in
the development of China's new culture; it would also be wrong to copy it
blindly, rather we should draw on it critically to meet the actual needs
of the Chinese people. The new culture created in the Soviet Union should
be a model for us in building our people's culture. Similarly, ancient Chinese
culture should neither be totally rejected nor blindly copied, but should
be accepted discriminatingly so as to help the progress of China's new culture.
9. The Problem of the Minority Nationalities


The anti-popular clique of the Kuomintang denies that many nationalities
exist in China, and labels all excepting the Han nationality as "tribes".
It has taken over the reactionary policy of the governments of the Ching
Dynasty and of the Northern warlords in relation to the minority nationalities,
oppressing and exploiting them in every possible way. Clear cases in point
are the massacre of Mongolians of the Ikhchao League in 1943, the armed
suppression of the minority nationalities in Sinkiang since 1944 and the
massacres of the Hui people in Kansu Province in recent years. These are
manifestations of a wrong Han-chauvinistic ideology and policy.

In 1924 Dr. Sun Yat-sen wrote in the Manifesto of the First National Congress
of the Kuomintang that "the Kuomintang's Principle of Nationalism has a twofold
meaning, first, the liberation of the Chinese nation, and second, the equality
of all the nationalities in China" and that "the Kuomintang solemnly declares
that it recognizes the right to self-determination of all the nationalities
in China and that a free and united republic of China (a free union of all
the nationalities) will be established when the anti-imperialist and anti-warlord
revolution is victorious".

The Communist Party of China is in full agreement with Dr. Sun's policy on
nationalities as stated here. Communists must actively help the people of
all the minority nationalities to fight for it, and help them, including
all their leaders who have ties with the masses, to fight for their political,
economic and cultural emancipation and development and to establish their
own armies which will safeguard the people's interests. Their spoken and
written languages, their manners and customs and their religious beliefs
must be respected.

The attitude which the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the Liberated
Areas in northern China have for years adopted towards the Mongolian and
Hui nationalities is correct, and the work they have done has been fruitful.
10. The Problem of Foreign Policy


The Communist Party of China agrees with the Atlantic Charter and with the
decisions of the international conferences of Moscow, Cairo, Teheran and
the Crimea, [12] because these decisions all
contribute to the defeat of the fascist aggressors and the maintenance of
world peace.

The fundamental principle of the foreign policy advocated by the Chinese
Communist Party is as follows: China shall establish and strengthen diplomatic
relations with all countries and settle all questions of common concern,
such as co-ordination of military operations in the war, peace conferences,
trade and investment, on the basic conditions that the Japanese aggressors
must be completely defeated and world peace maintained, that there must be
mutual respect for national independence and equality, and that there must
be promotion of mutual interests and friendship between states and between
peoples.

The Chinese Communist Party fully agrees with the proposals of the Dumbarton
Oaks conference and the decisions of the Crimea conference on the establishment
of an organization to safeguard international peace and security after the
war. It welcomes the United Nations Conference on International Organization
in San Francisco.

It has appointed its own representative on China's delegation to this conference
in order to express the will of the Chinese people.
[13]

We hold that the Kuomintang government must cease its hostility towards the
Soviet Union and speedily improve Sino-Soviet relations. The Soviet Union
was the first country to renounce the unequal treaties and sign new, equal
treaties with China. At the time of the Kuomintang's First National Congress
called by Dr. Sun Yat-sen in 1924 and the subsequent Northern Expedition,
the Soviet Union was the only country to help China's war of liberation.
When the anti-Japanese war broke out in 1937, the Soviet Union was again
the first country to help China against the Japanese aggressors. The Chinese
people are grateful to the Soviet government and people for this help. We
believe that no final and thorough settlement of the problems of the Pacific
is possible without the participation of the Soviet Union.

We ask the governments of all the allied countries, and of the United States
and Britain in the first place, to pay serious attention to the voice of
the Chinese people and not to impair friendship with them by pursuing foreign
policies that run counter to their will. We maintain that if any foreign
government helps the Chinese reactionaries and opposes the Chinese people's
democratic cause, it will be committing a gross mistake.

The Chinese people welcome the steps taken by many foreign governments in
renouncing their unequal treaties and concluding new, equal treaties with
China. However, we maintain that the conclusion of equal treaties does not
in itself mean that China has actually won genuine equality. Genuine and
actual equality is never the gift of foreign governments, but must be won
mainly by the Chinese people through their own efforts, and the way to win
it is to build a new-democratic China politically, economically and culturally;
otherwise there will be only nominal and not actual independence and equality.
That is to say, China can never win genuine independence and equality by
following the present policy of the Kuomintang government.

We consider that, after the defeat and unconditional surrender of the Japanese
aggressors, it will be necessary to help all the democratic forces of the
Japanese people to establish their own democratic system so that Japanese
fascism and militarism may be thoroughly wiped out, together with their
political, economic and social roots. Unless the Japanese people have a
democratic system, it will be impossible thoroughly to wipe out Japanese
fascism and militarism and impossible to ensure peace in the Pacific.

We consider the decision of the Cairo conference regarding the independence
of Korea to be correct. The Chinese people should help the Korean people
to win liberation.

We hope that India will attain independence. For an independent and democratic
India is not only needed by the Indian people but is essential for world
peace.

As regards the Southeast Asian countries--Burma, Malaya, Indonesia, Viet
Nam and the Philippines--we hope that after the defeat of the Japanese aggressors
their people will exercise their right to establish independent and democratic
states of their own. As for Thailand, she should be treated like the fascist
satellite states in Europe.

  

So much for the major points of our specific programme.

To repeat, none of the points in this specific programme can be successfully
carried out on a nation-wide scale without a democratic coalition government
enjoying the support of the entire nation.

By its twenty-four years of struggle for the cause of the liberation of the
Chinese people, the Communist Party of China has attained a position such
that any political party or social group or any Chinese or foreigner ignoring
its opinion on questions concerning China will be making a serious mistake
and courting certain failure. There were, and still are, people who try to
ignore our opinions and to follow their own bigoted course, but they have
all ended in a blind alley. Why? Simply because our opinions conform to the
interests of the Chinese masses. The Chinese Communist Party is the most
faithful spokesman of the Chinese people, and whoever fails to respect it
in fact fails to respect the Chinese masses and is doomed to defeat.
THE TASKS IN THE KUOMINTANG AREAS


I have now given a detailed explanation of our Party's general and specific
programmes. There is no doubt that these programmes will eventually be put
into effect throughout China; this is the vista that the international and
domestic situation as a whole has opened up for the Chinese people. However,
at the moment conditions in the Kuomintang areas, the enemy-occupied areas
and the Liberated Areas differ from each other, making it necessary for us
to distinguish between them in implementing our programme. Different conditions
give rise to different tasks. Some of these tasks I have already explained
above, while others still need elaboration.

In the Kuomintang areas, the people are not free to engage in patriotic activity,
and democratic movements are considered illegal, and yet various social strata,
democratic parties and individuals are becoming increasingly active. The
China Democratic League issued a manifesto in January this year demanding
the termination of the Kuomintang's one-party dictatorship and the establishment
of a coalition government. Many sections of the people have made similar
declarations. Within the Kuomintang, too, many people are showing increasing
doubt and discontent over the policies of the leading bodies of their own
party, are becoming increasingly aware of the danger of their party's isolation
from the people, and are therefore demanding democratic reforms suited to
the times. In Chungking and other places democratic movements are growing
among the workers, the peasants, cultural circles, the students, educational
circles, women, industrial and commercial circles, government employees and
even among some of the soldiers and officers. Those facts indicate that the
democratic movements of all the oppressed strata are gradually converging
on a common objective. One weakness of the present movements is that the
basic sections of society have not yet joined it on a wide scale and that
the most important forces, namely, the peasants, workers, soldiers and the
lower-ranking government employees and teachers, who are all suffering so
bitterly, are not yet organized. Another weakness is that many of the democratic
personalities in the movement are still unclear and hesitant about the
fundamental policy, namely, that a change in the situation must be sought
through the waging of struggle on a democratic mass basis. However, the objective
situation is compelling all the oppressed strata, political parties and social
groups gradually to awaken and unite. No suppression by the Kuomintang government
can stop the advance of this movement.

All the oppressed strata, political parties and social groups in the Kuomintang
areas must extend their democratic movement on a broad scale and gradually
weld their scattered forces together in order to fight for national unity,
the establishment of a coalition government, the defeat of the Japanese
aggressors and the building of a new China. The Communist Party of China
and the people of the Liberated Areas should give them every possible help.

In the Kuomintang areas the Communists should continue to pursue the policy
of a broad National United Front Against Japan. In the fight for common
objectives, we should co-operate with anyone who does not oppose us today,
even though he might have done so yesterday.
THE TASKS IN THE JAPANESE-OCCUPIED AREAS


In the occupied areas, Communists should call on all who oppose Japan to
follow the French and Italian examples and form organizations and underground
forces to prepare armed uprisings, so that when the time comes they can act
from the inside in co-ordination with the armies attacking from the outside
and so wipe out the Japanese aggressors. The atrocities, plunder, rape and
humiliation suffered by our brothers and sisters in the occupied areas at
the hands of the Japanese aggressors and their servile lackeys have aroused
the burning wrath of all Chinese, and the hour of revenge is fast approaching.
The victories in the European theatre of war and the victories of our Eighth
Route and New Fourth Armies have stimulated and heightened the anti-Japanese
spirit of the people in the occupied areas. They urgently want to become
organized so as to achieve liberation as quickly as possible. Therefore,
we must raise our work in the occupied areas to the same level of importance
as that in the Liberated Areas. Large numbers of our working personnel must
be sent to work there. Large numbers of activists among the people there
must be trained and promoted and must take part in local work. We must intensify
our underground work in the four northeastern provinces which have been occupied
longer than any other region and which form a key industrial and troop
concentration area for the Japanese aggressors. With a view to the recovery
of these lost territories, we should strengthen our solidarity with the people
who have fled south from the Northeast.

Communists should pursue the broadest united front policy in all the occupied
areas. For the overthrow of the common enemy they must unite with anyone
who is opposed to the Japanese aggressors and their servile lackeys.

We should warn all the puppet armies, the puppet police and others who are
helping the enemy and opposing their countrymen that they must quickly recognize
the criminal nature of their actions, repent in time and atone for their
crimes by helping their countrymen against the enemy. Otherwise the nation
will certainly call them to account the day the enemy collapses.

Communists should direct persuasive propaganda at all puppet organizations
with a mass following so as to win the masses who have been misled over to
our side against the national enemy. At the same time, evidence should be
collected about those impenitent collaborators who have committed the most
heinous crimes, so that they can be brought to justice when the lost territories
are recovered.

Those Kuomintang reactionaries who have betrayed the nation by organizing
open collaborators to fight the Chinese people, the Communist Party, the
Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth Army and other armed forces of the people
must be warned to repent in time. Otherwise, when the lost territories are
recovered, they will certainly be punished for their crimes along with the
collaborators with Japan and will be shown no mercy.
THE TASKS IN THE LIBERATED AREAS


Our Party has put its whole new-democratic programme into practice in the
Liberated Areas with striking results, and so built up tremendous anti-Japanese
strength, and from now on this strength should be developed and consolidated
in every way.

In the prevailing circumstances, the troops of the Liberated Areas should
launch extensive attacks on all places that can be captured from the Japanese
and puppets in order to expand the Liberated Areas and reduce the occupied
areas.

But at the same time it should be borne in mind that the enemy is still strong
and may launch further attacks on the Liberated Areas. The army and the people
of our areas must be ready at all times to smash his attacks and must work
in every way to consolidate these areas.

We must expand the armies, the guerrilla units, the people's militia and
the self-defence corps of the Liberated Areas, and increase their combat
effectiveness by speeding up their training and consolidation in order to
build up adequate strength for the final defeat of the aggressors.

The army in the Liberated Areas must support the government and cherish the
people, while the democratic governments must lead the people in the work
of supporting the army and taking good care of the families of soldiers fighting
Japan. In this way relations between the army and the people will become
still better.

In the work of the local coalition governments and mass organizations, Communists
should continue to co-operate closely with all anti-Japanese democrats on
the basis of the new-democratic programme.

Similarly in military work, Communists should co-operate closely with all
anti-Japanese democrats who are willing to co-operate with us, whether or
not they are members of the armies of the Liberated Areas.

To increase the enthusiasm of the masses of the workers, peasants and other
working people for the war and for production, we must thoroughly apply the
policy of reducing rent and interest and of increasing the pay of workers
and office staff. The cadres of the Liberated Areas must diligently learn
to do economic work. All available forces must be mobilized for the extensive
development of agriculture, industry and trade and the improvement of the
livelihood of the soldiers and the people. For this purpose there must be
labour emulation campaigns, and rewards should be given to labour heroes
and model workers. When the Japanese aggressors are driven out of the cities,
our personnel must rapidly learn how to do urban economic work.

Our cultural and educational work must be developed in order to raise the
level of political consciousness of the people in the Liberated Areas and,
above all, of the masses of the workers, peasants and soldiers, and in order
to train large numbers of cadres. In carrying forward this work, those engaged
in it should adopt forms and select contents suited to the existing rural
conditions and to the needs and wishes of the people in the countryside.

In all our work in the Liberated Areas, manpower and material resources must
be used most sparingly, and in every field long-term plans must be made,
and misuse and waste must be avoided. This is needed both for defeating the
Japanese aggressors and for building up the new China.

In all our work in the Liberated Areas, we must take great care to help the
local people administer local affairs and to cultivate many local cadres
from among the best local people. It will be impossible to accomplish the
great task of the democratic revolution in the rural areas unless comrades
who come from other places identify themselves with the local people and
help the local cadres whole-heartedly, painstakingly and in ways that fit
the actual conditions, and unless they cherish them like their own brothers
and sisters.

When a unit of the Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth Army or any other armed
force of the people arrives at a place, it should immediately help the local
people to organize forces led by the local cadres, including not only militia
and self-defence corps but also local troops and regional forces. This will
make possible the eventual creation of regular forces and regular army formations
led by local people. This is an extremely important task. Unless it is
accomplished, we can neither build stable anti-Japanese base areas nor expand
the people's army.

Of course the local people for their part should warmly welcome and help
the revolutionary workers and people's forces coming from other areas.

Everybody should be alerted on the question of dealing with covert wreckers.
For it is easy to spot and handle overt enemies and wreckers of the national
cause, but not those who work under cover. Therefore we should take up this
matter in all seriousness and at the same time be very careful in dealing
with such people.

All religions are permitted in China's Liberated Areas, in accordance with
the principle of freedom of religious belief. All believers in Protestantism,
Catholicism, Islamism, Buddhism and other faiths enjoy the protection of
the people's government so long as they are abiding by its laws. Everyone
is free to believe or not to believe; neither compulsion nor discrimination
is permitted.

Our congress should propose to the people of the Liberated Areas that a people's
conference of the Chinese Liberated Areas [14]
be held in Yenan as soon as possible to discuss the questions of co-ordinating
the activities of the various Liberated Areas, strengthening their work in
the War of Resistance, helping the people's anti-Japanese democratic movement
in the Kuomintang areas, helping the underground armed forces of the people
in the occupied areas, and promoting national unity and the formation of
a coalition government. Now that China's Liberated Areas have become the
centre of gravity in the nationwide people's struggle to resist Japan and
save the country, the broad masses throughout the country pin their hopes
on us and it is our duty not to disappoint them. Such a conference would
give great impetus to the Chinese people's cause of national liberation.

V. LET THE WHOLE PARTY UNITE AND FIGHT TO ACCOMPLISH ITS
  TASKS!


Comrades! Now that we understand our tasks and the policies for accomplishing
them, what should be our attitude in carrying out these policies and performing
these tasks?

The present international and domestic situation opens up bright prospects
and provides unprecedentedly favorable conditions for us and the Chinese
people as a whole; this is evident and beyond doubt. But at the same time
there are still serious difficulties. Anyone who sees only the bright side
but not the difficulties cannot fight effectively for the accomplishment
of the Party's tasks.

Together with the Chinese people, our Party has built up immense strength
for the Chinese nation in the twenty-four years of the Party's history, including
the eight years of the War of Resistance Against Japan; the success of our
work is obvious and beyond doubt. But at the same time there are still defects
in our work. Anyone who sees only the successful side but not the defects
likewise cannot fight effectively for the accomplishment of the Party's tasks.

In the twenty-four years since its birth in 1921, the Communist Party of
China has gone through three great struggles--the Northern Expedition, the
Agrarian Revolutionary War and the War of Resistance Against Japan which
is still going on. From its very beginning our Party has based itself on
the theory of Marxism-Leninism, for Marxism-Leninism is the crystallization
of the most correct and most revolutionary scientific thought of the world
proletariat. When the universal truth of Marxism-Leninism began to be integrated
with the concrete practice of the Chinese revolution, the Chinese revolution
took on an entirely new complexion and the entire historical stage of New
Democracy emerged. Armed with Marxist-Leninist theory, the Communist Party
of China has brought a new style of work to the Chinese people, a style of
work which essentially entails integrating theory with practice, forging
close links with the masses and practicing self-criticism.

The universal truth of Marxism-Leninism, which reflects the practice of
proletarian struggle throughout the world, becomes an invincible weapon for
the Chinese people when it is integrated with the concrete practice of the
revolutionary struggle of the Chinese proletariat and people. This the Communist
Party of China has achieved. Our Party has grown and advanced through staunch
struggle against every manifestation of dogmatism and empiricism, which runs
counter to this principle. Dogmatism is divorced from concrete practice,
while empiricism mistakes fragmentary experience for universal truth; both
kinds of opportunist thinking run counter to Marxism. In the course of its
twenty-four years of struggle our Party has successfully fought such wrong
thinking and it is still doing so, thus greatly consolidating itself
ideologically. Our Party now has 1,210,000 members. The overwhelming majority
have joined during the War of Resistance, and there are various impurities
in their ideology. The same is true of some of the members who joined the
Party before the war. The work of rectification in the last few years has
been most successful and has gone a long way towards removing these impurities.
This work should be continued and ideological education within the Party
should be developed still more extensively in the spirit of "learning from
past mistakes to avoid future ones" and "curing the sickness to save the
patient". We must enable the Party's leading cadres at all levels to understand
that close integration of theory and practice is a hallmark distinguishing
our Party from all other political parties. Therefore ideological education
is the key link to be grasped in uniting the whole Party for great political
struggles. Unless this is done, the Party cannot accomplish any of its political
tasks.

Another hallmark distinguishing our Party from all other political parties
is that we have very close ties with the broadest masses of the people. Our
point of departure is to serve the people whole-heartedly and never for a
moment divorce ourselves from the masses, to proceed in all cases from the
interests of the people and not from the interests of individuals or groups,
and to understand the identity of our responsibility to the people and our
responsibility to the leading organs of the Party. Communists must be ready
at all times to stand up for the truth, because truth is in the interests
of the people; Communists must be ready at all times to correct their mistakes,
because mistakes are against the interests of the people. Twenty-four years
of experience tell us that the right task, policy and style of work invariably
conform with the demands of the masses at a given time and place and invariably
strengthen our ties with the masses, and the wrong task, policy and style
of work invariably disagree with the demands of the masses at a given time
and place and invariably alienate us from the masses. The reason why such
evils as dogmatism, empiricism, commandism, tailism, sectarianism, bureaucracy
and an arrogant attitude in work are definitely harmful and intolerable,
and why anyone suffering from these maladies must overcome them, is that
they alienate us from the masses. Our congress should call upon the whole
Party to be vigilant and to see that no comrade at any post is divorced from
the masses. It should teach every comrade to love the people and listen
attentively to the voice of the masses; to identify himself with the masses
wherever he goes and, instead of standing above them, to immerse himself
among them; and, according to their present level, to awaken them or raise
their political consciousness and help them gradually to organize themselves
voluntarily and to set going all essential struggles permitted by the internal
and external circumstances of the given time and place. Commandism is wrong
in any type of work, because in overstepping the level of political consciousness
of the masses and violating the principle of voluntary mass action it reflects
the disease of impetuosity. Our comrades must not assume that everything
they themselves understand is understood by the masses. Whether the masses
understand it and are ready to take action can be discovered only by going
into their midst and making investigations. If we do so, we can avoid commandism.
Tailism in any type of work is also wrong, because in falling below the level
of political consciousness of the masses and violating the principle of leading
the masses forward it reflects the disease of dilatoriness. Our comrades
must not assume that the masses have no understanding of what they themselves
do not yet understand. It often happens that the masses outstrip us and are
eager to advance a step when our comrades are still tailing behind certain
backward elements, for instead of acting as leaders of the masses such comrades
reflect the views of these backward elements and, moreover, mistake them
for those of the broad masses. In a word, every comrade must be brought to
understand that the supreme test of the words and deeds of a Communist is
whether they conform with the highest interests and enjoy the support of
the overwhelming majority of the people. Every comrade must be helped to
understand that as long as we rely on the people, believe firmly in the
inexhaustible creative power of the masses and hence trust and identify ourselves
with them, no enemy can crush us while we can crush every enemy and overcome
every difficulty.

Conscientious practice of self-criticism is still another hallmark distinguishing
our Party from all other political parties. As we say, dust will accumulate
if a room is not cleaned regularly, our faces will get dirty if they are
not washed regularly. Our comrades' minds and our Party's work may also collect
dust, and also need sweeping and washing. The proverb "Running water is never
stale and a door-hinge is never worm-eaten" means that constant motion prevents
the inroads of germs and other organisms. To check up regularly on our work
and in the process develop a democratic style of work, to fear neither criticism
nor self-criticism, and to apply such good popular Chinese maxims as "Say
all you know and say it without reserve", "Blame not the speaker but be warned
by his words" and "Correct mistakes if you have committed them and guard
against them if you have not"-- this is the only effective way to prevent
all kinds of political dust and germs from contaminating the minds of our
comrades and the body of our Party. The reason for the great effectiveness
of the rectification movement, the purpose of which was "to learn from past
mistakes to avoid future ones and to cure the sickness to save the patient",
was that the criticism and self-criticism we carried out were honest and
conscientious, and not perfunctory and distorted. As we Chinese Communists,
who base all our actions on the highest interests of the broadest masses
of the Chinese people and who are fully convinced of the justice of our cause,
never balk at any personal sacrifice and are ready at all times to give our
lives for the cause, can we be reluctant to discard any idea, viewpoint,
opinion or method which is not suited to the needs of the people? Can we
be willing to allow political dust and germs to dirty our clean faces or
eat into our healthy organism? Countless revolutionary martyrs have laid
down their lives in the interests of the people, and our hearts are filled
with pain as we the living think of them--can there be any personal interest,
then, that we would not sacrifice or any error that we would not discard?

Comrades! When this congress is over, we shall go to the front and, guided
by its resolutions, fight to bring about the final defeat of the Japanese
aggressors and to build a new China. To achieve this aim, we shall unite
with all the people of our country. Let me repeat: We shall unite with any
class, any party, any group or individual if they are for the defeat of the
Japanese aggressors and the building of a new China. To achieve this aim,
we shall solidly unite all the forces of our Party on democratic centralist
principles of organization and discipline. We shall unite with any comrade
if he abides by the Party's Programme, Constitution and decisions. In the
period of the Northern Expedition our Party had a membership of less than
60,000, most of whom were later dispersed by the enemy; in the period of
the Agrarian Revolutionary War we had a membership of less than 300,000,
most of whom were likewise dispersed by the enemy. Now we have more than
1,200,000 members; this time we must in no circumstances allow ourselves
to be dispersed by the enemy. If we can profit from the experience of those
three periods, if we are modest and guard against conceit and are able to
strengthen unity among all comrades inside the Party and with all the people
outside the Party, we can rest assured that, far from being dispersed by
the enemy, we shall destroy the Japanese aggressors and their servile running
dogs resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely, and thereafter build
a new-democratic China.

The experience of the three periods of the revolution, and especially that
of the War of Resistance Against Japan, has convinced us and the whole Chinese
people that without the efforts of the Chinese Communist Party, without the
Chinese Communists as the mainstay of the Chinese people, China can never
achieve independence or liberation, or industrialization and the modernization
of her agriculture.

Comrades! I firmly believe that with the Communist Party of China armed with
the experience of the three revolutions, we can accomplish our great political
task.

Thousands upon thousands of martyrs have heroically laid down their lives
for the people; let us hold their banner high and march ahead along the path
crimson with their blood!

A new-democratic China will soon be born. Let us hail that great day!
NOTES

l. The Chinese National Liberation Vanguard Corps, or to
give its shorter name the National Vanguard Corps, was a revolutionary youth
organization formed under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party in
September 1936 by the progressive youth who participated in the December
9th Movement of 1935. After the outbreak of the War of Resistance, many of
its members saw action and took part in building base areas behind the enemy
lines. The organizations of the National Vanguard Corps in the Kuomintang
areas were forcibly dissolved by the Chiang Kai-shek government in 1938;
those in the Liberated Areas were later merged into the Association of Youth
for National Salvation, an organization of even broader scope.

2. On July 7, 1937, the Japanese invading forces attacked
the Chinese garrison at Lukouchiao, some ten kilometres southwest of Peking.
Under the influence of the ardent and nation-wide anti-Japanese movement
the Chinese troops put up resistance. This incident marked the beginning
of the Chinese people's heroic War of Resistance Against Japan which lasted
for eight years.

3. For a fuller account of the three anti-Communist onslaughts,
see "A Comment on the Sessions of the Kuomintang Central Executive Committee
and of the People's Political Council", pp. 137-51 of this volume.

4. These operations to force China's north-south trunk
railways open for through traffic constituted the offensive launched in May
1944 by the Japanese army to seize the Canton-Hankow Railway along its entire
length and thus secure an uninterrupted land link between northern and southern
China.

5. Scobie was the commander of the British imperialist
forces of aggression in Greece. In October 1944, when the German invaders
were retreating in defeat on the European continent, Scobie's troops entered
the country, bringing with them the reactionary Greek government that had
been in exile in London. Scobie directed and assisted this government in
attacking the Greek People's Liberation Army, which had waged a long and
heroic struggle against the German invaders, and in massacring Greek patriots,
and so plunged Greece into a blood bath.

6. Pao chia was the administrative system by which
the Kuomintang reactionary clique enforced its fascist rule at the primary
level. On August 1, 1932, Chiang Kai-shek promulgated his "Regulations for
the Organization of Pao and Chia and for a Population Census
in the Counties", covering the provinces of Honan, Hupeh and Anhwei. The
"Regulations" provided that "the pao and chia are to be
organized on the basis of households; there is to be a head of each household,
of each chia, which is made up of ten households, and of each pao,
which is made up of ten chia". Neighbours were required to
watch each other's activities and report them to the authorities, and all
were punishable when one was found guilty; counter-revolutionary measures
for exacting compulsory labour were also laid down. On November 7, 1934,
the Kuomintang government officially announced that this system of fascist
rule was to be established in all the provinces and municipalities under
its rule.

7. The Cairo conference, held by China, the United States
and Britain in November 1943, issued the Cairo Declaration which clearly
stipulated that Taiwan and certain other territories were to be returned
to China. In June 1950 the U.S. government sent a fleet to control Taiwan
in open repudiation of this agreement, in the attempt to deprive China of
her sovereignty over it.

8. Yuan Shih-kai was the head of the Northern warlords
in the last years of the Ching Dynasty. After the Ching Dynasty was overthrown
by the Revolution of 1911, he usurped the president of the Republic and organized
the first government of the Northern warlords, which represented the big
landlord and big comprador classes. He did this by relying on
counter-revolutionary armed force and on the support of the imperialists
and by taking advantage of the conciliationist character of the bourgeoisie,
which was then leading the revolution. In 1915 he wanted to make himself
emperor and, to gain the support of the Japanese imperialists, accepted the
Twenty-one Demands with which Japan aimed at obtaining exclusive control
of all China. In December of the same year an uprising against his assumption
of the throne took place in Yunnan Province and promptly won nation-wide
response and support. Yuan Shih-kai died in Peking in June 1916.

9. Omei is a famous mountain in the southwestern part of
Szechuan Province. Here it symbolizes the mountainous areas of Szechuan,
the last refuge of the Chiang Kai-shek ruling clique in the War of Resistance
Against Japan.

10. From Dr. Sun Yat-sen's "Statement on My Departure
for the North", dated November 10, 1924.

11. For many decades, beginning with the end of the 18th
century, Britain exported an increasing quantity of opium to China. This
traffic not only subjected the Chinese people to drugging but also plundered
China of her silver. It aroused fierce opposition in China. In 1840, under
the pretext of safeguarding its trade with China, Britain launched armed
aggression against her. The Chinese troops led by Lin Tse-hsu put up resistance,
and the people in Canton spontaneously organized the "Quell the British Corps",
which dealt serious blows to the British forces of aggression. In 1842, however,
the corrupt Ching regime signed the Treaty of Nanking with Britain. This
treaty provided for the payment of indemnities and the cession of Hongkong
to Britain, and stipulated that Shanghai, Foochow, Amoy, Ningpo and Canton
were to be opened to British trade and that tariff rates for British goods
imported into China were to be jointly fixed by China and Britain.

12. The Atlantic Charter was issued jointly by the United
States and Britain at the conclusion of their Atlantic conference in August
1941. The Moscow conference was held in October 1943 by the foreign ministers
of the Soviet Union, the United States and Britain. The Teheran conference
of the Soviet Union, the United States and Britain was held in the capital
of Iran from November to December 1943. The Crimea conference of the Soviet
Union, the United States and Britain took place in February 1945 at Yalta.
At all these international conferences the signatories recorded their resolve
to defeat fascist Germany and Japan through common endeavour and, after the
war, to prevent the revival of the forces of aggression and the remnants
of fascism, maintain world peace and help the peoples of all countries to
realize their aspirations for independence and democracy. But immediately
after the war the U.S. and British governments violated all these international
agreements.

13. As the representative of China's Liberated Areas Comrade
Tang Pi-wu attended the United Nations Conference on International Organization
which was held at San Francisco from April to June 1945, with the participation
of representatives from fifty countries. The proposals for the Organization
of the United Nations were drafted at Dumbarton Oaks, U.S.A., where the
representatives of the Soviet Union, the United States, Britain and China
met from August to October 1944 in accordance with the decisions of the Moscow
and Teheran conferences.

14. With Japan's surrender the situation changed and the
people's conference of the Chinese Liberated Areas was not convened, although
a Preparatory Committee for this conference was formed in Yenan after the
Seventh National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party and held an inaugural
meeting which was attended by representative from all the Liberated Areas.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Foolish Old Man Who Removed the Mountains







THE FOOLISH OLD MAN WHO REMOVED THE MOUNTAINS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE FOOLISH OLD MAN WHO REMOVED THE MOUNTAINS

June 11, 1945

[This was Comrade Mao Tse-tung's concluding speech at the Seventh National
Congress of the Communist Party of China.]
  

We have had a very successful congress. We have done three things. First,
we have decided on the line of our Party, which is boldly to mobilize the
masses and expand the people's forces so that, under the leadership of our
Party, they will defeat the Japanese aggressors, liberate the whole people
and build a new-democratic China. Second, we have adapted the new Party
Constitution. Third, we have elected the leading body of the Party--the Central
Committee. Henceforth our task is to lead the whole membership in carrying
out the Party line. Ours has been a congress of victory, a congress of unity.
The delegates have made excellent comments on the three reports. Many comrades
have undertaken self-criticism; with unity as the objective unity has been
achieved through self-criticism. This congress is a model of unity, of
self-criticism and of inner-Party democracy.

When the congress closes, many comrades will be leaving for their posts and
the various war fronts. Comrades, wherever you go, you should propagate the
line of the congress and, through the members of the Party, explain it to
the broad masses.

Our aim in propagating the line of the congress is to build up the confidence
of the whole Party and the entire people in the certain triumph of the
revolution. We must first raise the political consciousness of the vanguard
so that, resolute and unafraid of sacrifice, they will surmount every difficulty
to win victory. But this is not enough; we must also arouse the political
consciousness of the entire people so that they may willingly and gladly
fight together with us for victory. We should fire the whole people with
the conviction that China belongs not to the reactionaries but to the Chinese
people. There is an ancient Chinese fable called "The Foolish Old Man Who
Removed the Mountains". It tells of an old man who lived in northern China
long, long ago and was known as the Foolish Old Man of North Mountain. His
house faced south and beyond his doorway stood the two great peaks, Taihang
and Wangwu, obstructing the way. He called his sons, and hoe in hand they
began to dig up these mountains with great determination. Another graybeard,
known as the Wise Old Man, saw them and said derisively, "How silly of you
to do this! It is quite impossible for you few to dig up those two huge
mountains." The Foolish Old Man replied, "When I die, my sons will carry
on; when they die, there will be my grandsons, and then their sons and grandsons,
and so on to infinity. High as they are, the mountains cannot grow any higher
and with every bit we dig, they will be that much lower. Why can't we clear
them away?" Having refuted the Wise Old Man's wrong view, he went on digging
every day, unshaken in his conviction. God was moved by this, and he sent
down two angels, who carried the mountains away on their backs. Today, two
big mountains lie like a dead weight on the Chinese people. One is imperialism,
the other is feudalism. The Chinese Communist Party has long made up its
mind to dig them up. We must persevere and work unceasingly, and we, too,
will touch God's heart. Our God is none other than the masses of the Chinese
people. If they stand up and dig together with us, why can't these two mountains
be cleared away?

Yesterday, in a talk with two Americans who were leaving for the United States,
I said that the U.S. government was trying to undermine us and this would
not be permitted. We oppose the U.S. government's policy of supporting Chiang
Kai-shek against the Communists. But we must draw a distinction, firstly,
between the people of the United States and their government and, secondly,
within the U.S. government between the policy-makers and their subordinates.
I said to these two Americans, "Tell the policy-makers in your government
that we forbid you Americans to enter the Liberated Areas because your policy
is to support Chiang Kai-shek against the Communists, and we have to be on
our guard. You can come to the Liberated Areas if your purpose is to fight
Japan, but there must first be an agreement. We will not permit you to nose
around everywhere. Since Patrick J. Hurley [1]
has publicly declared against co-operation with the Chinese Communist Party,
why do you still want to come and prowl around in our Liberated Areas?"

The U.S. government's policy of supporting Chiang Kai-shek against the Communists
shows the brazenness of the U.S. reactionaries. But all the scheming of the
reactionaries, whether Chinese or foreign, to prevent the Chinese people
from achieving victory is doomed to failure. The democratic forces are the
main current in the world today, while reaction is only a counter-current.
The reactionary countercurrent is trying to swamp the main current of national
independence and people's democracy, but it can never become the main current.
Today, there are still three major contradictions in the old world, as Stalin
pointed out long ago: first, the contradiction between the proletariat and
the bourgeoisie in the imperialist countries; second, the contradiction between
the various imperialist powers, and third, the contradiction between the
colonial and semi-colonial countries and the imperialist metropolitan countries.
[2] Not only do these three contradictions continue
to exist but they are becoming more acute and widespread. Because of their
existence and growth, the time will come when the reactionary anti-Soviet,
anti-Communist and anti-democratic counter-current still in existence today
will be swept away.

At this moment two congresses are being held in China, the Sixth National
Congress of the Kuomintang and the Seventh National Congress of the Communist
Party. They have completely different aims: the aim of one is to liquidate
the Communist Party and all the other democratic forces in China and thus
to plunge China into darkness; the aim of the other is to overthrow Japanese
imperialism and its lackeys, the Chinese feudal forces, and build a
new-democratic China and thus to lead China to light. Those two lines are
in conflict with each other. We firmly believe that, led by the Chinese Communist
Party and guided by the line of its Seventh Congress, the Chinese people
will achieve complete victory, while the Kuomintang's counter-revolutionary
line will inevitably fail.
NOTES

l. Patrick J. Hurley, a reactionary Republican Party
politician, was appointed U.S. ambassador to China towards the end of 1944.
In November 1945 he was forced to resign because his support for Chiang
Kai-shek's anti-Communist policy roused the firm opposition of the Chinese
people. Harley's open declaration against cooperation with the Chinese Communist
Party was made on April 2, 1945 at a U.S. State Department press conference
in Washington. For details, see "The Hurley-Chiang Duet Is a Flop", pp. 281-84
of this volume.

2. See J. V. Stalin, "The Foundations of Leninism",
Works, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1953, Vol. VI, pp. 74-82.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Production by the Army for Its Own Support and On the Importance of the Great Movements for Rectification and for Production







ON PRODUCTION BY THE ARMY FOR ITS OWN SUPPORT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON PRODUCTION BY THE ARMY FOR ITS OWN SUPPORT AND ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
  GREAT MOVEMENTS FOR RECTIFICATION AND FOR PRODUCTION

April 27, 1945

[This was an editorial written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Liberation
Daily, Yenan.] 
  

In the existing circumstances in which our army is facing extreme material
difficulties and is engaged in dispersed operations, it is absolutely
inadmissible for the leading bodies to assume full responsibility for
provisioning the army, for to do so would both hamper the initiative of the
large numbers of officers and men at the lower levels and fail to satisfy
their needs. We should say, "Comrades, let us all go into action and overcome
our difficulties!" If only the leadership at the higher levels sets the tasks
well and gives the lower levels a free hand to overcome difficulties by their
own efforts, the problem will be solved and, indeed, solved in a more
satisfactory way. But if, instead, the higher levels always shoulder loads
heavier than they can really carry, dare not give the lower levels a free
hand and do not arouse enthusiasm for self-reliance among the broad masses,
then in spite of all the efforts of the higher levels the result will be
that both the higher and the lower levels will find themselves in a predicament,
and the problem will never be solved in the existing circumstances. The
experience of the last few years has amply borne this out. The principle
of "unified leadership and decentralized management" has proved to be the
correct one for organizing all economic activities in our Liberated Areas
in the present circumstances. The armed forces of the Liberated Areas already
total more than 900,000 men. To defeat the Japanese aggressors, we must increase
them to several times this number. But we have so far received no outside
aid. Even if we get it in the future, we shall still have to provide our
own means of livelihood; on that score there must be no illusions whatsoever.
In the near future we shall have to take the necessary number of military
formations from the areas where they are now engaged in dispersed operations,
and concentrate them for attack on particular enemy objectives. Such big
formations for concentrated action will be unable to engage in production
to support themselves, and, what is more, will need large supplies from the
rear; only the local troops and regional formations remaining behind (and
they will still be considerable) will be able both to fight and to engage
in production as before. Such being the case, is there any doubt that, as
long as fighting and training are not impeded, all troops without exception
should use the present opportunity to learn how to be partially self-supporting
through production?

In our circumstances, production by the army for its own support, though
backward or retrogressive in form, is progressive in substance and of great
historic significance. Formally speaking, we are violating the principle
of division of labour. However, in our circumstances-- the poverty and disunity
of the country (resulting from the crimes of the chief ruling clique of the
Kuomintang), and the protracted and dispersed people's guerrilla war--what
we are doing is progressive. Look how pale and emaciated the Kuomintang soldiers
are, and how robust and strong our soldiers of the Liberated Areas are! Look
what difficulties we ourselves had before we started production for self-support,
and how much better off we have been since! Let us ask two army units here,
say two companies, to choose between the two methods, i.e., between the higher
levels supplying them with all their means of livelihood and the higher levels
supplying little or nothing but letting them produce for themselves all that
they need, or the greater part, or half, or even less than half of what they
need. Which method will yield better results? Which will they prefer? After
a year's serious experiment in production for self-support, they will surely
answer that the second method yields better results and be willing to adopt
it, and they will surely answer that the first method yields poorer results
and be unwilling to adopt it. The reason is that the second method can improve
the living conditions of everyone in the army, whereas the first method can
never satisfy their needs in the present difficult material circumstances,
however hard the higher levels may try. Because we have adopted what seems
to be a "backward" and "retrogressive" method, our troops are able to overcome
shortages in the means of livelihood and improve their living conditions,
so that every soldier is robust and strong; as a result, we are able to ease
the tax burden on the people who are also in difficulties, thus winning their
support, and we are able to keep up the protracted war and expand our armed
forces, thus extending the Liberated Areas, reducing the enemy-occupied areas
and attaining our objective of final victory over the aggressor and the
liberation of the whole of China. Is this not of great historic significance?

Production by the army for its own support has not only improved the army's
living conditions and lightened the burden on the people, thereby making
it possible further to expand the army. In addition, it has had many immediate
effects. They are as follows:

  (1) Improved relations between officers and men. Officers and men work together
  in production and become like brothers.


  (2) Better attitude to labour. What we now have is neither the old mercenary
  system nor universal military service, but a third system, the system of
  mobilizing volunteers. It is better than the mercenary system since it does
  not produce so many loafers, but it is not so good as universal military
  service. Nevertheless, our present conditions only allow us to adopt the
  system of mobilizing volunteers, and not that of universal military service.
  The mobilized soldiers have to lead an army life for a long time, which may
  impair their attitude to labour and so turn some of them into loafers or
  taint them with certain bad habits characteristic of the warlord armies.
  But since the army began to produce for its own support, the attitude to
  labour has improved and loafer ways have been overcome.


  (3) Strengthened discipline. Far from weakening discipline in battle and
  in army life, labour discipline in production actually strengthens it.


  (4) Improved relations between the army and the people. Once an armed force
  begins to "keep house" for itself, encroachments upon the property of the
  people seldom or never occur. As the army and the people exchange labour
  and help each other in production, the friendship between them is strengthened.


  (5) Less grumbling in the army about the government and improved relations
  between the two.


  (6) An impetus to the great production campaign of the people. Once the army
  engages in production, the need for government and other organizations to
  do likewise becomes more obvious, and they do so more energetically; also,
  the need for a universal campaign of the whole people to increase production
  naturally becomes more obvious, and this too is carried on more energetically.


The widespread movements for rectification and for production which began
in 1942 and 1943 respectively have played and are still playing a decisive
role, the one in our ideological and the other in our material life. Unless
we grasp these two links at the right time, we shall be unable to grasp the
whole chain of the revolution, and our struggle will not advance.

As we know, of the members who joined the Party before 1937, only a few tens
of thousands are left, and most of our present membership of 1,200,000 come
from the peasantry and other sections of the petty bourgeoisie. The revolutionary
fervour of these comrades is admirable and they wish to have Marxist training,
but they have brought with them into the Party ideas which are out of keeping
or not altogether in keeping with Marxism. The same is true of some people
who joined the Party before 1937. It constitutes an extremely serious
contradiction, an enormous difficulty. In those circumstances, could we have
advanced smoothly if we had not started a widespread movement of Marxist
education, that is, the rectification movement? Obviously not. But as we
have solved or are in the process of solving this contradiction among large
numbers of cadres--the contradiction, within the Party, between the proletarian
ideology and non-proletarian ideologies (including those of the petty
bourgeoisie, the bourgeoisie and even of the landlord class, but mainly of
the petty bourgeoisie), i.e., the contradiction between the Marxist ideology
and non-Marxist ideologies--our Party can go forward with great, firm strides
in unprecedented (though not complete) ideological, political and organizational
unity. From now on our Party can and should grow even larger and, guided
by the principles of Marxist ideology, we shall be able to steer its further
development still more effectively.

The other link is the movement for production. The War of Resistance has
been going on for eight years. When it began we had food and clothing. But
things got steadily worse until we were in great difficulty, running short
of grain, short of cooking oil and salt, short of bedding and clothing, short
of funds. This great difficulty, this great contradiction, came in the wake
of the big Japanese offensives and the Kuomintang government's three large-scale
attacks on the people (the "anti-Communist onslaughts") in 1940-43. Could
our anti-Japanese struggle have progressed if we had not overcome this
difficulty, solved this contradiction, grasped this link? Obviously not.
But we have learned and are still learning to develop production, and so
we are again full of vigour and vitality. Fearing no enemy, we shall prevail
over them all in a few years.

Thus there can be no doubt of the historic importance of the two great movements
for rectification and production.

Let us go forward and spread those two great movements everywhere as a foundation
for the fulfilment of other tasks in our struggle. If we can do so, the complete
liberation of the Chinese people will be assured.

Now is the season for spring ploughing, and it is hoped that the leading
comrades, all the working personnel and the masses of the people in every
Liberated Area will grasp the link of production in good time and strive
for even greater achievements than those of last year. Greater efforts must
be made this year, particularly in areas which have not yet learned to develop
production.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Hurley-Chiang Duet is a Flop







THE HURLEY-CHIANG DUET IS A FLOP



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE HURLEY-CHIANG DUET IS A FLOP

July 10, 1945

[Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrote this comment for the Hsinhua News Agency.]

  

Convened to camouflage Chiang Kai-shek's dictatorial regime, the Fourth People's
Political Council opened in Chungking on July 7. It was the smallest opening
session on record. Not only was nobody present from the Chinese Communist
Party, but many members of the Council from other groups were absent too.
Out of a total membership of 290, only 180 turned up. Chiang Kai-shek held
forth at this opening session as follows:

  The government is not going to submit any specific proposal on questions
  relating to the convocation of the National Assembly, and you gentlemen can
  therefore discuss these matters fully. The government is ready to listen
  to your opinions on these questions in all honesty and sincerity.


This will probably be the end of the whole business about convoking the National
Assembly on November 12 this year. The imperialist Patrick J. Hurley has
had something to do with this business. At first he strongly encouraged Chiang
Kai-shek to make such a move, and it was this that put some stiffening into
Chiang Kai-shek's New Year's Day speech, [1] and
a great deal more into his March 1 speech [2] in
which he announced his determination to "hand state power back to the people"
on November 12. In his speech of March 1 he flatly rejected the Chinese Communist
Party's proposal, which voiced the general will of the Chinese people, that
a conference of all parties be convened and a coalition government established.
He gleefully played up the idea of forming a so-called Committee of Three,
including an American, to "reorganize" the armed forces of the Chinese Communist
Party. He had the audacity to say that the Chinese Communist Party must hand
over its troops before he would bestow "legal status" upon it.

In all this, the backing of His Worship Patrick J. Hurley was decisive. In
a statement in Washington on April 2, Hurley did his best to boost Chiang
Kai-shek's "National Assembly" and other such nasty schemes in addition to
denying the role of the Chinese Communist Party, vilifying its activities,
declaring against co-operation with it and uttering other such imperialist
platitudes. Thus the duet between Hurley in the United States and Chiang
Kai-shek in China reached its most raucous pitch, with the sacrifice of the
Chinese people as the common objective. Since then the show seems to have
flagged. Countless voices have been raised in protest everywhere, among both
Chinese and foreigners, both inside and outside the Kuomintang, among people
with party affiliations and without. The sole reason is that for all its
high-sounding language, the Hurley-Chiang racket is designed to sacrifice
the interests of the Chinese people, further wreck their unity, and as it
were, lay a mine to set off large-scale civil war in China, thereby damaging
the common interests of the people of the United States and other allied
countries during the anti-fascist war and the prospects of peaceful coexistence
afterwards. At the moment Hurley seems to be lying low, busying himself with
no one knows what, with the result that Chiang Kai-shek has to talk twaddle
before the People's Political Council. Previously, on March 1, Chiang Kai-shek
said:

  The conditions in our country differ from those in other countries: prior
  to the convocation of the National Assembly, we have no responsible organization
  which is representative of the people and through which the government can
  consult the people for their opinions.


If that is so, why does our Generalissimo now go to the People's Political
Council to "listen" to "opinions"? According to him, there is no "responsible
organization" in the whole of China through which one "can consult the people
for their opinions"; it follows that the People's Political Council as an
"organization" exists merely to eat, and his "listening" to it has no legal
basis. Be that as it may, if the People's Political Council says even a single
word against the convocation of the bogus "National" Assembly, it will have
done a good deed and merited divine grace, though by so doing it would have
violated the Imperial Edict of March 1 and committed
lèse-majesté. Of course, it is still premature to
make any comment on the People's Political Council, as we have to wait a
few days to see what it will produce for the Generalissimo to "listen" to.
One thing, however, is certain: ever since the Chinese people began raising
their voices in protest against this National Assembly, even the enthusiasts
for "constitutional monarchy" have been worried about our "monarch", cautioning
him not to stick his neck into a noose by convening a "Parliament of
Pigs"[3] and warning him of the fate of Yuan Shih-kai.
Who knows but that our "monarch" may stay his hand in consequence? But it
is absolutely certain that he and his retinue will not allow the people to
gain a particle of power, if that would cost them a single hair. The immediate
proof is that His Majesty has described the people's justified criticism
as "unbridled attacks". He said:

... under war conditions a general election is obviously out of the question
in the Japanese-occupied areas. Consequently two years ago the Plenary Session
of the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang resolved to convoke
the National Assembly and institute constitutional government within a year
after the conclusion of the war. However, in certain quarters unbridled attacks
were made at that time.

And the grounds for these attacks were that this date might be too late.
His Majesty thereupon proposed that "the National Assembly be convoked as
soon as the war situation is stabilized, in view of the possibility that
the final conclusion of the war may be delayed and that order may not be
quickly restored everywhere even after the end of the war". Much to his surprise,
these people again made "unbridled attacks". This has put His Majesty in
a terrible fix. But the Chinese people must teach Chiang Kai-shek and his
group a lesson and tell them: Whatever you say or do, no tricks in violation
of the people's wishes will be tolerated. What the Chinese people demand
is immediate democratic reforms, such as the release of political prisoners,
the abolition of the secret service, and the granting of freedoms to the
people and of legal status to the political parties. You are doing none of
these things and instead are simply juggling with the pseudo-problem of the
date of the "National Assembly"; this will not deceive even a three-year-old.
Without a minimum of genuine democratic reforms, all your assemblies, large
or small, will be thrown into the cesspit. Call this an "unbridled attack"
if you like, but every deception of this kind must be exploded resolutely,
thoroughly, wholly and completely, with not a trace allowed to remain. The
reason is simply that it is a swindle. Whether or not there is a national
assembly is one thing and whether or not there is a minimum of democratic
reforms is quite another. The former can be dispensed with for the time being,
but the latter must be introduced immediately. Since Chiang Kai-shek and
his group are willing to "hand state power back to the people sooner", why
are they unwilling to carry out a minimum of democratic reforms "sooner"?
Gentlemen of the Kuomintang! When you come to these concluding lines, you
will have to admit that the Chinese Communists are not in any sense making
an "unbridled attack" on you, but are asking you one simple question. May
we not even ask a question? Can you brush it aside? The question you must
answer is: How is it that you are willing to "hand state power back to the
people" but not willing to institute democratic reforms?
NOTES

1. The radio speech made by Chiang Kai-shek on January
1, 1945 did not even mention the ignominious defeats of the Kuomintang troops
at the hands of the Japanese aggressors in the previous year, but maligned
the people and opposed the proposal for abolishing the Kuomintang's one-party
dictatorship and for setting up a coalition government and a joint supreme
command, a proposal supported by all the people and all the anti-Japanese
parties in the country. He insisted on continuing the Kuomintang's one-party
dictatorship and as a shield against the people's criticism he talked about
convening a Kuomintang-controlled "National Assembly" which had been spurned
by the whole nation.

2. On March l, 1945 Chiang Kai-shek made a speech in Chungking
at the Association for the Establishment of Constitutional Government. Besides
reiterating the reactionary views of his New Year's Day speech, Chiang proposed
the formation of a Committee of Three, including a U.S. representative, to
"reorganize" the Eighth Route Army and the New Fourth Army, which amounted
to an open invitation to the U.S. imperialists to intervene in China's domestic
affairs.

3. In 1923, the Northern warlord Tsao Kun had himself elected
"President of the Republic of China" by giving members of parliament a bribe
of 5,000 silver dollars each. He became notorious as the president elected
through bribery, and the bribed members came to be called "members of the
Parliament of Pigs". Comrade Mao Tse-tung's analogy here likens the Kuomintang's
bogus "National Assembly" to the "Parliament of Pigs".


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Danger of the Hurley Policy







ON THE DANGER OF THE HURLEY POLICY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON THE DANGER OF THE HURLEY POLICY

July 12, 1945

[This comment was written for the Hsinhua News Agency.] 
  

It has become increasingly obvious that the policy of the United States towards
China as represented by its ambassador Patrick J. Hurley is creating a civil
war crisis in China. Sticking to its reactionary policies, the Kuomintang
government has lived on civil war ever since it was set up eighteen years
ago; only at the time of the Sian Incident in 1936 and of the Japanese invasion
south of the Great Wall in 1937 was it forced to abandon its nation-wide
civil war for a time. Since 1939, however, civil war on a local scale has
again been waged without interruption. "Fight the Communists first" is the
mobilization slogan used by the Kuomintang government among its own people,
while it relegates resistance to Japan to a secondary place. At present all
its military dispositions are focused not on resisting the Japanese aggressors
but on "recovering lost territory" from China's Liberated Areas and on wiping
out the Chinese Communist Party. This situation must be taken into serious
account in our struggle both for victory in the War of Resistance and for
peaceful construction after the war. The late President Roosevelt did take
it into account and consequently, in the interests of the United States,
refrained from adopting a policy of helping the Kuomintang to undertake armed
attacks on the Chinese Communist Party. When Hurley visited Yenan as Roosevelt's
personal representative in November 1944, he expressed agreement with the
Chinese Communist Party's plan for the abolition of the Kuomintang one-party
dictatorship and the establishment of a democratic coalition government.
But later he changed his tune and went back on what he had said in Yenan.
This change was crudely revealed in his statement in Washington on April
2. In the interim, according to the selfsame Hurley, the Kuomintang government
represented by Chiang Kai-shek seems to have turned into the Beauty and the
Chinese Communist Party into the Beast, and he flatly declared that the United
States would co-operate with Chiang Kai-shek only and not with the Chinese
Communist Party. This, of course, is not just Hurley's personal view but
that of a whole group of people in the U.S. government. It is a wrong and
dangerous view. At this juncture Roosevelt died, and Hurley returned to the
U.S. embassy in Chungking in high spirits. The danger of the China policy
of the United States as represented by Hurley is that it is encouraging the
Kuomintang government to be still more reactionary and aggravating the civil
war crisis. If the Hurley policy continues, the U.S. government will fail
irretrievably into the deep stinking cesspool of Chinese reaction; it will
put itself in the position of antagonizing the hundreds of millions of awakened
and awakening Chinese people and will become a hindrance to the War of Resistance
in the present and to world peace in the future. Isn't it clear that this
would be the inevitable result? A section of U.S. public opinion is worried
about the China policy of the Hurley type with its dangers and wants it changed,
because as far as China's future is concerned, it sees clearly that the forces
of the Chinese people which demand independence, freedom and unity are
irresistible and are bound to burst forth and supplant foreign and feudal
oppression. We cannot yet say whether or when the U.S. policy will be changed.
But one thing is certain. If the Hurley policy of aiding and abetting the
reactionary forces in China and antagonizing the Chinese people with their
immense numbers continues unchanged, it will place a crushing burden on the
government and people of the United States and plunge them into endless trouble.
This point must be brought home to the people of the United States.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Telegram to Comrade William Z. Foster







TELEGRAM TO COMRADE WlLLIAM Z. FOSTER



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  TELEGRAM TO COMRADE WlLLIAM Z. FOSTER

July 29, 1945


Comrade William Z. Foster and the National Committee of the Communist Party
of the United States of America:

We are glad to learn that the special convention of the Communist Political
Association of the United States has resolved to repudiate Browder's revisionist,
that is, capitulationist line, [1] has re-established
Marxist leadership and revived the Communist Party of the United States.
We hereby extend to you our warm congratulations on this great victory of
the working class and the Marxist movement in the United States. Browder's
whole revisionist-capitulationist line (which is fully expressed in his book
Teheran) in essence reflects the influence of reactionary U.S.
capitalist groups on the U.S. workers' movement. These groups are now doing
their utmost to extend their influence in China too; they are supporting
the erroneous policy of the reactionary clique inside the Kuomintang, a policy
which is against the interests of the nation and the people, and are thereby
confronting the Chinese people with the grave danger of civil war and
jeopardizing the interests of the peoples of our two great countries, China
and the United States. Beyond all doubt the victory of the U.S. working class
and its vanguard, the Communist Party of the United States, over Browder's
revisionist-capitulationist line will contribute signally to the great cause
in which the Chinese and American peoples are engaged the cause of carrying
on the war against Japan and of building a peaceful and democratic world
after the war.
NOTES

1. Earl Browder was the General Secretary of the Communist
Party of the United States of America from 1930 to 1944. During World War
II, the Rightist ideas in the Communist Party of the U.S.A., of which Browder
was the chief exponent, developed into an anti-Marxist
revisionist-capitulationist line. From December 1943 onward, Browder advocated
this line in a number of speeches and articles and in April 1944 he published
Teheran, as his Right opportunist programme. Revising the basic
Leninist thesis that imperialism is monopolistic, decadent and moribund
capitalism, and denying the imperialist nature of U.S. capitalism, he declared
that U.S. capitalism "retains some of the characteristics of a young
capitalism" (Browder's italics) and that there is a "common interest" between
the proletariat and the big bourgeoisie in the U.S.A. Thus he pleaded for
the safeguarding of the system of monopolist trusts and dreamed about saving
U.S. capitalism from inevitable crises by means of class conciliation. Basing
himself on this absurd appraisal of U.S. capitalism and following a
capitulationist line of class collaboration with monopoly capital, Browder
in May 1944 presided over the dissolution of the Communist Party of the U.S.A.,
the party of the U.S. proletariat, and formed a non-Party organization, the
Communist Political Association of the U.S.A. From the very beginning, Browder's
wrong line met with opposition from many members of the Communist Party of
the U.S.A. with Comrade William Z. Poster at their head. Under the leadership
of Comrade Foster, the Communist Political Association in June 1945 passed
a resolution denouncing Browder's line. In July the association held a special
national convention and decided on the thorough liquidation of this line
and the re-establishment of the Communist Party of the U.S.A. Browder was
expelled from the Party in February 1946 because he persisted in his stand,
which was a betrayal of the proletariat, and because he openly supported
the imperialist policy of the Truman Administration and engaged in factional
activities against the Party.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Last Round with the Japanese Invaders







THE LAST ROUND WITH THE JAPANESE INVADERS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE LAST ROUND WITH THE JAPANESE INVADERS

August 9, 1945


The Chinese people heartily welcome the Soviet government's declaration of
war on Japan on August 8. The Soviet Union's action will very much shorten
the war against Japan. The war is already in its last stage and the time
has come to inflict final defeat on the Japanese aggressors and all their
running dogs. In these circumstances, all the anti-Japanese forces of the
Chinese people should launch a nationwide counter-offensive in close and
effective co-ordination with the operations of the Soviet Union and the other
allied countries. The Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth Army and the other
armed forces of the people should seize every opportunity to launch extensive
attacks on all the invaders and their running dogs who refuse to surrender,
annihilate their forces, capture their arms and matériel,
vigorously expand the Liberated Areas and reduce the areas under enemy
occupation. We must boldly form armed working teams which, by hundreds and
by thousands, should penetrate deep into the rear of the enemy-occupied areas,
organize the people to wreck the enemy's communication lines and fight in
co-ordination with the regular armies. We must boldly arouse the people in
the occupied areas in their tens of millions and immediately organize underground
forces to prepare armed uprisings and to annihilate the enemy in co-ordination
with the troops attacking from without. Meanwhile, the consolidation of the
Liberated Areas must not be neglected. Among the 100 million people there,
and among the people in all other areas as they are liberated, we should
universally carry out the reduction of rent and interest this winter and
next spring, increase production, build up the people's political power and
armed forces, intensify militia work, strengthen army discipline, persistently
develop the united front of all sections of the people and guard against
waste of manpower and material resources. All this is designed to put more
punch into our army's offensive against the enemy. The people of the whole
country must be on their guard to avert the danger of civil war and make
efforts to bring about the formation of a democratic coalition government.
A new stage in China's war of national liberation has arrived, and the people
of the whole country must strengthen their unity and struggle for final victory.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


