# Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Volume IV

==========

## Table of contents









Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Vol. IV




 Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung: Vol. IV



THE THIRD REVOLUTIONARY CIVIL WAR PERIOD


The Situation and Our Policy After the Victory in the War of Resistance against Japan (August 13, 1945)

Chiang Kai-Shek is Provoking Civil War 
 (August 13, 1945)

Two Telegrams from the Commander-in-Chief of the Eighteenth Group to Chiang Kai-Shek (August
1945)

On a Statement by Chiang Kai-Shek's Spokesman
(August 16, 1945)

On Peace Negotiations with the Kuomintang — Circular of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
 (August 26, 1945)

On the Chungking Negotiations (October
17, 1945)

The Truth About the Kuomintang Attacks (November
5, 1945)

Rent Reduction and Production Are Two Important Matters for the Defence of the Liberated Areas (November 7,
1945)

Policy for Work in the Liberated Areas for 1946
(December 15, 1945)

Build Stable base Areas in the Northeast
(December 28,1945)

Some Points in Appraisal of the present International Situation (April 1946)

Smash Chiang Kai-Shek's Offensive by a War of Self-Defence (July 20, 1946)

Talk With the American Correspondent Anna Louise Strong (August 1946)

Concentrate a Superior Force to Destroy the Enemy Forces One by One (September 16, 1946)

The Truth About U.S. "Mediation" and the Future of the Civil War in China (September 29, 1946)

A Three Months' Summary (October 1,
1946)

Greet the New High Tide of the Chinese Revolution
(February 1, 1947)

On the Temporary Abandonment of Yenan and the Defence of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region — Two Documents Issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (November 1946 and
April 1947)

The Concept of Operations for the Northwest War Theatre (April 15, 1947)

The Chiang Kai-Shek Government is Besieged by the Whole People (May 30, 1947)

Strategy for the Second Year of the War of Liberation (September 1, 1947)

Manifesto of the Chinese Peoples Liberation Army
(October 1947)

On the Reissue of the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for Attention — Instruction of the general Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (October 10,
1947)

The Present Situation and Our Tasks (December
25, 1947)

On Setting Up a System of Reports (January7,
1948)

On Some Important Problems of the Party's Present Policy (January 18, 1948)

The Democratic Movement in the Army 
 (January 30, 1948)

Different Tactics for Carrying Out the land Law in Different Areas (February 3, 1948)

Correct the "Left" Errors in Land Reform Propaganda
(February 11, 1948)

Essential Points in Land Reform in the New Liberated Areas (February 15, 1948)

On the Policy Concerning Industry and Commerce 
 (February 27, 1948)

On the Question of the National Bourgeoisie and the Enlightened Gentry (March 1, 1948)

On the Great Victory in the Northwest and on the New Type of Ideological Education Movement in the Liberation Army  (March
7, 1948)

A Circular on the Situation (March
20, 1948)

Speech at a Conference of Cadres in the Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area  (April 1, 1948)

A Talk to the Editorial Staff of the Shansi-Suiyuan Daily (April 2, 1948)

Telegram to the Headquarters of the Loyang Front After the Recapture of the City (April 8, 1948)

Tactical Problems of Rural Work in the New Liberated Areas (May 24, 1948)

The Work of Land Reform and of party Consolidation in 1948 (May 25, 1948)

The Concept of Operations for the Liaoshi-Shenyang Campaign (September and October 1948)

On Strengthening the Party Committee System 
 (September 20, 1948)

On the September Meeting — Circular of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (October 10, 1948)

The Concept of Operations for the Huai-hai Campaign
(October 11, 1948)

Revolutionary Forces of the World Unite, Fight Against Imperialist Aggression!  (November 1948)

The Momentous Change in China's Military Situation
(November 14, 1948)

The Concept of Operations for the Peiping-Tientsin Campaign (December 11, 1948)

Message Urging Tu Yu-ming and Others to Surrender
(December 17, 1948)

Carry the Revolution Through to the End 
 (December 30, 1948)

On the War Criminal's Suing for Peace 
 (January 5, 1949)

Statement on the Present Situation by Mao Tse-tung, Chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China 
(January 14, 1949)

Comment by the Spokesman for the Communist Party of China on the Resolution of the Nanking Executive Yuan (January
21, 1949)

On Ordering the Reactionary Kuomintang Government to Re-Arrest Yasuji Okamura, Former Commander-in-Chief of the Japanese Forces of Aggrssion in China, and to Arrest the Kuomintang Civil War Criminals — Statement by the Spokesman for the Communist Party of China (January
28, 1949)

Peace Terms Must Include the Punishment of Japanese War Criminals and Kuomintang War Criminals — Statement by the Spokesman for the Communist Party of China (February 5, 1949)

Turn the Army into a Working Force (February
8, 1949)

Why do the Badly Split Reactionaries Still Idly Clamour for "Total Peace"? (February 15, 1949)

The Kuomintang reactionaries Turn from an "Appeal for Peace" to an Appeal for War (February
16, 1949)

On the Kuomintang's Different Answers to the Question of Responsibility for the War (February 18, 1949)

Report to the Second Plenary Session of the Seventh Central Committee of the ommunist Party of China (March
5, 1949)

Methods of Work Committtees (March
13, 1949)

Whither the Nanking Govenment? (April
4, 1949)

Order to the Army for the Country-Wide Advance
(April 21, 1949)

Proclamation of the Chinese People's Liberation Army
(April 25, 1949)

On the Outrages by British Warships — Statement by the Spokesman of the general Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (April 30, 1949)

Address to the Prepatory Meeting of the New Political Consultive Conference (June 15, 1949)

On the People's Democratic Dictatorship (June
30, 1949)

Cast Away Illusions, Prepare for Struggle (August
14, 1949)

Farewell, Leighton Stuart! (August
18, 1949)

Why it is Necessary to Discuss the White Paper
(August 28, 1949)

"Friendship" or Aggression? (August
30, 1949)

The Bankruptcy of the Idealist Conception of History
(September 16, 1949)

 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org
 

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung





==========

## The Situation and Our Policy After the Victory in the War of Resistance against Japan







THE SITUATION AND OUR POLICY AFTER THE VICTORY IN THE WAR OF RESISTANCE
  AGAINST JAPAN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE SITUATION AND OUR POLICY AFTER THE VICTORY IN THE WAR OF RESISTANCE AGAINST
  JAPAN

August 13, 1945

[This speech was delivered by Comrade Mao Tse-tung at a meeting of cadres
in Yenan. Based on the Marxist-Leninist method of class analysis, it presented
a penetrating study of the fundamental political situation in China after
victory in the War of Resistance Against Japan and set forth the revolutionary
tactics of the proletariat. As Comrade Mao Tse-tung had pointed out in his
opening address at the Seventh National Congress of the Communist Party of
China in April 1945, China after defeating Japanese imperialism still faced
two destinies, two futures -- either to become a new China or to remain the
old China. The big landlords and big bourgeoisie of China, represented by
Chiang Kai-shek, wanted to wrest the fruits of victory in the War of Resistance
from the hands of the people and to keep China a semi-colonial and semi-feudal
country under their dictatorship. The Communist Party of China, representing
the interests of the proletariat and the masses of the people, on the one
hand strove for peace and opposed civil war with all its strength. On the
other hand, it had to prepare fully against Chiang Kai-shek's
counter-revolutionary plot of launching a country-wide civil war and had
to adopt the correct policy, that is to say, to harbour no illusions about
imperialism and reaction, to have no fear of their threats, to resolutely
safeguard the fruits of the people's struggle and strive to build a new China
-- a new-democratic China of the broad masses of the people under the leadership
of the proletariat. The decisive struggle between the two destinies, the
two futures facing China, constituted the content of the historical period
from the conclusion of the War of Resistance Against Japan to the founding
of the People's Republic of China, the historical period of the Chinese People's
War of Liberation or Third Revolutionary Civil War. After the War of Resistance,
Chiang Kai-shek, supported by U.S. imperialism, tore up peace agreements
again and again and launched a gigantic counter-revolutionary civil war without
parallel in history in an attempt to wipe out the people's forces. Because
of the correct leadership of the Communist Party of China it took the Chinese
people only four years of struggle to win a great country-wide victory --
the overthrow of Chiang Kai-shek and the creation of a new China.]

  

These are days of tremendous change in the situation in the Far East. The
surrender of Japanese imperialism is now a foregone conclusion. The decisive
factor for Japan's surrender is the entry of the Soviet Union into the war.
A million Red Army troops are entering China's Northeast; this force is
irresistible. Japanese imperialism can no longer continue the
fight.[1] The Chinese people's hard and bitter
War of Resistance is crowned with victory. As a historical stage, the War
of Resistance Against Japan is now over. 

In these circumstances, what are the relations among the different classes
in China and what are the relations between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party at present? What will they be like in the future? What is the policy
of our Party? These are questions of great concern to the people of the whole
country and to all members of our Party. 

What about the Kuomintang? Look at its past, and you can tell its present;
look at its past and present, and you can tell its future. In the past, this
party carried on a counter-revolutionary civil war for ten whole years. During
the War of Resistance it launched three large-scale anti-Communist campaigns,
[2] in 1940, 1941 and 1943, each time attempting
to develop the attack into a country-wide civil war. It was only because
of the correct policy adopted by our Party and the opposition of the people
of the whole country that its attempts failed. As everyone knows, Chiang
Kai-shek, the political representative of China's big landlords and big
bourgeoisie, is a most brutal and treacherous fellow. His policy has been
to look on with folded arms, wait for victory, conserve his forces and prepare
for civil war. Indeed, the victory he has been waiting for has arrived, and
now this "generalissimo" is about to "come down from the
mountain".[3] In the past eight years we have changed
places with Chiang Kai-shek -- formerly we were on the mountain and he was
by the water;[4] during the War of Resistance we
were behind the enemy lines and he went up the mountain. Now he is coming
down from the mountain, coming down to seize the fruits of victory.

During the past eight years the people and army of our Liberated Areas, receiving
no aid whatsoever from outside and relying solely on their own efforts, liberated
vast territories and resisted and pinned down the bulk of the Japanese invading
forces and practically all the puppet troops. Only by our determined resistance
and heroic struggle were the 200 million people in the Great Rear Area
[5] saved from being trampled underfoot by the
Japanese aggressors and the regions inhabited by these 200 million people
saved from Japanese occupation. Chiang Kai-shek hid on Mount Omei with guards
in front of him -- the guards were the Liberated Areas, the people and army
of the Liberated Areas. In defending the 200 million people of the Great
Rear Area, we protected this "generalissimo" as well and gave him both the
time and the space to sit around waiting for victory with folded arms. Time
-- eight years one month. Space -- an area inhabited by 200 million people.
These conditions we provided for him. But for us, he could not have stood
by looking on. Is the "generalissimo" grateful to us, then? No, not he! This
fellow has never known what it is to be grateful. How did Chiang Kai-shek
climb to power? By the Northern Expedition, [6]
by the first period of co-operation between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party, [7] by the support given him by the people,
who had not yet seen through him. Once in power, Chiang Kai-shek, far from
being grateful to the people, knocked them down and plunged them into the
bloodbath of ten years of civil war. You comrades are familiar with this
segment of history. During the present War of Resistance the Chinese people
again defended him. This war is now ending in victory and Japan is on the
point of surrender, but he is not at all grateful to the people. On the contrary,
thumbing through the records of 1927, he wants to act in the same old
way.[8] He says there has never been any "civil
war" in China, only "bandit suppression". Whatever he likes to call it, the
fact is he wants to start a civil war against the people, he wants to slaughter
the people.

Until a civil war breaks out all over the country, many of the people and
many of our Party comrades will not have a very clear understanding of this
question. Since civil war is not yet here on a large scale, since it is not
yet widespread or out in the open and since the battles are not yet numerous,
many people think, "Well, there may not be a civil war after all!" Many others
are afraid of civil war. Their fear is not without reason. There were ten
years of fighting and then another eight years of the War of Resistance;
if the fighting keeps on, where will it all end? It is quite natural that
such fears should arise. With regard to Chiang Kai-shek's plot to launch
a civil war, our Party's policy has been clear and consistent, that is,
resolutely to oppose civil war, be against civil war and prevent civil war.
In the days to come, we shall continue, with the utmost effort and greatest
patience, to lead the people in preventing civil war. Nevertheless, it is
necessary to be soberly aware that the danger of civil war is extremely serious
because Chiang Kai-shek's policy is already set. Chiang Kai-shek's policy
is civil war. Our policy, the policy of the people, is against civil war.
The opponents of civil war consist only of the Chinese Communist Party and
the Chinese people -- it is a pity that they do not include Chiang Kai-shek
and the Kuomintang. Here one side does not want to fight and the other does.
If both did not want it, there would be no fighting. Now, since only one
side is against it and this side is not yet strong enough to check the other,
the danger of civil war is extremely grave.

Our Party pointed out in good time that Chiang Kai-shek would stick to his
reactionary policy of dictatorship and civil war. Before, during and after
the Seventh Party Congress, [9] we did fairly adequate
work to call the people's attention to the danger of civil war, so that the
whole people, our Party members and our troops should be mentally prepared
well in advance. This is a very important point, and it makes a world of
difference whether or not there is such preparedness. In 1927 our Party was
still in its infancy and was mentally wholly unprepared for Chiang Kai-shek's
counter-revolutionary surprise attack. Consequently the fruits of victory
won by the people were soon lost, the people had to undergo long suffering,
and a bright China was plunged into darkness. This time things are different,
our Party has acquired the rich experience of three revolutions
[10] and a much higher degree of political maturity.
Time and again, the Central Committee of the Party has clearly explained
the danger of civil war, and so the whole people, all Party members and the
troops led by our Party are in a state of preparedness.

Chiang Kai-shek always tries to wrest every ounce of power and every ounce
of gain from the people. And we? Our policy is to give him tit for tat and
to fight for every inch of land. We act after his fashion. He always tries
to impose war on the people, one sword in his left hand and another in his
right. We take up swords, too, following his example. We found this method
only after investigation and study. Such investigation and study are very
important. When we see the other fellow holding something in his hands, we
should do some investigating. What does he hold in his hands? Swords. What
are swords for? For killing. Whom does he want to kill with his swords? The
people. Having made these findings, investigate further -- the Chinese people,
too, have hands and can take up swords, they can forge a sword if there is
none handy. The Chinese people have discovered this truth after long
investigation and study. Warlords, landlords, local bullies and bad gentry
and the imperialists all have swords in their hands and are out to kill.
The people have come to understand this and so act after the same fashion.
Some of us often neglect such investigation and study. Chen Tu-hsiu,
[11] for example, did not understand that with
swords one can kill people. Some say, this is a plain everyday truth; how
can a leader of the Communist Party fail to know it? But you never can tell.
Chen Tu-hsiu made no investigation and study and so did not understand this,
hence we called him an opportunist. He who makes no investigation and study
has no right to speak, and accordingly we deprived Chen Tu-hsiu of that right.
We have adopted a course different from Chen Tu-hsiu's and enabled the people
suffering from oppression and slaughter to take up swords. If ever again
anybody wants to kill us, we will act after his fashion. Not long ago, the
Kuomintang sent six divisions to attack our Kuanchung sub-region, and three
of them drove in and seized an area measuring 20 by 100 li. We acted
after their fashion and wholly, thoroughly and completely wiped out the
Kuomintang troops in this area of 20 by 100
li.[12] Our policy is to give tit for
tat and fight for every inch of land; we will never let the Kuomintang easily
seize our land and kill our people. Of course, to fight for every inch of
land does not mean following the old "Left" line of "not abandoning a single
inch of land in the base area".[13] This time
we abandoned an area of 20 by 100 li. Abandoned late in July, it
was retaken early in August. After the Southern Anhwei Incident of 1941,
[14] the Kuomintang liaison staff officer once asked
me what we intended to do. I answered, "You are here in Yenan all the time
and you don't know? If Ho goes for us, we'll go for him. If Ho stops, we'll
stop too."[15] At that time Chiang Kai-shek was
not named, only Ho Ying-chin. Today we say, "If Chiang goes for us, we'll
go for him. If Chiang stops, we'll stop too." We will act after his fashion.
As Chiang Kai-shek is now sharpening his swords, we must sharpen ours too.

The rights the people have won must never be lightly given up but must be
defended by fighting. We don't want civil war. However, if Chiang Kai-shek
insists on forcing civil war on the Chinese people, the only thing we can
do is to take up arms and fight him in self-defence to protect the lives
and property, the rights and well-being of the people of the Liberated Areas.
This will be a civil war he forces on us. If we do not win, we will blame
neither heaven nor earth but only ourselves. However, let no one think that
the people can be easily robbed or defrauded of the rights they have won;
that is impossible. Last year an American correspondent asked me, "Who has
given you the power to act?" I replied, "The people." Who else indeed, if
not the people? The ruling Kuomintang hasn't given us any power. It doesn't
recognize us. We take part in the People's Political Council in the capacity
of a "cultural organization" [16] as stipulated
by its rules. But we are not a "cultural organization", we say, we have an
army and are a "military organization". On March 1 this year Chiang Kai-shek
stated that the Communist Party would have to turn over its army before it
could acquire legal status. Chiang Kai-shek's statement still stands. We
have not turned over our army, and so we have no legal status and are "defying
laws human and divine". Our duty is to hold ourselves responsible to the
people. Every word, every act and every policy must conform to the people's
interests, and if mistakes occur, they must be corrected -- that is what
being responsible to the people means. Comrades! The people want liberation
and therefore entrust power to those who can represent them and work faithfully
for them, that is, to us Communists. As representatives of the people, we
must represent them well and not act like Chen Tu-hsiu. Confronted by
counter-revolutionary attacks against the people, Chen Tu-hsiu did not adopt
the policy of giving tit for tat and fighting for every inch of land; as
a result, in 1927, within the space of a few months, he forfeited all the
rights the people had won. This time we must be on our guard. Our policy
is absolutely different from Chen Tu-hsiu's; no trickery can fool us. We
must be clearheaded and have a correct policy; we must not make mistakes.

To whom should the fruits of victory in the War of Resistance belong? It
is very obvious. Take a peach tree for example. When the tree yields peaches
they are the fruits of victory. Who is entitled to pick the peaches? Ask
who planted and watered the tree. Chiang Kai-shek squatting on the mountain
did not carry a single bucket of water, and yet he is now stretching out
his arm from afar to pick the peaches. "I, Chiang Kai-shek, own these peaches,"
he says, "I am the landlord, you are my serfs and I won't allow you to pick
any." We have refuted him in the press. [17] We
say, "You never carried any water, so you have no right to pick the peaches.
We the people of the Liberated Areas watered the tree day in day out and
have the most right to gather the fruit." Comrades! The victory of the War
of Resistance has been won by the people with bloodshed and sacrifice, it
should be the victory of the people and it is to the people that the fruits
of the War of Resistance should go. As for Chiang Kai-shek, he was passive
in resisting Japan but active in anti-communism. He was a stumbling-block
in the people's War of Resistance. Now this stumbling-block is coming forward
to monopolize the fruits of victory, wants China after victory to relapse
into her old pre-war state and does not tolerate the slightest change. This
gives rise to struggle. Comrades! It is a most serious struggle.

That the fruits of victory of the War of Resistance should go to the people
is one thing, but who will eventually get them and whether it will be the
people is another. Don't be too sure that all the fruits of victory will
fall into the hands of the people. Chiang Kai-shek will grab a lot of big
peaches, such as Shanghai, Nanking, Hangchow and other big cities. He has
ganged up with U.S. imperialism and in those places they have the upper hand,
while so far the revolutionary people can by and large occupy only the rural
areas. Another bunch of peaches will be contested by both sides. These are
the medium and small towns situated along the section of the Tatung-Puchow
Railway north of Taiyuan, the middle section of the Peiping-Suiyuan Railway,
the Peiping-Liaoning Railway, the section of the Peiping-Hankow Railway north
of Chengchow, the Chengting-Taiyuan Railway, the Paikuei-Chincheng Railway,
[18] the Tehchow-Shihchiachuang Railway, the
Tientsin-Pukow Railway, the Tsingtao-Tsinan Railway and the section of the
Lunghai Railway east of Chengchow. These medium and small towns must be
contested; they are the medium and small peaches watered by the people of
the Liberated Areas with their sweat and blood. It is difficult to say now
whether these places will fall into the people's hands. Only two words can
be said now: struggle hard. Are there places which are sure to fall into
the hands of the people? Yes, there are. They are the vast rural areas and
the numerous towns in the provinces of Hopei, Chahar and Jehol,
[19] most of Shansi, Shantung and the northern
part of Kiangsu, with villages linked together and with about a hundred towns
in one area, seventy to eighty in another, forty to fifty in a third --
altogether three, four, five or six such areas, big and small. What sort
of towns? Medium and small towns. We are sure of them, we have the strength
to pick these fruits of victory. In the history of the Chinese revolution
this will be the first time that we have got such a bunch of fruit. Historically,
it was only after we smashed the enemy's third "encirclement and suppression"
campaign [20] in the latter half of 1931 that
we had altogether as many as twenty-one county towns
[21] in the Central Base Area in Kiangsi Province,
but there was not a single medium-sized town among them. With twenty-one
small towns linked together, the total population at its height reached
2,500,000. Relying on this base, the Chinese people were able to continue
the struggle for such a long time, win such big victories and smash such
big "encirclement and suppression" campaigns. Later we were defeated, for
which we should blame, not Chiang Kai-shek, but ourselves for not fighting
well enough. This time, if scores of big and small towns are linked in a
single contiguous area and if there are three, four, five or six such areas,
then the Chinese people will have three, four, five or six revolutionary
bases, each larger than the Central Base Area in Kiangsi Province, and the
situation for the Chinese revolution will be very promising indeed.

If one looks at the situation as a whole, the stage of the War of Resistance
Against Japan is over and the new situation and task is domestic struggle.
Chiang Kai-shek talks about "building the country". From now on the struggle
will be, build what sort of country? To build a new-democratic country of
the broad masses of the people under the leadership of the proletariat? Or
to build a semi-colonial and semi-feudal country under the dictatorship of
the big landlords and the big bourgeoisie? This will be a most complicated
struggle. At present it takes the form of a struggle between Chiang Kai-shek
who is trying to usurp the fruits of victory of the War of Resistance and
ourselves who oppose his usurpation. If there is any opportunism during this
period, it will lie in failing to struggle hard and in making a voluntary
gift to Chiang Kai-shek of the fruits which should go to the people.

Will an open and total civil war break out? That depends on internal and
international factors. The internal factors consist chiefly of our strength
and the degree of our political consciousness. Given the general trend of
the international and internal situation and the feelings of the people,
is it possible, through our own struggles, to localize the civil war or delay
the outbreak of a country-wide civil war? There is this possibility.

Chiang Kai-shek will face many difficulties if he tries to let loose a civil
war. First, in the Liberated Areas there are a hundred million people, a
million troops and over two million people's militia. Second, the politically
conscious people in the Kuomintang areas are against civil war, and this
is some kind of check on Chiang Kai-shek. Third, inside the Kuomintang also
there is a section which is not in favour of civil war. The situation today
is vastly different from that in 1927. In particular, the condition of our
Party today is vastly different from what it was in 1927. In those days our
Party was still in its infancy and did not have a clear head or experience
in armed struggle or the policy of giving tit for tat. Today the level of
political consciousness in our Party is very much higher.

Apart from our own political consciousness, the political consciousness of
the vanguard of the proletariat, there is the question of the political
consciousness of the masses of the people. When the people are not yet
politically conscious, it is entirely possible that their revolutionary gains
may be handed over to others. This happened in the past. Today the level
of political consciousness of the Chinese people is likewise very much higher.
The prestige of our Party among the people has never been so great. Nevertheless,
among the people, and chiefly among those living in the Japanese-occupied
and Kuomintang areas, there are still a good many who believe in Chiang Kai-shek
and have illusions about the Kuomintang and the United States of America,
illusions which Chiang Kai-shek is working hard to spread. The fact that
a section of the Chinese people is not yet politically conscious shows that
much remains to be done in our propaganda and organizational work. The political
awakening of the people is not easy. It requires much earnest effort on our
part to rid their minds of wrong ideas. We should sweep backward ideas from
the minds of the Chinese people, just as we sweep our rooms. Dust never vanishes
of itself without sweeping. We must carry on extensive propaganda and education
among the masses, so they will understand the real situation and trend in
China and have confidence in their own strength.

It is up to us to organize the people. As for the reactionaries in China,
it is up to us to organize the people to overthrow them. Everything reactionary
is the same; if you don't hit it, it won't fall. It is like sweeping the
floor; where the broom does not reach, the dust never vanishes of itself.
There is a river called the Chieh-tse, south of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region. South of the river is Lochuan County and north of it, Fuhsien
County. North and south of the river are two different worlds. The south
is under the Kuomintang; since we have not reached there, the people are
unorganized, and there is much filth and rottenness. Some of our comrades
put their faith only in political influence, fancying that problems can be
solved merely by influence. That is blind faith. In 1936, we were in Pao-an.
[22] Forty to fifty li away, there was
a fortified village held by a landlord despot. The Central Committee of the
Party was then in Pao-an and our political influence could be considered
very great indeed, but the counter-revolutionaries in this village obstinately
refused to surrender. We swept to the south, we swept to the north, all in
vain. Not until our broom swept right into the village did the landlord cry
out, "Ow, I give up!" [23] That is how things
are in this world. Bells don't ring till you strike them. Tables don't move
till you shift them. Japan would not surrender until after the Red Army of
the Soviet Union entered northeastern China. The enemy and puppet troops
never handed over their arms until our troops fought them. Only where the
broom reaches can political influence produce its full effect. Our broom
is the Communist Party, the Eighth Route Army and the New Fourth Army. Broom
in hand, you must learn to sweep; don't lie in bed, fancying that a gust
of wind will somehow rise and blow all the dust away. We Marxists are
revolutionary realists and never indulge in idle dreams. There is an old
saying in China, "Rise at dawn and sweep the courtyard."
[24] Dawn is the breaking of a new day. Our
forefathers told us to rise and start sweeping at the very break of day.
They were setting us a task. Only by thinking and acting in this way will
we benefit and find work to do. China has a vast territory, and it is up
to us to sweep it clean inch by inch.

On what basis should our policy rest? It should rest on our own strength,
and that means regeneration through one's own efforts. We are not alone;
all the countries and people in the world opposed to imperialism are our
friends. Nevertheless, we stress regeneration through our own efforts. Relying
on the forces we ourselves organize, we can defeat all Chinese and foreign
reactionaries. Chiang Kai-shek, on the contrary, relies entirely on the aid
of U.S. imperialism, which he looks upon as his mainstay. The trinity of
dictatorship, civil war and selling out the country has always been the basis
of his policy. U.S. imperialism wants to help Chiang Kai-shek wage civil
war and turn China into a U.S. dependency, and this policy, too, was set
long ago. But U.S. imperialism while outwardly strong is inwardly weak. We
must be clear-headed, that is, we must not believe the "nice words" of the
imperialists nor be intimidated by their bluster. An American once said to
me, "You should listen to Hurley and send a few men to be officials in the
Kuomintang government."[25] I replied: "It is
no easy job to be an official bound hand and foot; we won't do it. If we
become officials, our hands and feet must be unfettered, we must be free
to act, that is, a coalition government must be set up on a democratic basis."
He said, "It will be bad if you don't." I asked him, "Why bad?" He said,
"First, the Americans will curse you; secondly, the Americans will back Chiang
Kai-shek." I replied: "If you Americans, sated with bread and sleep, want
to curse people and back Chiang Kai-shek, that's your business and I won't
interfere. What we have now is millet plus rifles, what you have is bread
plus cannon. If you like to back Chiang Kai-shek, back him, back him as long
as you want. But remember one thing. To whom does China belong? China definitely
does not belong to Chiang Kai-shek, China belongs to the Chinese people.
The day will surely come when you will find it impossible to back him any
longer." Comrades! This American was trying to scare people. Imperialists
are masters at this sort of stuff, and many people in the colonial countries
do get scared. The imperialists think that all people in the colonial countries
can be scared, but they do not realize that in China there are people who
are not afraid of that sort of stuff. In the past we have openly criticized
and exposed the U.S. policy of aiding Chiang Kai-shek to fight the Communists;
it was necessary, and we shall continue to do so.

The Soviet Union has sent its troops, the Red Army has come to help the Chinese
people drive out the aggressor; such an event has never happened before in
Chinese history. Its influence is immeasurable. The propaganda organs of
the United States and Chiang Kai-shek hoped to sweep away the Red Army's
political influence with two atom bombs.[26] But
it can't be swept away; that isn't so easy. Can atom bombs decide wars? No,
they can't. Atom bombs could not make Japan surrender. Without the struggles
waged by the people, atom bombs by themselves would be of no avail. If atom
bombs could decide the war, then why was it necessary to ask the Soviet Union
to send its troops? Why didn't Japan surrender when the two atom bombs were
dropped on her and why did she surrender as soon as the Soviet Union sent
troops? Some of our comrades, too, believe that the atom bomb is all-powerful;
that is a big mistake. These comrades show even less judgement than a British
peer. There is a certain British peer called Lord Mountbatten. He said the
worst possible mistake is to think that the atom bomb can decide the
war.[27] These comrades are more backward than
Mountbatten. What influence has made these comrades look upon the atom bomb
as something miraculous? Bourgeois influence. Where does it come from? From
their education in bourgeois schools, from the bourgeois press and news agencies.
There are two world outlooks and two methodologies, the proletarian world
outlook and methodology and the bourgeois world outlook and methodology.
These comrades often cling to the bourgeois world outlook and methodology
and often forget the proletarian world outlook and methodology. The theory
that "weapons decide everything", the purely military viewpoint, a bureaucratic
style of work divorced from the masses, individualist thinking, and the like
-- all these are bourgeois influences in our ranks. We must constantly sweep
these bourgeois things out of our ranks just as we sweep out dust.

The entry of the Soviet Union into the war has decided Japan's surrender
and the situation in China is entering a new period. Between the War of
Resistance and the new period there is a transitional stage. The struggle
during this transitional stage is to oppose Chiang Kai-shek's usurpation
of the fruits of victory in the War of Resistance. Chiang Kai-shek wants
to launch a country-wide civil war and his policy is set; we must be prepared
for this. No matter when this country-wide civil war breaks out, we must
be well prepared. If it comes early, say, tomorrow morning, we should also
be prepared. That is point one. In the present international and domestic
situation it is possible that for a time the civil war may be kept restricted
in scale and localized. That is point two. Point one is what we should prepare
for, point two is what has existed for a long time. In short, we must be
prepared. Being prepared, we shall be able to deal properly with all kinds
of complicated situations.

NOTES 

1. On August 8, 1945, the Soviet government declared war
on Japan. On August 10 the Mongolian government declared war on Japan. The
Soviet Red Army moved by land and sea into China's Northeast and into Korea
and swiftly routed the Japanese Kwantung Army. The joint Soviet-Mongolian
armies crossed the Inner Mongolian desert and entered Jehol and Chahar Provinces.
On August 10 the Japanese government was compelled to send a note begging
to surrender and on the 14th it formally announced its unconditional surrender.
The Kwantung Army was the cream of the main force of the Japanese army and
constituted Japan's general strategic reserve. The Japanese imperialists
had dreamed of relying on this force to carry on a long-drawn-out war from
their favourable strategic position in China's Northeast and in Korea. This
scheme was completely wrecked by the entry of the Soviet Union into the war,
and the Japanese government had to admit defeat and surrender.

2. For details, see "A Comment on the Eleventh Plenary
Session of the Kuomintang's Central Executive Committee and the Second Session
of the Third People's Political Council", Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung,
Vol. III.

3. "Mountain" here refers to Mount Omei in Szechuan Province
and more generally to the mountainous areas in southwestern and northwestern
China. After Wuhan was occupied by the Japanese army in 1938, Chiang Kai-shek
and the main force under his command took refuge in these mountainous areas
and sat there watching the bitter struggle against the Japanese aggressors
which was being waged behind the enemy lines by the army and people of the
Liberated Areas.

4. Prior to the War of Resistance Against Japan, most of
the revolutionary base areas led by the Communist Party of China were in
mountainous regions. At that time Chiang Kai-shek's rule was centred in the
large cities along the big rivers and the coast. Accordingly, Comrade Mao
Tse-tung said "we were on the mountain and he was by the water".

5. During the War of Resistance the front lines were in
northern, eastern, central and southern China. People usually referred to
the Kuomintang areas in southwestern and northwestern China which were not
occupied by the Japanese invaders as the Great Rear Area.

6. The Northern Expedition was the punitive war against
the Northern warlords launched by the revolutionary army which marched north
from Kwangtung Province in May-July 1926. The Northern Expeditionary Army,
with the Communist Party of China taking part in its leadership and under
the Party's influence (the political work in the army was at that time mostly
under the charge of Communist Party members), gained the warm support of
the broad masses of workers and peasants. In the second half of 1926 and
the first half of 1927 it occupied most of the provinces along the Yangtse
and Yellow Rivers and defeated the Northern warlords. In April 1927 this
revolutionary war failed as a result of betrayal by the reactionary clique
under Chiang Kai-shek within the army.

7. In 1924, with the help of the Communist Party of China,
Sun Yat-sen reorganized the Kuomintang and effected co-operation between
the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. The Revolutionary War of 1924-27
was launched on the basis of this cooperation. This first co-operation between
the Kuomintang and the Communist Party was wrecked as a result of betrayals
by Chiang Kai-shek and Wang Ching-wei in 1927.

8. This refers to Chiang Kai-shek's betrayal of the revolution
in 1927. After betraying the revolution, Chiang Kai-shek massacred great
numbers of Communists workers, peasants and revolutionary intellectuals and
unleashed a counter-revolutionary war against the revolutionary masses.

9. This Congress was held in Yenan in April 1945. It was
there that Comrade Mao Tse-tung delivered the political report "On Coalition
Government" (see Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. III).

10. The first revolution was the anti-imperialist, anti-feudal
revolutionary struggle waged from 1924 to 1927 by the Chinese people under
the leadership of the Communist Party of China; the Northern Expedition was
the main content of this revolution. The second revolution was the revolutionary
struggle from 1927 to 1937 to create and develop Red political power. The
third revolution was the War of Resistance Against Japan from 1937 to 1945.

11. Chen Tu-hsiu was originally a professor at Peking
University and became famous as an editor of New Youth. He was one
of the founders of the Communist Party of China. Owing to his reputation
at the time of the May 4th Movement and owing to the Party's immaturity in
its initial period, he became General Secretary of the Party. In the last
period of the revolution of 1924-27, the Rightist thinking in the Party
represented by Chen Tu-hsiu developed into a line of capitulationism. In
"The Present Situation and Our Tasks", Comrade Mao Tse-tung said that the
capitulationists at that time "voluntarily gave up the Party's leadership
of the peasant masses, urban petty bourgeoisie and middle bourgeoisie, and
in particular gave up the Party's leadership of the armed forces, thus causing
the defeat of the revolution" (p. 171 of this volume). After the defeat in
1927 Chen Tu-hsiu and a handful of other capitulationists lost faith in the
future of the revolution and became liquidationists. They took the reactionary
Trotskyist stand and together with the Trotskyites formed a small anti-Party
group. Consequently Chen Tu-hsiu was expelled from the Party in November
1929. He died in 1942. With reference to Chen Tu-hsiu's Right opportunism,
see the introductory notes to "Analysis of the Classes in Chinese Society"
and to "Report on the Investigation into the Peasant Movement in Hunan",
Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. I, and "Introducing The
Communist", Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. II.

12. On July 21, 1945, the Provisional 59th Division and
2nd Cavalry Division under Hu Tsung-nan, Commander of the Kuomintang's 1st
War Zone, suddenly attacked Yehtai Mountain in Chunhua County in the Kuanchung
sub-region of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region. On July 23 Hu Tsung-nan
sent his 3rd Reserve Division to join in the attack. On July 27 our forces
withdrew on their own initiative from Yehtai Mountain and forty-one villages
west of it. The Kuomintang forces continued their attacks on Hsunyi, Yaohsien
and other points. On August 8 our forces struck back at the invading Kuomintang
troops and recovered the Yehtai mountain area.

13. This slogan was raised by the "Left" opportunists
during the period from October 1933 to October 1934 when the Red Army of
the Central Base Area was repulsing the Kuomintang's fifth encirclement campaign.
The slogan was diametrically opposed to the strategy formulated by Comrade
Mao Tse-tung, which was to lure the enemy deep into our territory, concentrate
a superior force and select the enemy's weak points in order to wipe him
out in mobile warfare.

14. In January 1941, as demanded by Chiang Kai-shek, the
Headquarters of the New Fourth Army led by the Communist Party of China and
the units under the direct command of this headquarters moved north from
southern Anhwei Province to cross the Yangtse River. While on the march they
were encircled and ambushed by Chiang Kai-shek's troops and lost more than
9,000, killed, wounded and captured. Chiang Kai-shek announced the cancellation
of the designation of the New Fourth Army and ordered attacks against its
other units. The event was called the Southern Anhwei Incident.

15. During the War of Resistance the Kuomintang kept a
staff officer in Yenan for liaison. "Ho" refers to Ho Ying-chin, Chief of
the Kuomintang General Staff. On October 19 and December 8,1940, Chiang Kai-shek
sent two telegrams in the names of Ho Ying-chin and Pai Chung-hsi, Deputy
Chief of the Kuomintang General Staff, outrageously slandering the Eighth
Route Army and the New Fourth Army, which were fighting stubbornly behind
the Japanese lines, and arbitrarily ordering the people's anti-Japanese armed
forces operating south of the Yellow River to withdraw north of the river
within a definite time-limit. The Kuomintang reactionaries then launched
a sudden attack on units of the New Fourth Army which were moving north and
thus created the Southern Anhwei Incident. At that time the Communist Party
of China pointed to Ho Ying-chin as the representative of the Kuomintang
reactionaries who had launched the large-scale anti-Communist campaign, but
actually Chiang Kai-shek was meant.

16. The "People's Political Council" was an advisory body
set up by the Kuomintang government after the start of the War of Resistance.
Its members were all "selected" by the Kuomintang government; the majority
belonged to the Kuomintang, and only a very few belonged to the Communist
Party of China and other political parties. Moreover, the Kuomintang government
did not recognize the equal and legal status of the parties which were opposed
to Japanese aggression, nor did it allow their members to sit in the "People's
Political Council" as representatives of their parties. One of the stipulations
of the "Organic Rules of the People's Political Council" promulgated by the
Kuomintang government was that those persons might become members of the
Council "who have served in important cultural or economic organizations
for three years or more and enjoy prestige, or those who devote themselves
to affairs of state and have long enjoyed prestige". It was on the basis
of this stipulation that the Kuomintang "selected" some counselors from the
Communist Party of China.

17. This refers to the commentary, "Chiang Kai-shek Is
Provoking Civil War", written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Hsinhua News
Agency, pp. 27-31 of this volume.

18. An unfinished railway line in southeastern Shansi
Province, between Paikuei in Chihsien County and Chincheng.

19. The province of Chahar was abolished in 1952.
The province of Jehol was abolished in 1955. The territories originally
under their jurisdiction were transferred to Hopei, Shansi and Liaoning Provinces
and the Inner Mongolian Autonomous Region.

20. From July to September 1931 Chiang Kai-shek personally
held the post of commander-in-chief and moved 300,000 reactionary troops
in an encirclement campaign against the Kiangsi Red Base Area. The Red Army
smashed this encirclement campaign and won a great victory. For details,
see "Strategic Problems of the Chinese Revolutionary War", Chapter 5, Section
5, Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. I.

21. The twenty-one county towns here referred to were
Juichin, Huichang, Hsunwu, Anyuan, Hsinfeng, Yutu, Hsingkuo, Ningtu, Kuangchang,
Shihcheng and Lichuan in Kiangsi Province, and Chienning, Taining, Ninghua,
Chingliu, Kueihua, Lungyen, Changting, Liencheng, Shanghang and Yungting
in Fukien Province.

22. Pao-an was a county in the northwestern part of Shensi
Province. It is now called Chihtan County. The Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China had its headquarters there from early July 1936 to January
1937. Later it moved to Yenan.

23. The fortified village referred to was Tanpachai in
the southwest of Pao-an County. There were over two hundred households in
the village, which occupied a highly strategic position. Tsao Chun-chang,
a landlord despot who headed a reactionary local armed band of over a hundred
men, had long entrenched himself in this village. The Chinese Red Army repeatedly
besieged the village but failed to capture it. In August 1936 the Red Army,
while surrounding Tanpachai with the local armed forces, proceeded to win
over the basic masses in the village and disintegrate the enemy from within.
In December of the same year the bandit Tsao fled with a handful of his men,
and Tanpachai was liberated.

24. From Maxims for the Good Household, written
by Chu Po-lu in the 17th century.

25. The American referred to was Colonel David D. Barrett,
head of the U.S. Army Observer Group in Yenan. With the consent of the Communist
Party of China, this group was sent to Yenan in 1944 by the U.S. forces fighting
against Japan. Patrick J. Hurley, a reactionary politician of the Republican
Party, came to China in September 1944 as the personal representative of
the U.S. president and at the end of the year became U.S. ambassador to China.
See "The Foolish Old Man Who Removed the Mountains", Note 1, Selected
Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. III.

26. The United States dropped an atom bomb on Hiroshima
on August 6, 1945, and another on Nagasaki on August 9. The propaganda organs
of the United States and of the Kuomintang made much of the event, alleging
that the Japanese government had surrendered because it was afraid of the
U.S. atom bombs. By such propaganda they hoped to belittle the decisive role
played by the entry of the Soviet Union into the war in compelling Japan
to surrender.

27. Mountbatten, then Supreme Commander of Allied Forces
in Southeast Asia, made a statement on August 9, 1945, welcoming the entry
of the Soviet Union into the war against Japan. He also said that the worst
possible mistake would be to believe that the atom bomb could end the war
in the Far East.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Chiang Kai-Shek is Provoking Civil War 








CHIANG KAI-SHEK IS PROVOKING CIVIL WAR



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  CHIANG KAI-SHEK IS PROVOKING CIVIL WAR


August 13, 1945 

[This was a commentary written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Hsinhua News
Agency.]
  

A spokesman for the Propaganda Department of the Kuomintang Central Executive
Committee has made a statement describing as "a presumptuous and illegal
act" the order [1] setting a time-limit for the
surrender of the enemy and the puppets, [2] which
was issued by Chu Teh, Commander-in-Chief of the Eighteenth Group Army, on
August 10 from the General Headquarters in Yenan. This comment is absolutely
preposterous. Its logical implication is that it was wrong of Chu Teh to
act in accordance with the Potsdam Declaration
[3] and with the enemy's declared intention of
surrendering and to order his troops to effect the surrender of the enemy
and the puppets, and that on the contrary it would have been right and legitimate
to advise the enemy and puppets to refuse to surrender. No wonder that even
before the enemy's actual surrender, Chiang Kai-shek, China's fascist ringleader,
autocrat and traitor to the people, had the audacity to "order" the anti-Japanese
armed forces in the Liberated Areas to "stay where they are, pending further
orders", that is, to tie their own hands and let the enemy attack them. No
wonder this selfsame fascist ringleader dared to "order" the so-called
underground forces (who are, in fact, puppet troops "saving the nation by
a devious path" [4] and Tai Li's
[5] secret police collaborating with the Japanese
and puppets) as well as other puppet troops to "be responsible for maintaining
local order", while forbidding the anti-Japanese armed forces in the Liberated
Areas to "take presumptuous action on their own" against enemy and puppet
forces. This transposition of the enemy and the Chinese is in truth a confession
by Chiang Kai-shek; it gives a vivid picture of his whole psychology, which
is one of consistent collusion with the enemy and puppets and of liquidation
of all those not of his ilk. However, the people's anti-Japanese armed forces
in China's Liberated Areas will never be taken in by this venomous scheme.
They know that Commander-in-Chief Chu Teh's order is precisely the resolute
fulfilment of the provision in paragraph 2 of the Potsdam Declaration, "prosecute
the war against Japan until she ceases to resist". On the other hand, Chiang
Kai-shek's so-called "orders" are precisely violations of the Potsdam Declaration
which he himself signed. One has only to make the comparison to see at once
who is not "adhering faithfully to the provisions of the common agreements
of the Allies".

Both the comment by the spokesman for the Propaganda Department of the Kuomintang
Central Executive Committee and Chiang Kai-shek's "orders" are from beginning
to end provocations to civil war; at this moment, when attention at home
and abroad is focussed on Japan's unconditional surrender, their aim is to
find a pretext for switching to civil war as soon as the War of Resistance
ends. In reality, the Kuomintang reactionaries are pitifully stupid. They
have sought their pretext in Commander-in-Chief Chu Teh's order for the surrender
and disarming of the enemy and puppet troops. Can this be considered a clever
pretext? No. That they seek a pretext in this way proves only that the Kuomintang
reactionaries are fonder of the enemy and puppets than of their fellow-countrymen
and that they hate their fellow-countrymen more than they do the enemy and
puppets. The Chunhua Incident [6] was plainly an
invasion of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region by Hu Tsung-nan's troops
to provoke civil war, and yet the Kuomintang reactionaries said it was a
"rumour offensive" by the Communist Party of China. The Kuomintang reactionaries
found their long-sought-for pretext in the Chunhua Incident, but Chinese
and foreign public opinion saw through it at once. So now they are saying
that the Eighth Route Army and the New Fourth Army should not demand that
the enemy and puppet troops surrender their guns. In the eight years of the
War of Resistance, the Eighth Route Army and the New Fourth Army have suffered
enough from the attacks and encirclements of both Chiang Kai-shek and the
Japanese. And now, with the War of Resistance coming to an end, Chiang Kai-shek
is hinting to the Japanese (and to his beloved puppet troops) that they should
not surrender their guns to the Eighth Route Army and the New Fourth Army
but "only to me, Chiang Kai-shek". One thing, however, Chiang Kai-shek has
left unsaid, ". . . so that I can use these guns to kill the Communists and
wreck the peace of China and the world." Isn't this the truth? What will
be the result of telling the Japanese to hand over their guns to Chiang Kai-shek
and telling the puppet troops to "be responsible for maintaining local order"?
The result can only be that a merger of the Nanking and Chungking regimes
[7] and co-operation between Chiang Kai-shek and
the puppets will take the place of "Sino-Japanese collaboration" and of
co-operation between the Japanese and the puppets, and that Chiang Kai-shek's
"anti-communism and national reconstruction" will take the place of the
"anti-communism and national reconstruction" of the Japanese and Wang Ching-wei.
[8] Isn't this a violation of the Potsdam Declaration?
Can there be any doubt that the grave danger of civil war will confront the
people of the whole country the moment the War of Resistance is over? We
now appeal to all our fellow-countrymen and to the Allied countries to take
action, together with the people of the Liberated Areas, resolutely to prevent
a civil war in China, which would endanger world peace.

After all, who has the right to accept the surrender of the Japanese and
puppets? Relying solely on their own efforts and the support of the people,
the anti-Japanese armed forces in China's Liberated Areas, to whom the Kuomintang
government refused all supplies and recognition, have succeeded by themselves
in liberating vast territories and more than 100 million people and have
resisted and pinned down 56 per cent of the invading enemy troops in China
and 95 per cent of the puppet troops. If not for these armed forces, the
situation in China would never have been what it is today! To speak plainly,
in China only the anti-Japanese armed forces of the Liberated Areas have
the right to accept the surrender of the enemy and puppet troops. As for
Chiang Kai-shek, his policy has been to look on with folded arms and sit
around and wait for victory; indeed he has no right at all to accept the
surrender of the enemy and the puppets.

We declare to all our fellow-countrymen and to the people of the whole world:
The Supreme Command in Chungking cannot represent the Chinese people and
those Chinese armed forces which have really fought Japan; the Chinese people
demand the right of the anti-Japanese armed forces of China's Liberated Areas
under Commander-in-Chief Chu Teh to send their representatives directly in
order to participate in the acceptance of Japan's surrender and in the military
control over Japan by the four Allied Powers and also to participate in the
future peace conference. If this is not done, the Chinese people will deem
it most improper. 


NOTES


1.On August 10, 1945, Commander-in-Chief Chu Teh issued
an order from the General Headquarters in Yenan to all armed forces in the
Liberated Areas concerning the surrender of the Japanese invaders. The order
reads as follows:

  Japan has announced her unconditional surrender, and the Allies will meet
  to discuss measures for accepting the surrender on the basis of the Potsdam
  Declaration. I hereby issue the following order to all our armed forces in
  the Liberated Areas:

  (1) In accordance with the provisions of the Potsdam Declaration, any
  anti-Japanese armed forces in the Liberated Areas may serve notice on enemy
  troops and headquarters in cities and towns or along communication lines
  in the vicinity, requiring them to hand over all their arms to our fighting
  forces within a given time; when they have handed over their arms, our forces
  will protect their lives in accordance with our regulations on the lenient
  treatment of prisoners of war.

  (2) Any anti-Japanese armed forces in the Liberated Areas may serve notice
  on all the puppet troops and puppet government organs in the vicinity, requiring
  them to come over with their troops to our side before the signing of the
  surrender by the Japanese invaders and to wait for reorganization and
  disbandment; those who fail to comply within the time allowed shall hand
  over all their arms.

  (3) All anti-Japanese armed forces in the Liberated Areas should resolutely
  wipe out all those enemy and puppet armed forces which refuse to surrender
  and hand over their arms.

  (4) Our armed forces have full authority to send their units to take over
  and occupy any city, town or communication line held by the enemy and the
  puppets, to set up military control, to maintain order and to appoint
  commissioners to take charge of all administrative matters there; in case
  of any act of sabotage or resistance, the culprits shall be punished as traitors.


Then, on August 11 the General Headquarters in Yenan issued six successive
orders, under which the armed forces of the Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area
(led by Comrade Ho Lung), the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Liberated Area (led by
Comrade Nieh Jung-chen) and the Hopei-Jehol-Liaoning Liberated Area were
to march on Inner Mongolia and the Northeast, the armed forces of the Shansi
Liberated Area were to mop up the Japanese and puppet troops along the
Tatung-Puchow Railway and in the Fenho River valley; and the armed forces
of all the Liberated Areas were to launch vigorous offensives on all the
main communication lines under enemy control to compel the Japanese and puppet
troops to surrender. The units of the People's Liberation Army in all the
Liberated Areas resolutely carried out these orders and won important victories.

2. Here "enemy" refers to the Japanese invading forces,
and "puppets" refers to the puppet governments set up by the Japanese invaders
and to the troops of these puppet governments, consisting largely of former
Kuomintang officials and of troops who had surrendered to Japan.

3. This refers to the declaration made by China, Britain
and the United States at the Potsdam conference on July 26, 1945, requiring
Japan to surrender. The main points of the declaration were that Japanese
militarism must be eliminated for good and all, Japan's military forces must
be completely disarmed; Japan's war industries must be dismantled; Japanese
war criminals must be tried; the Cairo Declaration must be carried out, that
is, Japan must renounce the territories she had stolen, such as Korea and
China's Manchuria, Taiwan and the Penghu Islands, and Japan's territory must
be limited to the islands of Honshu, Hokkaido, Kyushu, Shikoku and various
minor islands; and that the armed forces of the Allies were to occupy Japan
until the establishment of a democratic Japanese government. The Soviet Union
also signed the Potsdam Declaration after it declared war on Japan on August
8,1945.

4. This refers to the dastardly practice of capitulating
to Japan and fighting communism followed by the Kuomintang reactionaries
during the War of Resistance Against Japan. The Kuomintang reactionaries
directed part of their troops and government officials to surrender to the
Japanese invaders and then, as puppet troops and officials, to join the Japanese
troops in attacking the Liberated Areas, this was what they cunningly named
"saving the nation by a devious path".

5. Tai Li was the Director of the Bureau of Investigation
and Statistics of the Military Council of the Kuomintang, one of the Kuomintang's
huge secret service agencies.

6. The invasion by Kuomintang troops of Chunhua, Hsunyi
and Yaohsien in the Kuanchung sub-region of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border
Region in July 1945. See "The Situation and Our Policy After the Victory
in the War of Resistance Against Japan", Note 12, p. 24 of this volume.

7. Wang Ching-wei's puppet regime was in Nanking and Chiang
Kai-shek's regime was in Chungking. The "merger of the Nanking and Chungking
regimes" was a political plot hatched by Japanese imperialism and the
pro-Japanese elements within the Kuomintang.

8. Wang Ching-wei was a notorious Kuomintang leader and
pro-Japanese traitor. He openly surrendered to the Japanese invaders in December
1938 when he was vice-chairman of the Kuomintang and chairman of its People's
Political Council. In March 1940 he became president of the puppet central
government then formed in Nanking. He died in Japan in November 1944. 
 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Two Telegrams from the Commander-in-Chief of the Eighteenth Group to Chiang Kai-Shek







TWO TELEGRAMS  THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OFTHE EIGHTEENTH GROUP TO
  CHIANG KAI-SHEK



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  TWO TELEGRAMS  THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF THE EIGHTEENTH GROUP TO CHIANG
  KAI-SHEK


August 1945

[These telegrams were written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Commander-in-Chief
of the Eighteenth Group Army. At that time, when the Japanese aggressors
had announced their surrender but had not yet actually surrendered, the Chiang
Kai-shek government, with the armed assistance of U.S. imperialism, monopolized
the right to accept the Japanese surrender and was actively preparing a
counterrevolutionary civil war by sending large forces to advance on the
Liberated Areas on the pretext of accepting the Japanese surrender. Comrade
Mao Tse-tung's purpose in writing the first telegram was to unmask the
counter-revolutionary face of Chiang Kai-shek and teach the whole people
to be on guard against his civil war plot. The second telegram further exposed
the plot of the Chiang Kai-shek clique for preparing civil war and put forward
the six-point proposal of the Communist Party of China for preventing civil
war. For the same purpose, Comrade Mao Tse-tung wrote for the Hsinhua News
Agency two commentaries, "Chiang Kai-shek Is Provoking Civil War" and "On
a Statement by Chiang Kai-shek's Spokesman", which are included in this volume.
Owing to the firm, determined stand of the Communist Party of China in refusing
to be cowed by Chiang Kai-shek's reactionary bluster, both the Liberated
Areas and the Liberation Army expanded quickly; and, under strong political
pressure from the forces at home and abroad opposed to civil war in China,
Chiang Kai-shek had to change his tactics, assume a posture of peace and
invite Comrade Mao Tse-tung to Chungking for peace negotiations.] 
  

I. TELEGRAM OF AUGUST 13 


We have received through the Chungking radio two Central News Agency dispatches,
one carrying the order you sent us and the other your order to the officers
and men in various war zones. Your order to us reads, "All units of the
Eighteenth Group Army should stay where they are, pending further orders."
In addition, it talks about such things as forbidding us to take over the
enemy's arms. Your order to the officers and men in various war zones was
reported as follows in the Central News Agency dispatch from Chungking, dated
August 11: "The Supreme Command today sent telegrams to the officers
and men in various war zones, ordering them to step up the war effort and
in accordance with existing military plans and orders actively to push forward
without the slightest relaxation." We hold that these two orders contradict
each other. According to the first, our units should "stay where they are,
pending further orders" and should no longer attack or fight. Why do you
tell us not to fight at this moment when the Japanese aggressors have not
yet actually surrendered, when every hour and every minute they are killing
Chinese people and fighting Chinese troops as well as Soviet, U.S. and British
troops, and when, in their turn, the Soviet, U.S. and British troops are
fighting the Japanese aggressors every hour and every minute? As to the second
order, we consider it very good. "Step up the war effort and actively push
forward without the slightest relaxation" -- that's more like it! But what
a pity you have given this order only to your own troops, and not to us,
and that you have given us something quite different. Chu Teh issued an order
on August 10 to all anti-Japanese armed forces in China's Liberated Areas
[1] precisely to the effect that they should "step
up the war effort". His order said further that while stepping up their war
effort they must order the Japanese aggressors to surrender to them and must
take over the arms and other equipment of the enemy and puppet troops. Isn't
this very good? Undoubtedly it is very good; undoubtedly it is in the interest
of the Chinese nation. But to "stay where they are, pending further orders"
is definitely not in the national interest. We hold that you have given a
wrong order, an order so wrong that we have to inform you we firmly reject
it. For your order to us is not only unjust but also runs counter to China's
national interest and benefits only the Japanese aggressors and the traitors
to the motherland.

II. TELEGRAM OF AUGUST 16


At a time when our common enemy, the Japanese government, has accepted the
terms of the Potsdam Declaration and already announced its surrender but
has not yet actually surrendered, I hereby address to you the following statement
and demands on behalf of all the anti-Japanese armed forces and all the 260
million people in China's Liberated Areas and Japanese-occupied areas.

With the War of Resistance Against Japan coming to a victorious close, I
call your attention to this fact in the China war theatre today, namely,
that in the vast occupied areas abandoned by you and seized by the enemy
and puppets we have, against your will, by our eight years of bitter fighting
recaptured nearly 1,000,000 square kilometres of territory; liberated over
100,000,000 people; organized over 1,000,000 regular troops and over 2,200,000
people's militia; established nineteen large Liberated Areas in the nineteen
provinces of Liaoning, Jehol, Chahar, Suiyuan, Hopei, Shansi, Shensi, Kansu,
Ningsia, Honan, Shantung, Kiangsu, Anhwei, Hupeh, Hunan, Kiangsi, Chekiang,
Fukien and Kwangtung; [2] and encircled most of
the cities and towns, vital communication lines and sections of the sea coast
seized by the enemy and puppets since the July 7th Incident of 1937,
[3] except in a few areas. In addition, in China's
Japanese-occupied areas (with a population of 160 million) we have organized
extensive underground forces to strike at the enemy and puppets. In the fighting
we are continuing to resist and encircle 69 per cent of the Japanese troops
invading China (not counting those in the Northeast) and 95 per cent of the
puppet troops. Your government and armed forces, on the contrary, have all
along followed a policy of looking on with folded arms, sitting around and
waiting for victory, conserving your forces and preparing for civil war,
and have not only refused recognition and supplies to our Liberated Areas
and armies but encircled and attacked us with a huge force of 940,000 men.
Although all the troops and civilians in China's Liberated Areas have suffered
enough from being attacked by the enemy and puppet forces on the one side
and by your troops on the other, we have never in the least weakened in our
determination to persevere in the War of Resistance, in unity and in democracy.
The people of China's Liberated Areas and the Communist Party of China have
proposed many times to you and your government that a conference of all parties
be convened and that a democratic coalition government of the whole country
be formed in order to stop internal strife, mobilize and unite the people's
anti-Japanese forces throughout China, lead the War of Resistance to victory
and ensure peace after the war. But our proposals have invariably been rejected
by you and your government. We are extremely dissatisfied with all this.

The enemy country will soon sign its surrender, but you and your government
have continued to ignore our opinions, issued a most outrageous order to
me on August 11 and ordered your troops to press against the Liberated Areas
on a large scale under the pretext of disarming the enemy; the danger of
civil war is therefore more serious than ever. All of which compels us to
make the following demands on you and your government: 

1. I demand that you consult with us, so that we may reach common views before
you, your government and your Supreme Command accept the surrender of the
Japanese and the puppets and conclude any post-surrender agreements or treaties.
For you and your government have aroused the dissatisfaction of the people
and cannot represent the broad masses or any of the people's anti-Japanese
armed forces in China's Liberated Areas and Japanese-occupied areas. We reserve
our right to speak out, if the agreements or treaties include, without our
prior consent, anything that concerns the people's anti-Japanese armed forces
in China's Liberated Areas and Japanese-occupied areas.

2. All the people's anti-Japanese armed forces in China's Liberated Areas
and Japanese-occupied areas have the right, in accordance with the Potsdam
Declaration and the measures laid down by the Allies for accepting the enemy
surrender, [4] to accept the surrender of the Japanese
and puppet troops encircled by us, take over their arms and matériel
and assume the responsibility for carrying out all stipulations laid down
by the Allies after Japan's surrender has been accepted. On August 10 I ordered
the armed forces of China's Liberated Areas to make all efforts to attack
the enemy troops and be prepared to accept their surrender. On August 15,
I ordered the enemy commander-in-chief, Yasuji Okamura, to surrender with
his troops, [5] this order, however, applies only
to the sphere of operations armed forces of the Liberated Areas, and not
to any other. I consider my orders very reasonable and very much in the common
interest of China and the Allies.

3. The broad masses and all the anti-Japanese armed forces in China's Liberated
Areas and Japanese-occupied areas have the right to send their representatives
to participate in the Allies' acceptance of the enemy surrender and in the
work of dealing with the enemy country after its surrender.

4. China's Liberated Areas and all the anti-Japanese armed forces have the
right to select their own delegation to participate in the future peace
conference concerned with Japan and any United Nations meetings.

5. I ask you to prevent civil war. The way to do this is for the armed forces
of the Liberated Areas to accept the surrender of the enemy and puppet troops
they have encircled, while your armed forces accept the surrender of the
enemy and puppet troops you have encircled. Not only is this the established
practice in all wars, it is particularly imperative in order to avert civil
war. If you act otherwise, it will lead to adverse consequences. I am now
giving you a serious warning on this matter and I ask you not to treat this
warning casually.

6. I ask you immediately to abolish the one-party dictatorship, call a conference
of all parties to set up a democratic coalition government, dismiss corrupt
officials and all reactionaries from their posts, punish the traitors, abolish
the secret services, recognize the legal status of the various parties (the
Communist Party of China and all democratic parties have up to now been regarded
as illegal by you and your government), annul all reactionary laws and decrees
that suppress the liberties of the people, recognize the popularly elected
governments and the anti-Japanese armed forces of China's Liberated Areas,
withdraw the troops encircling the Liberated Areas, release political prisoners
and carry out economic and other democratic reforms.

Apart from this, I sent you a telegram on August 13 in reply to your order
to me of August 11, and presumably you have received it. I now declare again,
your order was completely wrong. On August 11 you ordered my troops to "stay
where they are, pending further orders" and not to attack the enemy any more.
However, not only was it true on August 11, but it is equally true even today
(August 16) that the Japanese government has surrendered only in words, and
not in deeds; no instrument of surrender has been signed, no actual surrender
has taken place. My view is completely in accord with that of the Allies,
Britain, the United States and the Soviet Union. On August 11, the very day
you issued your order to me, the British Army Command on the Burma front
announced that the war with Japan was still in progress. Nimitz,
[6] the commander of the U.S. forces, declared
that not only did a state of war continue but the war with all its devastating
consequences must be carried on. The Far Eastern Command of the Red Army
of the Soviet Union announced, "The enemy must be ruthlessly smashed." On
August 15, Colonel-General Antonov, Chief of the General Staff of the Red
Army, made the following statement: 

  The message concerning Japan's surrender issued by the Japanese Emperor on
  August 14 is only a general declaration concerning unconditional surrender.
  The order to the armed forces to cease hostilities has not yet been issued
  and the Japanese troops are continuing their resistance. Hence there is still
  no actual surrender by the armed forces of Japan. The surrender of the armed
  forces of Japan can be considered to have taken place only from the moment
  the Japanese Emperor orders his armed forces to discontinue hostilities and
  lay down their arms and when this order is carried out in practice. In view
  of the above, the armed forces of the Soviet Union in the Far East will continue
  their offensive operations against Japan.


It can be seen that you alone, of all the high commanders of the Allied forces,
have given an absolutely wrong order. I consider that your error stems from
your self-seeking and is of an extremely serious nature; that is to say,
your order serves the interest of the enemy. Therefore, taking my stand on
the common interest of China and the Allies, I shall firmly and completely
oppose your order so long as you do not openly admit your error and countermand
this wrong order. At present I am still ordering the armed units under my
command to make determined attacks on the enemy, in co-ordination with armed
forces of the Soviet Union, the United States and Britain, the enemy actually
stops hostilities and surrenders his arms and all the territory of the motherland
has been fully recovered. I declare to you, I am a patriotic soldier, I cannot
act otherwise.

With regard to the above I request your early reply.


NOTES


1. See "Chiang Kai-shek Is Provoking Civil War", Note 1,
p. 30 of this volume.

2. The nineteen Liberated Areas were: Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia,
Shansi-Suiyuan, Shansi-Chahar-Hopei, Hopei-Jehol-Liaoning, Shansi-Hopei-Honan,
Hopei-Shantung-Honan, Shantung, Northern Kiangsu, Central Kiangsu, Southern
Kiangsu, Huai River North, Huai River South, Central Anhwei, Chekiang, Kwangtung,
Chiungyai (Hainan Island), Hunan-Hupeh-Kiangsi, Hupeh-Honan-Anhwei and Honan.

3. On July 7, 1937, Japanese invading forces attacked the
Chinese garrison at Lukouchiao, ten kilometres southwest of Peking. Under
the influence of the ardent anti-Japanese movement of the whole people, the
Chinese troops there put up resistance. This incident marked the beginning
of the Chinese people's heroic War of Resistance Against Japan which lasted
for eight years.

4. On August 10,1945, the Japanese government notified
the Soviet Union, China, the United States and Britain of its desire to
surrender. On August 11 the governments of the four countries replied that
"all the Japanese military, naval and air authorities" and "all the forces
under their control wherever located" must "cease active operations" and
"surrender their arms".

5. Yasuji Okamura was then commander-in-chief of the Japanese
invading forces China. The order from Commander-in-Chief Chu Teh to Yasuji
Okamura reads as follows:

  (1) The Japanese government has formally accepted the terms of the Potsdam
  Declaration and announced its surrender.


  (2) You are to order all the troops under your command to cease all military
  operations; all of them, except those encircled by the troops of the Kuomintang
  government, must surrender to us upon orders from the Eighth Route Army,
  New Fourth Army and Southern China Anti-Japanese Column of China's Liberated
  Areas.


  (3) With regard to the surrender of the Japanese troops in northern China,
  you are to order General Sadamu Shimomura to appoint a representative to
  go to the Eighth Route Army's Fuping area to receive orders from General
  Nieh Jung-chen; with regard to the surrender of the Japanese troops in eastern
  China, you yourself are to appoint a representative to go to the Tienchang
  area, where the Headquarters of the New Fourth Army is located, to receive
  orders from General Chen Yi; with regard to the surrender of the Japanese
  troops in Hupeh and Honan Provinces, you are to order your representative
  in Wuhan to go to the Tapieh mountain area of the 5th Division of the New
  Fourth Army to receive orders from General Li Hsien-nien; with regard to
  the surrender of the Japanese troops in Kwangtung, you are to instruct your
  representative in Canton to go to the Tungkuan area of the Southern China
  Anti-Japanese Column to receive orders from General Tseng Sheng.


  (4) All the Japanese troops in northern, eastern, central and southern China
  (except those encircled by the Kuomintang troops) must keep all arms and
  matériel intact, pending our army's acceptance of their surrender,
  and must not take orders except from the Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth
  Army or the Southern China Anti-Japanese Column.


  (5) All the aircraft and vessels in northern and eastern China are to stay
  where they are, but the vessels anchored along the Chinese coast of the Yellow
  Sea and the Pohai Gulf should be assembled at Lienyunkang, Tsingtao, Weihaiwei
  and Tientsin.


  (6) There must be no destruction of any matériel or installations.


  (7) You and the commanders of the Japanese army in northern, eastern, central
  and southern China will be held completely responsible for the execution
  of this order.


6. Chester W. Nimitz was then Commander-in-Chief of the
U.S. Pacific War Theatre. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On a Statement by Chiang Kai-Shek's Spokesman







ON A STATEMENT BY CHIANG KAI-SHEK'S SPOKESMAN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON A STATEMENT BY CHIANG KAI-SHEK'S SPOKESMAN


August 16, 1945

[This commentary was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Hsinhua News
Agency.] 
  

A spokesman for Chiang Kai-shek, commenting on the alleged violation by the
Communist Party of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's order to Commander-in-Chief
Chu Teh, said at a press conference in Chungking on the afternoon of August
15, "The orders of the generalissimo must be obeyed" and "Those who violate
them are enemies of the people." A Hsinhua News Agency correspondent states:
This is an open signal by Chiang Kai-shek for all-out civil war. On August
11, at the critical moment when the Japanese invaders were being finally
wiped out, Chiang Kai-shek issued an order of national betrayal forbidding
the Eighth Route Army, the New Fourth Army and all the other armed forces
of the people to fight the Japanese and the puppet troops. Of course, this
order cannot and should not be accepted. Soon afterwards, Chiang Kai-shek
through his spokesman proclaimed the armed forces of the Chinese people to
be "enemies of the people". This shows that Chiang Kai-shek has declared
civil war against the Chinese people. Chiang Kai-shek's plotting of civil
war did not of course begin with his order of August 11; it has been his
consistent plan throughout the eight years of the War of Resistance. During
those eight years, Chiang Kai-shek launched three large-scale anti-Communist
campaigns, in 1940, 1941 and 1943,
[1] each time attempting to develop the
attack into a country-wide civil war, and only the opposition of the Chinese
people and of public figures in the Allied countries prevented its occurrence,
much to Chiang's regret. Thus he was forced to postpone the country-wide
civil war until the end of the War of Resistance Against Japan, and so came
the order of August and the statement of August 15. For the purpose of unleashing
civil war, Chiang Kai-shek had already invented many terms, such as "alien
party", "traitor party", "traitor army", "rebel army", "traitor areas", "bandit
areas", "disobedience to military and government orders", "feudal separatism",
"undermining the War of Resistance" and "endangering the state"; and he had
alleged that, since in the past there had been only "suppression of Communists"
in China and not "civil war", there would be no "civil war" in the future
either, and so on and so forth. The slight difference this time is the addition
of a new term, "enemy of the people". But people will perceive that this
is a foolish invention. For whenever the term, "enemy of the people", is
used in China, everyone knows who is meant. There is a person in China who
betrayed Sun Yat-sen's Three People's Principles
[2] and the Great Revolution of 1927. He plunged
the Chinese people into the bloodbath of ten years of civil war and thereby
invited aggression by Japanese imperialism. Then, scared out of his wits,
he took to his heels and led a flock of people in a flight all the way from
Heilungkiang to Kweichow Province. He became an onlooker and sat around,
waiting with folded arms for victory to come. Now that victory has come,
he tells the people's armies to "stay further orders" and tells the enemy
and the traitors to "maintain order" so that he can swagger back to Nanking.
One need only mention these facts for the Chinese people to know that this
person is Chiang Kai-shek. After all he has done, can there be any dispute
as to whether Chiang Kai-shek is an enemy of the people? Dispute there is.
The people say "Yes". The enemy of the people says "No". And that is the
only dispute. Among the people it is becoming less and less a matter of dispute.
The problem now is that this enemy of the people wants to start a civil war.
What are the people to do? The Hsinhua News Agency correspondent says: The
policy of the Communist Party of China in regard to Chiang Kai-shek's launching
a civil war is clear and consistent, namely, to oppose it. As far back as
the time when Japanese imperialism began to invade China, the Communist Party
of China demanded an end to civil war and unity against foreign aggression.
In 1936-37 the Party made tremendous efforts, forced Chiang Kai-shek to accept
its proposal and so carried out the War of Resistance Against Japan. During
the eight years of resistance, the Communist Party of China never once relaxed
its efforts to alert the people to check the danger of civil war. Since last
year, the Communist Party has time and again called the people's attention
to the huge plot being hatched by Chiang Kai-shek to unleash a country-wide
civil war as soon as the War of Resistance ended. The Communist Party, like
the rest of the Chinese people in the world concerned for peace in China,
holds that a new civil war would be a calamity. But the Communist Party maintains
that civil war can still be prevented and must be prevented. It is in order
to prevent civil war that the Communist Party has advocated the formation
of a coalition government. Now Chiang Kai-shek has rejected this proposal,
and so civil war is touch-and-go. But there is definitely a way of checking
this move of Chiang Kai-shek's. The people's democratic forces must strive
to expand resolutely and rapidly; the people must liberate the big cities
under enemy occupation and disarm the enemy and puppet troops; and if an
autocrat and traitor to the people dares to attack them, the people must
act in self-defence and resolutely strike back to frustrate the designs of
the instigator of civil war. That is the way, the only way. The Hsinhua News
Agency correspondent calls on the whole nation and the whole world to repudiate
the utterly hypocritical and shameless lie which asserts that, on the contrary,
civil war in China can be averted if Chiang Kai-shek forbids the Chinese
people to liberate the enemy-occupied big cities, forbids them to disarm
enemy and puppet forces and forbids them to establish democracy, if he himself
goes to these big cities to "inherit" (not to smash) enemy and puppet regimes.
This is a lie, the Hsinhua News Agency correspondent points out, and this
lie obviously runs counter to the national and democratic interests of the
Chinese people and also in the face of all the facts of modern Chinese history.
It must always be remembered that it was not because the big cities were
in the hands of the Communist Party rather than in his own hands that Chiang
Kai-shek waged the ten-year civil war from 1927 to 1937; on the contrary,
since 1927 none of the big cities has been in the hands of the Communist
Party but all have been in Chiang's hands or have been yielded by him to
the Japanese and the traitors, and this is the very reason why the civil
war lasted for ten years on a country-wide scale and has continued on a local
scale to this day. It must always be remembered that the ten-year civil war
was stopped and that the three large-scale anti-Communist campaigns and countless
other provocations during the War of Resistance were checked (up to and including
Chiang Kai-shek's recent invasion of the southern part of the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region
[3]) not because Chiang Kai-shek was
strong, but on the contrary because Chiang was relatively not strong enough,
while the Communist Party and the people were relatively strong. The ten-year
civil war was stopped, not by the appeals of public figures throughout the
country who desired peace and feared war (such as those of the former "League
for Banning Civil War"[4] and similar
bodies), but by the armed demand of the Communist Party of China and the
armed demands of the Northeastern Army under Chang Hsueh-liang and the
Northwestern Army under Yang Hu-cheng.
[5] The three large-scale anti-Communist
campaigns and countless other provocations were not beaten back by unlimited
concessions and submission by the Communist Party, they were beaten back
by the Communist Party's persistence in a just, stern attitude of self-defence
-- "We will not attack unless we are attacked; if we are attacked, we will
certainly counter-attack." [6] If the
Communist Party had been utterly powerless and spineless and had not fought
to the finish for the interests of the nation and the people, how could the
ten-year civil war have been ended? How could the War of Resistance Against
Japan have started? And even though started, how could it have been carried
on resolutely until victory today? How else could Chiang Kai-shek and his
ilk be alive now, issuing orders and making statements from a mountain retreat
so far from the front lines? The Communist Party of China is firmly opposed
to civil war. The Soviet Union, the United States and Britain declared in
the Crimea, "establish conditions of internal peace" and "form interim
governmental authorities broadly representative of all democratic elements
in the population and pledged to the earliest possible establishment through
free elections of governments responsive to the will of the
people".[7] That is exactly what the
Communist Party of China has persistently advocated -- the formation of a
"coalition government". The carrying out of this proposal can prevent civil
war. But there is one precondition -- strength. If people unite and increase
their strength, civil war can be prevented.

NOTES 


1. See "A Comment on the Eleventh Plenary Session of the
Kuomintang's Central Executive Committee and the Second Session of the Third
People's Political Council", Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol.
III. 

2. The Three People's Principles were the principles and
programmes put forward by Sun Yat-sen on the questions of nationalism, democracy
and people's livelihood in the bourgeois democratic revolution in China.
In 1924, in the Manifesto of the First National Congress of the Kuomintang,
a congress characterized by co-operation between the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party, Sun Yat-sen restated the Three People's Principles, interpreted
nationalism as opposition to imperialism and expressed active support for
the movements of the workers and peasants. The old Three People's Principles
thus developed into the new Three People's Principles with the Three Great
Policies, that is, alliance with the Soviet Union, alliance with the Communist
Party and assistance to the peasants and workers. The new Three People's
Principles provided the political basis for the co-operation between the
Communist Party of China and the Kuomintang during the First Revolutionary
Civil War period.

3. This refers to the attack in July 1945 by Kuomintang
troops on Chunhua, Hsunyi and Yaohsien in the Kuanchung sub-region of the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region. See "The Situation and Our Policy After
the Victory in the War of Resistance Against Japan", Note 12, p. 24 of this
volume.

4. The "League for Banning Civil War" was formed in Shanghai
in August 1932 with a mainly bourgeois membership. It issued a declaration
calling for "ending the civil war and uniting to resist foreign aggression".


5. In 1936 the Kuomintang's Northeastern Army headed by
Chang Hsueh-liang and the Kuomintang's Northwestern Army headed by Yang Hu-cheng
were stationed in and around Sian; they were charged with the task of attacking
the Chinese Red Army which had arrived in northern Shensi. Influenced by
the Chinese Red Army and the people's anti-Japanese movement, they agreed
to the Anti-Japanese National United Front put forward by the Communist Party
of China and demanded that Chiang Kai-shek unite with the Communist Party
to resist Japan. Chiang Kai-shek turned down the demand, became even more
active in his military preparations for the "suppression of the Communists"
and massacred the anti-Japanese youth of Sian. Chang Hsueh-liang and Yang
Hu-cheng took joint action and arrested Chiang Kai-shek. This was the famous
Sian Incident of December 12, 1936. Chiang Kai-shek was forced to accept
the terms of unity with the Communist Party and resistance to Japan and was
then set free to return to Nanking. 

6. See "Talk with the Correspondents of the Central News
Agency, the Sao Tang Pao and the Hsin Min Pao", Selected Works
of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. II. 

7. From the communiqué of the Crimea (Yalta) conference
of the Soviet Union, the United States of America and the United Kingdom,
February 11, 1945.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Peace Negotiations with the Kuomintang — Circular of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China








ON PEACE NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE KUOMINTANG -- CIRCULAR OF THE CENTRAL
  COMMITTEE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OFCHINA



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON PEACE NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE KUOMINTANG -- CIRCULAR OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE
  OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA


August 26, 1945

[This inner-Party circular was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China two days before he went to Chungking
for peace negotiations with Chiang Kai-shek. Because the Chinese Communist
Party and the broad masses of the Chinese people firmly opposed Chiang Kai-shek's
civil war plot and because U.S. imperialism still had to pay some heed to
world-wide democratic public opinion, which unanimously condemned his policy
of civil war and dictatorship, Chiang sent three telegrams to Comrade Mao
Tse-tung on August 14, 20 and 23, 1945, inviting him to Chungking for peace
negotiations, and for the same purpose Patrick J. Hurley, then U.S. ambassador
to China, came to Yenan on August 27. The Communist Party of China decided
to send Comrades Mao Tse-tung, Chou En-lai and Wang Jo-fei to Chungking for
peace negotiations with the Kuomintang in order to make every possible effort
for peace and also, in the process of struggling for peace, to show U.S.
imperialism and Chiang Kai-shek in their true colours and so help unite and
educate the masses of the people. This circular drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung
analysed developments in China during the fortnight after Japan announced
her surrender. It set forth the policy of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China on the peace negotiations, certain concessions the Party was
prepared to make in the negotiations and policies for coping with the two
possible outcomes of the negotiations. It contained directives concerning
the principles to be followed in the struggles in the Liberated Areas of
northern and eastern China and of central and southern China respectively.
And it warned the whole Party that it must absolutely not relax its vigilance
or its struggle against Chiang Kai-shek because negotiations were to take
place. Comrade Mao Tse-tung and his colleagues arrived in Chungking on August
28 and held negotiations with the Kuomintang for forty-three days. Although
the negotiations resulted only in the publication of the "Summary of
Conversations Between the Representatives of the Kuomintang and the Communist
Party of China" (also known as the "October 10th Agreement"), they were
nevertheless successful in that politically they enabled the Chinese Communist
Party to gain the initiative to a great extent and put the Kuomintang in
a passive position. Comrade Mao Tse-tung returned to Yenan on October 11.
Comrades Chou En-lai and Wang Jo-fei remained in Chungking to continue the
negotiations. For the results see "On the Chungking Negotiations", the next
article in this volume.] 
  

The speedy surrender of the Japanese invaders has changed the whole situation.
Chiang Kai-shek has monopolized the right to accept the surrender, and for
the time being (for a stage) the big cities and important lines of communication
will not be in our hands. Nevertheless, in northern China we should still
fight hard, fight with all our might to take all we can. In the past two
weeks our army has recovered fifty-nine cities of various sizes and vast
rural areas, and including those already in our hands we now control 175
cities, thus winning a great victory. In northern China, we have recovered
Weihaiwei, Yentai, Lungkou, Itu, Tsechuan, Yangliuching, Pikechi, Po-ai,
Changchiakou, Chining and Fengchen. The might of our army has shaken northern
China and, together with the sweeping advance of the Soviet and Mongolian
forces to the Great Wall, has created a favourable position for our Party.
In the coming period we should continue the offensive and do our best to
capture the Peiping-Suiyuan Railway, the northern section of the Tatung-Puchow
Railway and the Chengting-Taiyuan, Tehchow-Shihchiachuang, Paikuei-Chincheng
and Taokou-Chinghua Railways; and also to cut up the Peiping-Liaoning,
Peiping-Hankow, Tientsin-Pukow, Tsingtao-Tsinan, Lunghai and Shanghai-Nanking
Railways. We should gain control of whatever we can, even though temporarily.
At the same time, the necessary forces should be employed to take as many
villages, county and higher administrative centres and small towns as possible.
For example, a highly favourable situation has been created because the New
Fourth Army has occupied Nanking, Taihu Lake and the Tienmu Mountains and
between the Yangtse and the Huai Rivers, because our forces in Shantung have
occupied the whole of the Eastern Shantung Peninsula and because our forces
in the Shansi-Suiyuan Border Region have occupied many cities and towns north
and south of the Peiping-Suiynan Railway. After another period of offensive
operations, it will be possible for our Party to control most of the areas
north of the lower Yangtse River and the Huai River, most of Shantung, Hopei,
Shansi and Suiyuan Provinces, all of Jehol and Chahar Provinces and a part
of Liaoning Province. 


At present the Soviet Union, the United States and Britain all disapprove
of civil war in China; [1] at the same
time our Party has put forward the three great slogans of peace, democracy
and unity [2] and is sending Comrades
Mao Tse-tung, Chou En-lai and Wang Jo-fei to Chungking to discuss with Chiang
Kai-shek the great issues of unity and national reconstruction, thus it is
possible that the civil war plot of the Chinese reactionaries may be frustrated.
The Kuomintang has now strengthened its position by recovering Shanghai,
Nanking and other places, reopening sea communications, taking over the arms
of the enemy and incorporating the puppet troops into its own forces.
Nevertheless, it is riddled with a thousand gaping wounds, torn by innumerable
inner contradictions and beset with great difficulties. It is possible that
after the negotiations the Kuomintang, under domestic and foreign pressure,
may conditionally recognize our Party's status. Our Party too may conditionally
recognize the status of the Kuomintang. This would bring about a new stage
of cooperation between the two parties (plus the Democratic League,
[3] etc.) and of peaceful development.
In that event, our Party should strive to master all methods of legal struggle
and intensify in the Kuomintang areas in the three main spheres, the cities,
the villages and the army (all weak points in our work there). During the
negotiations, the Kuomintang is sure to demand that we drastically reduce
the size of the Liberated Areas, cut down the strength of the Liberation
Army and stop issuing currency. We on our side are prepared to make such
concessions as are necessary and as do not damage the fundamental interests
of the people. Without such concessions, we cannot explode the Kuomintang's
civil war plot, cannot gain the political initiative, cannot win the sympathy
of world public opinion and the middle-of-the-roaders within the country
and cannot obtain in exchange legal status for our Party and a state of peace.
But there are limits to such concessions; the principle is that they must
not damage the fundamental interests of the people. 


If the Kuomintang still wants to launch civil war after our Party has taken
the above steps, it will put itself in the wrong in the eyes of the whole
nation and the whole world, and our Party will be justified in waging a war
of self-defence to crush its attacks. Moreover, our Party is powerful, and
if anyone attacks us and if the conditions are favourable for battle, we
will certainly act in self-defence to wipe him out resolutely, thoroughly,
wholly and completely (we do not strike rashly, but when we do strike, we
must win). We must never be cowed by the bluster of reactionaries. But we
must at all times firmly adhere to, and never forget, these principles: unity,
struggle, unity through struggle; to wage struggles with good reason, with
advantage and with restraint; and to make use of contradictions, win over
the many, oppose the few and crush our enemies one by one.
[4]

In Kwangtung, Hunan, Hupeh, Honan and some other provinces our Party forces
are in a more difficult position than in northern China and the area between
the Yangtse and the Huai Rivers. The comrades in those places are much in
the thoughts of the Central Committee. But the Kuomintang has many weak spots
and its areas are vast; our comrades will be fully able to deal with the
situation, provided they make no big mistakes in military policy (movements
and operations) and in the policy of uniting with the people, and provided
they are modest and prudent, not conceited or rash. Besides receiving the
necessary directives from the Central Committee, the comrades in these areas
must use their own judgement to analyse the situation, solve their problems,
surmount difficulties, maintain themselves and expand their forces. When
the Kuomintang becomes unable to do anything with you, it may be compelled
in the negotiations between the two parties to give your forces recognition
and agree to arrangements advantageous to both sides. But you must definitely
not rely on the negotiations, must definitely not hope that the Kuomintang
will be kind-hearted, because it will never be kind-hearted. You must rely
on your own strength, on correct guidance of activities, on brotherly unity
within the Party and good relations with the people. Firmly rely on the people,
that is your way out. 


To sum up, our Party is confronted with many difficulties which must not
be ignored, and all Party comrades must be well prepared mentally. But the
general trend of the international and internal situation is favourable to
our Party and to the people. So long as the whole Party is united as one,
we shall be able to overcome all difficulties step by step. 


NOTES


1. Around the time of Japan's surrender, the Soviet Union,
the United States and Britain for a period all expressed disapproval of civil
war in China. Events soon demonstrated, however, that the U.S. statement
about its so-called disapproval of civil war in China was only a screen for
actively helping the reactionary Kuomintang government prepare for a
counter-revolutionary civil war.

2. The three great slogans of peace, democracy and unity
were put forward in the "Declaration on the Current Situation" by the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China on August 25, 1945. The declaration
pointed out that after the surrender of Japanese imperialism, "the important
task confronting the whole nation is to consolidate unity in the country,
safeguard domestic peace, bring about democracy and improve the people's
livelihood so as, on the basis of peace, democracy and unity, to achieve
national unification and build a new China, independent, free, prosperous
and powerful". 

3. The Democratic League was formed in 1941 under the name
of the China Federation of Democratic Political Groups. It was reorganized
under the name of the China Democratic League in 1944. 

4. See "Problems of Tactics in the Present Anti-Japanese
United Front" and "On Policy", Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol.
II. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Chungking Negotiations







ON THE CHUNGKING NEGOTIATIONS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON THE CHUNGKING NEGOTIATIONS


October 17, 1945

[This report was made by Comrade Mao Tse-tung to a meeting of cadres in Yenan
after his return from Chungking.] 
  

Let us talk about the present situation. That is what our comrades are interested
in. This time the negotiations between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party
at Chungking have lasted forty-three days. The results have already been
published in the newspapers.[1] The representatives
of the two parties are continuing to negotiate. The negotiations have borne
fruit. The Kuomintang has accepted the principles of peace and unity, recognized
certain democratic rights of the people and agreed that civil war should
be averted and that the two parties should co-operate in peace to build a
new China. On these points agreement has been reached. There are other points
on which there is no agreement. The question of the Liberated Areas has not
been solved, and that of the armed forces has not really been solved either.
The agreements reached are still only on paper. Words on paper are not equivalent
to reality. Facts have shown that a very great effort must still be made
before they can be turned into reality.

The Kuomintang is negotiating with us on the one hand, and is vigorously
attacking the Liberated Areas on the other hand. Not counting the forces
surrounding the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region, 800,000 Kuomintang troops
are already directly engaged in these attacks. Wherever there are Liberated
Areas, fighting is going on or being prepared. The very first article of
the "October 10th Agreement" is on "peace and national reconstruction"; don't
these words on paper contradict reality? Yes, they do. That is why we say
it still requires effort on our part to turn what is on paper into reality.
Why does the Kuomintang mobilize so many troops to attack us? Because long
ago it made up its mind to wipe out the people's forces, to wipe us out.
Best of all, it would like to wipe us out quickly or, failing that, to worsen
our situation and improve its own. Peace, though written into the agreement,
has not in fact been realized. In places like the Shangtang area in Shansi
Province there is fighting on a fairly large scale. The Shangtang area, rimmed
by the Taihang, Taiyueh and Chungtiao Mountains, is like a tub. This tub
contains fish and meat, and Yen Hsi-shan sent thirteen divisions to grab
it. Our policy also was set long ago -- to give tit for tat, to fight for
every inch of land. This time we gave tit for tat, fought and made a very
good job of it. In other words, we wiped out all thirteen divisions. Their
attacking forces had 38,000 men, and we employed 31,000 men. Of their 38,000
men, 35,000 were destroyed, 2,000 fled and 1,000
scattered.[2] Such fighting will continue. They
want desperately to grab our Liberated Areas. This seems hard to explain.
Why are they so anxious to grab? Isn't it good for the Liberated Areas to
be in our hands, in the hands of the people? Yes, but that is only what we
think, what the people think. If they thought so too, there would be unity
and we would all be "comrades". But they won't think this way; they will
oppose us stubbornly. They can't see why they shouldn't oppose us. It is
quite natural that they should attack us. For our part, we can't see why
we should let them seize our Liberated Areas. It is also quite natural that
we should counter-attack. When two "can't-see-whys" come together, they fight.
Since there are two can't-see-whys, why have they negotiated? And why have
they concluded the "October 10th Agreement"? In this world, things are
complicated and are decided by many factors. We should look at problems from
different aspects, not from just one. In Chungking, some people think that
Chiang Kai-shek is unreliable and deceitful and that negotiations with him
can lead nowhere. So I was told by many people I met, including some members
of the Kuomintang. I told them that what they said was justified and well-founded
and that we were firmly convinced by eighteen years of
experience [3] that this would
be the case. The Kuomintang and the Communist Party are sure to fail in their
negotiations, sure to start fighting and sure to break with each other, but
that is only one aspect of the matter. Another aspect is that many other
factors are bound to make Chiang Kai-shek have misgivings. Among these factors,
the three main ones are the might of the Liberated Areas, the opposition
to civil war by the people in the Great Rear Area and the international
situation. In our Liberated Areas there are 100 million people, one million
troops and two million people's militia, a force no one dares to belittle.
Our Party's place in the nation's political life is no longer what it was
in 1927, nor what it was in 1937. The Kuomintang, which has always refused
to recognize the equal status of the Communist Party, is now forced to do
so. Our work in the Liberated Areas has already influenced all China and
the whole world. The people in the Great Rear Area desire peace and need
democracy. When in Chungking, I had a profound sense of the warm support
given us by the broad masses of the people. They are dissatisfied with the
Kuomintang government and place their hopes on us. I also met many foreigners,
including Americans, who sympathize with us. The broad masses of the people
in foreign countries are dissatisfied with the reactionary forces in China
and sympathize with the Chinese people's forces. They also disapprove of
Chiang Kai-shek's policies. We have many friends in all parts of the country
and of the world; we are not isolated. Those who oppose civil war in China
and stand for peace and democracy include not only the people in our Liberated
Areas but also the masses in the Great Rear Area and throughout the world.
The subjective desire of Chiang Kai-shek is to maintain his dictatorship
and destroy the Communist Party, but many objective difficulties stand in
his way. Therefore, he has to be a little realistic. He is being realistic,
and we are realistic too. He was realistic in inviting us and we were realistic
in going to negotiate with him. We arrived in Chungking on August 28. On
the evening of the 28th, I told the Kuomintang representatives that the country
had needed peace and unity ever since the September 18th Incident in
1931.[4] We had asked for peace and unity, but
they had not materialized. Peace and unity materialized only after the Sian
Incident of 1936[5] before the outbreak of the
War of Resistance on July 7, 1937. During the eight years of that war we
fought together against Japan. But civil war never stopped; there were continuous
frictions, big and small. To say that there was no civil war is deception
and does not square with facts. In the past eight years we repeatedly expressed
our willingness to negotiate. At the Seventh Congress of our Party we declared
that "we are willing to resume negotiations with the Kuomintang authorities
as soon as they are willing to renounce their present erroneous policies
and agree to democratic reforms".[6] In the
negotiations we declared that, first, China needs peace and, second, China
needs democracy. Chiang Kai-shek could find no reason to object and had to
agree. On the one hand, the policy of peace and the agreements on democracy
published in the "Summary of Conversations" are words on paper and not yet
reality; on the other hand, they have been determined by a variety of forces.
The forces of the people in the Liberated Areas, the forces of the people
in the Great Rear Area, the international situation -- the general trend
has forced the Kuomintang to accept these things.

How to give "tit for tat" depends on the situation. Sometimes, not going
to negotiations is tit-for-tat; and sometimes, going to negotiations is also
tit-for-tat. We were right not to go before, and also right to go this time;
in both cases we have given tit for tat. We did well to go this time, for
we exploded the rumour spread by the Kuomintang that the Communist Party
did not want peace and unity. They sent three successive telegrams to invite
us, and we went. But they were totally unprepared, and we had to make all
the proposals. As a result of the negotiations, the Kuomintang has accepted
the general policy of peace and unity. That's fine. If the Kuomintang launches
civil war again, it will put itself in the wrong in the eyes of the whole
nation and the whole world, and we shall have all the more reason to smash
its attacks by a war of self-defence. Now that the "October 10th Agreement"
has been concluded, our task is to uphold the agreement, to demand that the
Kuomintang honour it and to continue to strive for peace. If they fight,
we will wipe them out completely. This is the way things are: if they attack
and we wipe them out, they will have that satisfaction; wipe out some, some
satisfaction; wipe out more, more satisfaction; wipe out the whole lot, complete
satisfaction. China's problems are complicated, and our brains must also
be a little complicated. If they start fighting, we fight back, fight to
win peace. Peace will not come unless we strike hard blows at the reactionaries
who dare to attack the Liberated Areas.

Some comrades have asked why we should concede eight Liberated
Areas.[7] It is a great pity to concede these eight
areas, but it is better to do so. Why is it a pity? Because these Liberated
Areas have been created and arduously built up by the people, with sweat
and blood. Therefore, we must explain matters clearly to the people and make
appropriate arrangements in the areas we are going to concede. Why should
we concede those areas? Because otherwise the Kuomintang will not feel easy.
They are going back to Nanking, but some Liberated Areas in the south are
right by their beds or in their corridor. So long as we are there, they will
not be able to sleep easily and will therefore fight for those places at
all costs. Our concession on this point will help frustrate the Kuomintang's
plot for civil war and win us the sympathy of the numerous middle elements
at home and abroad. All the means of propaganda in China, except the Hsinhua
News Agency, are now controlled by the Kuomintang. They are all rumour factories.
Concerning the current negotiations, they have spread the rumour that the
Communist Party just wants territory and will make no concessions. Our policy
is to protect the fundamental interests of the people. Subject to the principle
of not damaging the fundamental interests of the people, it is permissible
to make certain concessions in exchange for peace and democracy, which the
people of the whole country need. In our past dealings with Chiang Kai-shek
we also made concessions, and even larger ones. In 1937, to bring about the
nation-wide War of Resistance, we voluntarily dropped the name, "Workers'
and Peasants' Revolutionary Government", changed the name of our Red Army
to "National Revolutionary Army" and altered our policy of confiscating the
land of the landlords to one of reducing rent and interest. This time, by
conceding certain areas in the south, we have completely exploded the
Kuomintang's rumours before the people of all China and the whole world.
It is the same with the problem of armed forces. Kuomintang propaganda has
been saying that the Communist Party is just scrambling for guns. But we
have said we are ready to make concessions. First, we proposed cutting our
present armed strength to 48 divisions. As the Kuomintang has 263 divisions,
this means our strength would be about a sixth of the total. Later, we proposed
a further reduction to 43 divisions, about a seventh of the total. The Kuomintang
then said they would reduce to 120 divisions. We said we would reduce by
the same proportion to 24 or even 20 divisions, which would still be only
a seventh of the total. In the Kuomintang army the proportion of officers
as compared to soldiers is unduly large and the complement of a division
is under 6,000. By their standard, we could form 200 divisions out of our
1,200,000 men. But we are not going to do so. Therefore the Kuomintang can
say nothing more and all their rumours are bankrupt. Does this mean that
we are going to hand over our guns to the Kuomintang? Not that either. If
we hand over our guns, won't the Kuomintang have too many? The arms of the
people, every gun and every bullet, must all be kept, must not be handed
over.

The above is what I want to say to the comrades about the present situation.
Its development shows many contradictions. In the negotiations between the
Kuomintang and our Party, why is there agreement on some questions and not
on others? Why does the "Summary of Conversations" speak of peace and unity,
while fighting is actually going on? Some comrades just can't understand
such contradictions. What I have said is meant to answer these questions.
Some comrades can't understand why we should be willing to negotiate with
Chiang Kai-shek, who has always been anti-Communist and against the people.
Was our Party right or wrong in deciding at its Seventh Congress that we
were willing to negotiate with the Kuomintang, provided they changed their
policy? It was absolutely right. The Chinese revolution is a long one and
victory can only be won step by step. China's future depends on our exertions.
The situation will remain in flux for six months or so. We must redouble
our efforts to make it develop in a direction favourable to the people of
the whole country.

Now, a few more words about our work. Some comrades present will be leaving
for the front. Many, full of enthusiasm, are vying with each other for the
opportunity to go to work there, and this active and fervent spirit is very
valuable. But there are also a few comrades who have mistaken ideas, who
don't think of the many difficulties to be overcome, but believe that everything
will be plain sailing at the front and that they will have an easier time
than in Yenan. Are there people who think that way? I believe there are.
I advise such comrades to correct their ideas. If one goes, it is to work.
What is work? Work is struggle. There are difficulties and problems in those
places for us to overcome and solve. We go there to work and struggle to
overcome these difficulties. A good comrade is one who is more eager to go
where the difficulties are greater. The work in those places is hard. Hard
work is like a load placed before us, challenging us to shoulder it. Some
loads are light, some heavy. Some people prefer the light to the heavy; they
pick the light and leave the heavy to others. That is not a good attitude.
Some comrades are different; they leave ease and comfort to others and carry
the heavy loads themselves; they are the first to bear hardships, the last
to enjoy comforts. They are good comrades. We should all learn from their
communist spirit.

Many local cadres will be leaving their native places for the front. And
many southern-born cadres who came to Yenan are also going to the front.
All comrades going to the front should be mentally prepared, once there,
to take root, blossom and bear fruit. We Communists are like seeds and the
people are like the soil. Wherever we go, we must unite with the people,
take root and blossom among them. Wherever our comrades go, they must build
good relations with the masses, be concerned for them and help them overcome
their difficulties. We must unite with the masses; the more of the masses
we unite with, the better. We must go all out to mobilize the masses, expand
the people's forces and, under the leadership of our Party, defeat the aggressor
and build a new China. This is the policy laid down by the Party's Seventh
Congress.[8] We must strive to carry it out. China
depends on the Communist Party and the people to run her affairs. We have
the will and the way to achieve peace and democracy. Provided we unite even
more closely with the whole people, China's affairs can be run well.

The world after World War II has a bright future. This is the general trend.
Does the failure of the Five Power Conference of Foreign Ministers in
London[9] mean that a third world war is about
to break out? No. Just think, how is it possible for a third world war to
break out right after the end of World War II? The capitalist and the socialist
countries will yet reach compromises on a number of international matters,
because compromise will be advantageous.[10] The
proletariat and the people of the whole world are firmly opposed to an
anti-Soviet and anti-Communist war. In the past thirty years two world wars
have been fought. Between World Wars I and II there was an interval of more
than twenty years. In the half million years of human history, it is only
in the last thirty years that world wars have been fought. After World War
I the world made great progress. After World War II the world is sure to
make even faster progress. Following World War I the Soviet Union was born
and scores of Communist Parties were founded -- they did not exist before.
After the end of World War II the Soviet Union is much stronger, the face
of Europe is changed, the political consciousness of the proletariat and
the people of the world is much higher and the progressive forces throughout
the world are more closely united. Our China is also undergoing rapid and
drastic change. The general trend of China's development is certainly for
the better, not the worse. The world is progressing, the future is bright
and no one can change this general trend of history. We should carry on constant
propaganda among the people on the facts of world progress and the bright
future ahead so that they will build their confidence in victory. At the
same time, we must tell the people and tell our comrades that there will
be twists and turns in our road. There are still many obstacles and difficulties
along the road of revolution. The Seventh Congress of our Party assumed that
the difficulties would be many, for we preferred to assume there would be
more difficulties rather than less. Some comrades do not like to think much
about difficulties. But difficulties are facts; we must recognize as many
difficulties as there are and should not adopt a "policy of non-recognition".
We must recognize difficulties, analyse them and combat them. There are no
straight roads in the world; we must be prepared to follow a road which twists
and turns and not try to get things on the cheap. It must not be imagined
that one fine morning all the reactionaries will go down on their knees of
their own accord. In a word, while the prospects are bright, the road has
twists and turns. There are still many difficulties ahead which we must not
overlook. By uniting with the entire people in a common effort, we can certainly
overcome all difficulties and win victory. 




NOTES


1. This refers to the "Summary of Conversations", also
known as the "October 10th Agreement", which was signed by representatives
of the Kuomintang and the Communist Party of China on October 10,1945. In
the summary, Chiang Kai-shek had to feign agreement with the "basic policy
of peace and national reconstruction" put forward by the Communist Party
of China and accept "long-term co-operation on the basis of peace, democracy,
solidarity and unity . . . resolute avoidance of civil war and the building
of a new China, independent, free, prosperous and powerful" and "democratization
of political life, nationalization of troops and equality and legality of
political parties as ways and means absolutely essential for achieving peace
and national reconstruction". He also had to agree to bring the Kuomintang's
political tutelage to a speedy conclusion, convene a political consultative
conference, "guarantee the freedoms of person, belief, speech, the press,
assembly and association as enjoyed by the people in all democratic countries
in peacetime, and abolish or amend existing laws and decrees according to
this principle", abolish the secret services, "strictly prohibit all organs
other than those of the judiciary and police from making arrests, conducting
trials and imposing punishment", "release political prisoners", "actively
carry out local self-government and conduct general elections from the lower
level upward" etc. The Chiang Kai-shek government, however, stubbornly refused
to recognize the legal status of the people's army and the democratic governments
in the Liberated Areas and, on the pretexts of "unifying the military command"
and "unifying government administration", insolently tried to eliminate
altogether the people's army and the Liberated Areas led by the Communist
Party of China; consequently no agreement could be reached on this question.
The following are excerpts from the "Summary of Conversations" concerning
the negotiations on the problem of the armed forces and political power in
the Liberated Areas; in the "Summary" the so-called "Government" refers to
Chiang Kai-shek's Kuomintang government.

"On the nationalization of troops. The Communist Party of China proposed
that with a view to unifying the military command the Government should effect
an equitable and rational reorganization of the armed forces of the whole
country, draw up a programme for carrying it out in stages, make a fresh
delimitation of the military zones and establish a conscription and replenishment
system. The Communist Party of China stated that, given such a programme,
it was ready to reduce the anti-Japanese troops under its command to twenty-four
divisions or to a minimum of twenty divisions and to take prompt action to
demobilize its anti-Japanese troops now distributed in the eight areas of
Kwangtung, Chekiang, southern Kiangsu, southern Anhwei, central Anhwei, Hunan,
Hupeh and Honan (not including northern Honan). The troops to be reorganized
would be gradually withdrawn from the above areas to assemble in the Liberated
Areas north of the Lunghai Railway and in northern Kiangsu and northern Anhwei.
The Government stated that the programme for the reorganization of troops
on a country-wide basis was under way and that the Government was willing
to consider the reorganization of the anti-Japanese troops led by the Communist
Party of China into twenty divisions, if the issues coming up in the present
negotiations could all be settled. As to the question of the stationing of
these troops, it stated further that the Communist Party of China could submit
plans for discussion and decision. The Communist Party of China proposed
that the Communist Party and its local military personnel should participate
in the work of the National Military Council and its various departments,
that the Government should preserve the existing personnel system and commission
the existing personnel as officers of various ranks in the reorganized units,
that officers not receiving appointment after reorganization should be assigned
to different areas for training and that a fair and reasonable system for
filling vacancies and a plan for political education should be adopted. The
Government indicated that it had no objection to these proposals and was
willing to discuss details. The Communist Party of China proposed that all
the militiamen in the Liberated Areas should be organized into local self-defence
corps. The Government indicated that such organization could be considered
only where local conditions would so require or permit. In order to formulate
concrete plans in regard to all the questions mentioned in this section,
both sides agreed that a sub-committee of three be formed, with one
representative each from the Board of Military Operations of the National
Military Council, the Ministry of War and the Eighteenth Group Army."

"On local governments in the Liberated Areas. The Communist Party of China
proposed that the Government should recognize the legal status of the popularly
elected governments at all levels in the Liberated Areas. The Government
indicated that, since Japan had surrendered, the term 'Liberated Area' should
have become obsolete and that government administration throughout the country
should be unified. The initial formula advanced by the Communist Party of
China was that the provincial and administrative areas were to be delimited
afresh in the light of the existence of eighteen Liberated Areas and that,
for the sake of unifying government administration, it would submit a list
of all the popularly elected government personnel at various levels for
reappointment by the Government. The Government indicated that, as Chairman
Chiang had stated to Mr. Mao, the Central Government, after the unification
of the military command and government administration throughout the country,
would give consideration to the administrative personnel nominated by the
Communist Party of China. The Government would consider retaining a due
proportion of the administrative personnel who had served in the areas recovered
during the War of Resistance, taking account of their record of ability and
service, irrespective of party affiliation. Thereupon, a second formula was
proposed by the Communist Party of China, asking the Central Government to
appoint nominees of the Communist Party of China as chairmen and members
of the provincial governments of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and
the five provinces of Jehol, Chahar, Hopei, Shantung and Shansi, and to appoint
the Communist Party's nominees as deputy chairmen and members of the six
provincial governments of Suiyuan, Honan, Kiangsu, Anhwei, Hupeh and Kwangtung
(because in the aforesaid eleven provinces there were extensive Liberated
Areas or sections thereof). The Communist Party of China also requested the
appointment of its nominees as deputy mayors of the four special municipalities
of Peiping, Tientsin, Tsingtao and Shanghai and the participation of its
nominees in the administration of the northeastern provinces. After many
discussions on this matter, the Communist Party of China modified the aforesaid
proposals by requesting the appointment of its nominees as chairmen and members
of the provincial governments of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and
the four provinces of Jehol, Chahar, Hopei and Shantung, as deputy chairmen
and members of the two provincial governments of Shansi and Suiyuan and as
deputy mayors of the three special municipalities of Peiping, Tientsin and
Tsingtao. In reply the Government stated that while the Communist Party of
China might nominate those of its members who had rendered distinguished
service during the War of Resistance and who possessed administrative ability
to the Government for appointment, the Communist Party would not be sincerely
endeavouring to achieve unity of military command and government administration
if it should insist upon nominating a chairman or deputy chairman or members
of any specific provincial government. The Communist Party of China then
said it would withdraw its second suggestion and proposed a third formula.
It suggested that general elections be held under the existing popularly
elected governments at all levels in the Liberated Areas, and members of
all other political parties as well as people in different walks of life
would be welcome to return to their native places to take part in the elections
to be held under the supervision of persons designated by the Political
Consultative Conference. A popular election was to be held in any county
where more than half the districts and townships had already held popular
elections. Likewise, a popular election was to be held in any province or
administrative area where more than half the counties had already held popular
elections. In the interest of unity of government administration, the names
of all the officials so elected in the provincial, administrative area and
county governments should be submitted to the Central Government for appointment
by confirmation. The Government replied that this formula of government
confirmation of appointments in provinces and areas was not in the interest
of unity of government administration. The Government might, however, consider
holding popular elections for county officials, but popular elections for
the provincial governments could be held only after the promulgation of a
national constitution, when the status of the province would have been defined.
For the time being, only those provincial government officials who had been
appointed by the Central Government should proceed to take up their posts
so that conditions in the recovered areas might be restored to normal at
the earliest possible moment. At this point, a fourth formula was proposed
by the Communist Party of China, namely, that the status quo in
all the Liberated Areas should temporarily be maintained until the constitutional
provision for the popular election of provincial governments had been adopted
and put into effect and that, for the time being, an interim arrangement
be worked out in order to guarantee the restoration of peace and order. The
Communist Party of China stated that meanwhile this particular problem might
be submitted to the Political Consultative Conference for settlement. The
Government insisted that unity of government administration must be carried
out first, because this problem, if left unsolved, might become an obstacle
to peace and reconstruction, and it expressed the hope that a concrete formula
with regard to this matter could be agreed upon soon. The Communist Party
of China agreed to hold further discussions."

2. Shangtang was an ancient name for the southeastern part
of Shansi Province with Changchih as its centre. Its mountainous sections
were the base of the 129th Division of the Eighth Route Army during the War
of Resistance Against Japan and formed part of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan
Liberated Area. In September 1945 the Kuomintang warlord, Yen Hsi-shan, mustered
thirteen divisions and, in co-ordination with Japanese and puppet troops,
moved in successively from Linfen, Fushan and Yicheng and from Taiyuan and
Yutse to invade Hsiangyuan, Tunliu and Lucheng in the Southeastern Shansi
Liberated Area. In October the army and people of this Liberated Area
counter-attacked this invading force, wiped out 35,000 men and captured several
high-ranking officers, including corps and division commanders.

3. This refers to the experience gained by the Communist
Party of China in its struggles with the Kuomintang from 1927, when the
Kuomintang betrayed the revolution, to 1945.

4. On September 18, 1931, the Japanese "Kwantung Army"
quartered in northeastern China seized Shenyang. Under Chiang Kai-shek's
order of "absolute non-resistance", the Chinese troops at Shenyang and elsewhere
in the Northeast (the Northeastern Army) withdrew to the south of the Great
Wall, and consequently the Japanese forces rapidly occupied the provinces
of Liaoning, Kirin and Heilungkiang. The Chinese people called this act of
aggression committed by the Japanese invaders the "September 18th Incident".

5. See "On a Statement by Chiang Kai-shek's Spokesman",
Note 5. p. 45 of this volume.

6. Quoted from "On Coalition Government", Part IV, Section
"Our Specific Programme", Item 2, Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol.
III.

7. This refers to the bases of the people's army scattered
over Kwangtung, Chekiang, southern Kiangsu, southern Anhwei, central Anhwei,
Hunan, Hupeh and Honan (not including northern Honan).

8. See "China's Two Possible Destinies" and "The Foolish
Old Man Who Removed the Mountains", Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung,
Vol. III.

9. From September 11 to October 2, 1945, the Foreign Ministers
of the Soviet Union, China, the United States, Britain and France met in
London to discuss peace treaties with Italy, Rumania, Bulgaria, Hungary and
Finland, countries which had taken part in the war of aggression started
by fascist Germany, and to discuss the disposal of the Italian colonies.
No agreement was reached because the United States, Britain and France rejected
the reasonable proposals put forward by the Soviet Union and persisted in
their imperialist policy of aggression aiming at overthrowing the people's
governments set up in Rumania, Hungary and Bulgaria after victory in the
anti-fascist war.

10. See "Some Points in Appraisal of the Present International
Situation", pp. 87-88 of this volume. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Truth About the Kuomintang Attacks







THE TRUTH ABOUT THE KUOMINTANG ATTACKS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE TRUTH ABOUT THE KUOMINTANG ATTACKS


November 5, 1945

[This statement prepared by Comrade Mao Tse-tung was issued in the name of
the spokesman for the Communist Party of China. By this time Chiang Kai-shek
had already torn up the "October 10th Agreement", and the civil war against
the Liberated Areas was expanding daily.] 
  

In a dispatch from Chungking, dated November 3, the United Press reported
that Wu Kuo-chen, Director of the Propaganda Department of the Kuomintang
Central Executive Committee, had declared that "the government is entirely
on the defensive in this war" and had proposed measures for "restoring
communications".[1] A Hsinhua News Agency reporter
asked the spokesman for the Communist Party of China about this.

The spokesman for the Communist Party of China replied to the reporter as
follows: What Wu Kuo-chen said about being "on the defensive" is a complete
lie. The Kuomintang, besides occupying the five Liberated Areas evacuated
by our troops in eastern Chekiang, southern Kiangsu, central and southern
Anhwei and Hunan and trampling on the people there, has moved more than seventy
divisions of its regular troops into or close to most of the other Liberated
Areas for example, those in Kwangtung, Hupeh, Honan, northern Kiangsu, northern
Anhwei, Shantung and Hopei -- and has been oppressing the people there and
attacking or preparing to attack our troops. Furthermore, scores of other
Kuomintang divisions are heading for the Liberated Areas. Can this be described
as being on the defensive? Of the eight Kuomintang divisions which reached
the Hantan area in their drive northward from Changteh, two opposed civil
war and favoured peace, while the other six (including three U.S.-equipped
divisions) were compelled to lay down their arms after the troops and people
of the Liberated Areas counter-attacked in self-defence. Many officers of
these Kuomintang troops, including war-zone deputy commanders' corps commanders
and deputy corps commanders, are now in the Liberated
Areas[2] and can confirm the whole truth about
where they came from and how they were ordered to attack. Can this, too,
be described as being on the defensive? Our troops in the Liberated Areas
in Honan and Hupeh Provinces are now completely encircled by more than twenty
Kuomintang divisions from the 1st, 5th and 6th War Zones, with Liu Chih as
field commander in charge of the "suppression of Communists". Our Liberated
Areas in western and central Honan and southern, eastern and central Hupeh
have all been invaded and occupied by the Kuomintang forces, which burned
and killed so wantonly that our troops commanded by Li Hsien-nien and Wang
Shu-sheng could find no shelter and had to seek quarters on the Honan-Hupeh
border in order to survive. But there again they have been closely pursued
and attacked by Kuomintang troops.[3] Can this,
too, be described as being on the defensive? It is the same in the three
provinces of Shansi, Suiyuan and Chahar. In early October, Yen Hsi-shan ordered
thirteen divisions to attack the Hsiangyuan-Tunliu sector in the Shangtang
Liberated Area. Fighting in self-defence, our troops and the people there
disarmed them all, and several commanders of corps and divisions were among
the captured. They are now in the Taihang Liberated Area, every one alive,
and can confirm the whole truth about where they came from and how they were
ordered to attack. In Chungking recently, Yen Hsi-shan told all sorts of
lies about how he had been attacked and how he had merely been "on the
defensive". Probably he had forgotten all about his generals: Shih Tse-po,
Commander of the 19th Corps; Kuo Jung, Commander of the Provisional 46th
Division; Chang Hung, Commander of the Provisional 48th Division; Li Pei-ying,
Commander of the 66th Division; Kuo Tien-hsing, Commander of the 68th Division
and Yang Wen-tsai, Commander of the Provisional 37th
Division.[4] They are now living in our Liberated
Areas and can refute any lies told by Wu Kuo-chen, Yen Hsi-shan and all the
other reactionary instigators of civil war. General Fu Tso-yi, under orders,
has been attacking our Liberated Areas in Suiyuan, Chahar and Jehol for over
two months and on one occasion pushed right to the gates of Changchiakou
and occupied our entire Suiyuan Liberated Area and western Chahar. Can this,
too, be described as being on the defensive and not firing "the first shot"?
Our troops and people in Chahar and Suiyuan rose in self-defence and in their
counter-attacks also captured large numbers of officers and men who can all
testify where they came from, how they attacked, and so
on.[5] In various battles of self-defence we have
captured piles of "bandit suppression" and anti-Communist documents, among
which are the Handbook on Bandit Suppression, orders for "bandit
suppression"[6] and other anti-Communist documents
issued by the highest Kuomintang authorities but dismissed as a "joke" by
Wu Kuo-chen; these are now being forwarded to Yenan. All these documents
are iron-clad proofs that Kuomintang troops have attacked the Liberated Areas.

The Hsinhua News Agency reporter went on to ask the spokesman for the Communist
Party of China about his views on the measures proposed by Wu Kuo-chen for
restoring communications. The spokesman replied: These are nothing but stalling
tactics. The Kuomintang authorities are mustering large forces and are trying
to swamp all the Liberated Areas as in a great flood. Following the failure
of several attacks in September and October, they are preparing new attacks
on an even larger scale. And one way to obstruct these attacks and effectively
check the civil war is not to let them transport their troops by rail. Like
everybody else, we advocate speedy restoration of the lines of communication,
but this can be done only after the settlement of the three problems of accepting
the Japanese surrender, disposing of the puppet troops and realizing
self-government in the Liberated Areas. Which should be settled first, the
problem of communications or these three problems? Why are the troops of
the Liberated Areas, which fought strenuously and bitterly against Japan
for eight years, not qualified to accept the Japanese surrender? And why
should other troops be put to the trouble of coming from afar to accept it?
Every citizen has the right to punish the puppet troops; why are they all
being incorporated into the "national army" and ordered to attack the Liberated
Areas? Local self-government is explicitly stipulated in the "October 10th
Agreement", and Dr. Sun Yat-sen long ago advocated the popular election of
provincial governors; why does the Kuomintang government still insist on
dispatching local officials? The problem of communications should be speedily
settled, but even more so, the three major problems should be speedily settled.
To talk of restoring communications without first settling the three major
problems can only serve to spread and prolong the civil war and help its
instigators achieve their purpose of swamping the Liberated Areas. In order
quickly to stop the anti-popular and anti-democratic civil war which has
now spread all over the country, we advocate the following: 

  (1) All the Kuomintang government forces that have entered the Liberated
  Areas in northern China, northern Kiangsu, northern Anhwei, central China
  and nearby regions to accept the Japanese surrender and to attack us should
  be withdrawn immediately to their original positions; the troops of the Liberated
  Areas should accept the Japanese surrender and garrison the cities and lines
  of communication; and the Liberated Areas which have been invaded and occupied
  should be restored.


  (2) All puppet troops should be immediately disarmed and disbanded, and in
  northern China, northern Kiangsu and northern Anhwei the Liberated Areas
  should take charge of such disarming and disbanding.


  (3) The people's democratic self-government in all the Liberated Areas should
  be recognized; the Central Government should not appoint and send out local
  officials; the provisions of the "October 10th Agreement" should be carried
  out.


The spokesman said: Only in this way can civil war be averted; otherwise
there is absolutely no safeguard against it. The documents captured during
the three battles we fought in self-defence in Suiyuan, Shangtang and Hantan
and such concrete actions as massive troop movements and attacks all give
the lie to the claim of the Kuomintang authorities that the so-called restoration
of communications is for the sake of the people and not of civil war. The
Chinese people have been fooled long enough and can be fooled no longer.
At present, the central problem is for the people of the whole country to
mobilize to stop the civil war by every means. 


NOTES


1. At the end of the War of Resistance Against Japan, most
of China's railways were either under the control of the army and people
of the Liberated Areas or surrounded by them. Under the pretext of "restoring
communications", the Kuomintang reactionaries tried to utilize these railways
to cut the Liberated Areas apart, transport millions of Kuomintang troops
to northeastern, northern, eastern and central China, attack the Liberated
Areas and grab the big cities.

2. In September 1945, Kuomintang troops from the region
of Chengchow and Hsinhsiang advanced along the Peiping-Hankow Railway to
attack the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Liberated Area. In late October their
vanguard, comprising three corps, invaded the region of Tsehsien and Hantan.
The army and people of the Liberated Area rose bravely in self-defence, and
after a week's bitter fighting General Kao Shu-hsun, Deputy Commander of
the Kuomintang's 11th War Zone and concurrently Commander of the New 8th
Corps, revolted against the Kuomintang at Hantan and came over to us with
the New 8th Corps and one column, totalling over ten thousand men. The other
two corps retreated in confusion but were surrounded and disarmed. Many
high-ranking officers were compelled to surrender, including Ma Fa-wu, another
Deputy Commander of the Kuomintang's 11th War Zone concurrently Commander
of the 40th Corps, Liu Shih-jung, its Deputy Commander, Li Hsu-tung, its
Chief of Staff, Liu Shu-sen, a Deputy Division Commander.

3. After Japan's surrender the Kuomintang gathered more
than twenty divisions from three war zones to launch large-scale attacks
on the Liberated Areas in Honan and Hupeh Provinces. Part of the forces of
Hu Tsung-nan, Commander of the Kuomintang's 1st War Zone, advanced from the
northwest to the east along both sides of the Lunghai Railway to invade the
Liberated Areas in western Honan; the forces of Liu Chih, Commander of the
5th War Zone, advanced from the north to the south along both sides of the
Peiping-Hankow Railway to invade the Liberated Areas in central Honan and
central and eastern Hupeh; the forces of the 6th War Zone advanced from southern
Hupeh to the north in concert. Most of these Kuomintang forces were under
the command of Liu Chih. The people's army of the Liberated Areas in Honan
and Hupeh put up a stubborn fight against the invaders, conserved its strength
and moved in late October 1945 to an area on the Honan-Hupeh border in the
Tahung and the Tungpai Mountains and around Tsaoyang. The army later shifted
to Hsuanhuatien, east of the Peiping-Hankow Railway, because the Kuomintang
continued to pursue and attack.

4. About the Shangtang battle, see "On the Chungking
Negotiations", Note 2, p. 63 of this volume. The captured Kuomintang officers
here mentioned were all high-ranking generals in Yen Hsi-shan's army.

5. The province of Suiyuan was abolished on March 6, 1954,
and became part of the Inner Mongolian Autonomous Region. General Fu Tso-yi
was in 1945 Commander of the Kuomintang's 12th War Zone. His troops had been
stationed at and around Wuyuan and Linho in western Suiyuan during the War
of Resistance Against Japan. After Japan's surrender he was ordered to attack
the Liberated Areas in Suiyuan, Jehol and Chahar Provinces. In August 1945
he occupied Kueisui (now Huhehot), Chining and Fengchen. In early September
he occupied Hsingho, Shangyi, Wuchuan, Taolin, Hsintang and Liangcheng, launched
massive attacks on the Liberated Areas in Chahar and pushed to the neighbourhood
of Changchiakou. In self-defence our army repulsed these attacks and captured
large numbers of his officers and men.

6. The Handbook on Bandit Suppression was a
counter-revolutionary pamphlet compiled by Chiang Kai-shek in 1933 dealing
exclusively with methods of attacking the Chinese people's forces and the
revolutionary bases. In 1945, after the conclusion of the War of Resistance,
Chiang Kai-shek had it reprinted and issued to Kuomintang officers together
with a confidential order, saying: "The present campaign for the suppression
of the bandits, on which the happiness of the people depends, must be speedily
completed. You should urge your officers and men to do their utmost to suppress
the bandits in the spirit of the resistance against Japanese aggression and
in accordance with the Handbook on Bandit Suppression which I have
compiled. Any meritorious action in the service of the state shall be richly
rewarded, and those responsible for delays or mistakes shall be court-martialled.
This order should be made known to and obeyed by all officers and suppressing
the bandits." 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Rent Reduction and Production Are Two Important Matters for the Defence of the Liberated Areas







RENT REDUCTION AND PRODUCTION ARE TWO IMPORTANT MATTERS FOR THE DEFENCE
  OF THE LIBERATED AREAS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

RENT REDUCTION AND PRODUCTION ARE TWO IMPORTANT MATTERS FOR THE
  DEFENCE OF THE LIBERATED AREAS


November 7, 1945

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China.] 
  

1. The Kuomintang, aided by the United States, is mobilizing all its forces
to attack our Liberated Areas. Country-wide civil war is already a fact.
Our Party's present task is to mobilize all forces, take the stand of
self-defence, smash the attacks of the Kuomintang, defend the Liberated Areas
and strive for the realization of peace. To achieve this aim the following
have become very urgent tasks. See to it that in the Liberated Areas the
peasants generally get the benefits of rent reduction and that the workers
and other labouring people benefit by appropriate wage increases and improved
conditions; at the same time, see to it that the landlords can still make
a living and that the industrial and commercial capitalists can still make
profits. Unfold a large-scale production drive next year, increase the output
of food and daily necessities, improve the people's livelihood, provide relief
for victims of famine and for refugees and meet the needs of the army. Only
when the two important matters of rent reduction and production are well
handled can we overcome our difficulties, support the war and win victory.

2. As the scale of the war is now very large, many leading comrades are in
command at the front and cannot divert their attention to rent reduction
and production. Hence there must be division of labour. Those leading comrades
who remain in the rear areas, in addition to doing a great deal of work in
direct support of the front, must not miss the opportune time for organizing
these two important tasks of rent reduction and production. In the next few
months of the winter and spring, they must launch large-scale rent reduction
campaigns and carry out rent reduction universally in all the Liberated Areas,
and particularly in the vast newly liberated areas, so as to arouse the
revolutionary fervour of the great majority of the peasant masses. Meanwhile
they must see to it that there is a new development of agricultural and
industrial production in all the Liberated Areas in 1946. Do not neglect
rent reduction and production because of the new large-scale war; on the
contrary, it is precisely in order to defeat the Kuomintang offensive that
rent reduction and production must be stepped up.

3. Rent reduction must be the result of mass struggle, not a favour bestowed
by the government. On this depends the success or failure of rent reduction.
In the struggle for rent reduction, excesses can hardly be avoided; as long
as it is really a conscious struggle of the broad masses, any excesses that
have occurred can be corrected afterwards. Only then can we persuade the
masses and enable them to understand that it is in the interest of the peasants
and the people as a whole to allow the landlords to make a living so that
they will not help the Kuomintang. The present policy of our Party is still
to reduce rents, not to confiscate land. During and following rent reduction
we must help the great majority of the peasants to organize themselves into
peasant associations.

4. The key to victory in the production drive is to organize the great majority
of the producers into mutual-aid production groups. An indispensable measure
is to provide government credits for agriculture and industry. It is also
very important to do farm work in the right season and reduce loss of working
time. At present we must mobilize civilian manpower to support the war; on
the other hand, we must so far as possible not miss any season for farming;
hence we should study methods of adjustments. Army units, government organs
and schools should continue to take part in production to an appropriate
extent, provided it does not interfere with the war, with work and with study.
Only thus can they better their livelihood and lighten the burden on the
people.

5. We already hold some large and many medium cities. It has become an important
task for our Party to take control of the economy of these cities and to
develop their industry, commerce and finance. For this purpose, it is very
necessary to use all the qualified persons available and persuade Party members
to co-operate with them and learn technique and methods of management from
them.

6. Tell all Party members to stand firmly together with the people, to have
concern for their economic difficulties and to regard the carrying out of
the two important tasks of rent reduction and production as the key to helping
the people overcome their difficulties; by so doing, we shall win the heartfelt
support of the people and be able to defeat attacks by any reactionaries.
Everything must still be considered from the standpoint of a long-term effort,
manpower and material resources must be used sparingly, everything must be
planned on a long-term basis; thus we will be sure to win victory. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Policy for Work in the Liberated Areas for 1946







POLICY FOR WORK IN THE LIBERATED AREAS FOR 1946



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

POLICY FOR WORK IN THE LIBERATED AREAS FOR 1946


December 15, 1945

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung Committee
of the Communist Party of China.] 
  

In the past few months our Party has gained great successes in leading the
people in fierce struggles to clean up the Japanese and puppet forces and
smash the attacks of the Kuomintang on the Liberated Areas. All our Party
comrades have worked as one man and made marked achievements in every held.
The year 1945 will soon be over, and in 1946 we must pay attention to the
following points in the work in all the Liberated Areas: 

1. Smash new attacks. Since our army smashed the large-scale attacks on our
Liberated Areas in Suiyuan, Shansi and southern Hopei, the Kuomintang has
been moving up larger forces and making preparations for new attacks. If
no new development makes the Kuomintang stop its civil war quickly, the fighting
in the spring of 1946 will be intense. Therefore, the central task of all
the Liberated Areas is still to take a stand of self-defence and do their
utmost to smash the Kuomintang attacks.

2. Spread the Kao Shu-hsun movement.[1] In order
to smash the Kuomintang attacks our Party must work to disintegrate the
Kuomintang troops which are preparing to attack or are already attacking.
On the one hand, our army must carry on extensive, open political propaganda
and political offensives to undermine the will to fight of the Kuomintang
troops engaged in the civil war. On the other hand, we must prepare and organize
uprisings within the Kuomintang army and spread the Kao Shu-hsun movement
so that, at crucial moments in the fighting, large numbers of Kuomintang
troops will follow Kao Shu-hsun's example and come over to the people, oppose
the civil war and take a stand for peace. In order to do this work in a practical
way and produce speedy results, every area must, in compliance with the Central
Committee directive, set up a special department and assign a large number
of cadres to devote themselves to it whole-heartedly and exclusively. The
leading bodies of each area must give this work close direction.

3. Train the troops. The field armies of the Liberated Areas have already
been formed in the main, and the regional troops are also quite numerous.
Hence, for the time being, we should generally stop expanding the number
of troops and should make use of the intervals between battles to stress
the training of troops. This applies to field armies, regional troops and
people's militia. As for the training courses, the main objective should
still be to raise the level of technique in marksmanship, bayoneting,
grenade-throwing and the like and the secondary objective should be to raise
the level of tactics, while special emphasis should be laid on night operations.
As for the method of training, we should unfold the mass training movement
in which officers teach soldiers, soldiers teach officers and the soldiers
teach each other. During 1946 we must further improve the political work
in the army, overcome any dogmatic and formalist working styles existing
in the army and strive to unite officers and soldiers, unite the army and
the people, unite with friendly troops, disintegrate the enemy troops and
ensure that the tasks of training, supply and fighting are accomplished.
The local people's militia should be reorganized in accordance with present
conditions. The army's rear services should be readjusted. Everything possible
should be done to organize and expand the artillery and engineer units in
all areas. The military academies should continue their work, with stress
on the training of technical personnel.

4. Reduce rent. In accordance with the November 7, 1945 directive of the
Central Committee,[2] all areas must launch movements
in 1946 for the reduction of rent and interest in newly liberated areas,
movements on a large scale, of a mass character, but with leadership. As
for the workers, their wages should be appropriately raised. Through these
movements the broad masses should be able to emancipate themselves, organize,
and become the conscious masters of the Liberated Areas. Without these determined
measures, the masses in the newly liberated areas will not be able to tell
which of the two parties, the Communist Party or the Kuomintang, is good
and which is bad; they will waver and will not give firm support to our Party.
In the old Liberated Areas the work of rent and interest reduction should
be rechecked in order to consolidate those areas further.

5. Production. All areas must follow the directive of November 7 and promptly
make every preparation to ensure that in 1946 both public and private production
in all Liberated Areas should surpass any previous year in scale and in
achievements. The feeling of weariness which has appeared among the people
can be overcome only after the two tasks of rent reduction and production
are carried out in earnest and with marked success. Whether or not these
two tasks are fulfilled will finally decide victory or defeat in the political
and military struggles of the Liberated Areas. They must not be neglected
in any area.

6. Finance. In 1946 the financial burden, which has become heavier to cover
the intensive work of the recent period, must be brought back to normal in
a planned and systematic way. There must be appropriate reductions for those
whose burdens are too heavy. In the interest of the long-term effort, the
number of people diverted from production in any area must not exceed the
limits of local financial capacity. Troops are valued for quality rather
than for number; in building the army this remains one of our principles.
To develop production, ensure supply, centralize leadership, decentralize
management, give consideration to both army and people and to both public
and private interests, and stress both production and economy -- all these
are still the proper guiding principles for solving our financial and economic
problems.

7. Support the government and cherish the people; support the army and give
preferential treatment to the families of the armymen who fought in the War
of Resistance.[3] In 1946 we must perform these
two tasks better than in the past few years. This will be of great significance
for smashing the Kuomintang attacks and consolidating the Liberated Areas.
In the army it should be handled through the ideological education of every
commander and fighter, so that all thoroughly understand the importance of
supporting the government and cherishing the people. As long as the army
on its part does this job well, the local government and the people will
also improve their relations with the army.

8. Relief. In the Liberated Areas there are many victims of natural disasters,
refugees, unemployed and partially unemployed, who urgently need relief.
Whether this problem is solved well or badly has a great and widespread
influence. Relief should depend mainly on mutual aid by the masses themselves,
in addition to government measures. The Party and the government should encourage
the masses to organize relief through mutual aid.

9. Take good care of local cadres. In every Liberated Area today there are
large numbers of cadres from other areas doing the leading work at all levels.
This is especially true in the northeastern provinces. The leading bodies
of each area must tirelessly counsel these cadres to take good care of the
local cadres and treat them with great warmth and goodwill. Cadres from outside
should make the selection, training and promotion of local cadres an important
task for themselves. Only thus can our Party take root in the Liberated Areas.
The working style of people from outside who look down on local people should
be criticized.

10. Calculate everything on a long-term basis. No matter how the situation
develops, our Party must always calculate on a long-term basis, if our position
is to be invincible. At present, our Party on the one hand persists in its
stand for self-government and self-defence in the Liberated Areas, firmly
opposes attacks by the Kuomintang and consolidates the gains won by the people
of these areas. On the other hand, we support the democratic movement now
developing in the Kuomintang areas (as marked by the student strike in Kunming
[4] ) in order to isolate the reactionaries, win
numerous allies for ourselves and expand the national democratic united front
under our Party's influence. Moreover, a delegation of our Party will soon
attend the Political Consultative Conference of various parties and public
figures without party affiliation, reopen negotiations with the Kuomintang
and strive for peace and democracy throughout the country. However, there
may yet be twists and turns. Ahead of us lie many difficulties. For example,
our new areas and our new troops are still not consolidated, and we have
problems in finance. We must face all these difficulties squarely and overcome
them, arrange all our work on a long-term basis, pay the closest attention
to the economical use of manpower and material resources and guard against
any wishful thinking about easy success through good luck.

These ten points should receive special attention in our work in 1946, and
particularly in the first half of the year. It is hoped that comrades in
different places will carry out these policies flexibly in the light of local
conditions. As for the work in various areas, such as building local political
authority, doing united front work, spreading education on current affairs
inside and outside the Party and doing work in cities and towns near the
Liberated Areas -- all this is important but we shall not dwell on it here.



NOTES


1. On October 30, 1945, Kao Shu-hsun, Deputy Commander
of the Kuomintang's 11th War Zone, revolted at the civil war front in Hantan,
southern Hopei Province, and came over to our side with one corps and one
column. This had a great influence throughout the country. In order to intensify
the work of dividing and disintegrating the Kuomintang troops and arousing
them to revolt, the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China decided
to start a propaganda campaign calling upon other Kuomintang officers and
men to follow the example of Kao Shu-hsun and his troops, refuse to attack
the Liberated Areas, sabotage the civil war at the front, fraternize with
the People's Liberation Army, rise in revolt and come over to the side of
the people. This was known as the Kao Shu-hsun movement.

2. See "Rent Reduction and Production Are Two Important
Matters for the Defence of the Liberated Areas", pp. 71-73 of this volume.

3. "Support the government and cherish the people" was
a slogan of the People's Liberation Army, while "Support the army and give
preferential treatment to the families of the armymen who fought in the War
of Resistance" was a slogan of the Party organizations, government bodies,
people's organizations and the masses of the people in the Liberated Areas.
The second slogan was later changed into "Support the army and give preferential
treatment to the families of the revolutionary armymen".

4. On the evening of November 25, 1945, more than six thousand
college and middle school students in Kunming, capital of Yunnan Province,
assembled at the Southwest Associated University to discuss current affairs
and protest against the civil war. The Kuomintang reactionaries sent troops
who surrounded the assembly, fired on the students with light artillery,
machine-guns and rifles and placed guards around the university to prevent
teachers and students from going home. Subsequently, students from Kunming's
schools and colleges joined in a strike. On December 1 the Kuomintang
reactionaries dispatched a large number of soldiers and secret agents to
the Southwest Associated University and the Teachers College where they threw
hand-grenades, killing four people and wounding over ten. This incident was
known as the "December 1st Massacre". 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Build Stable base Areas in the Northeast







BUILD STABLE BASE AREAS IN THE NORTHEAST



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

BUILD STABLE BASE AREAS IN THE NORTHEAST


December 28, 1945

[This directive, drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China, was addressed to its Northeast Bureau. As
soon as the Soviet Union declared war on Japan and the Soviet Red Army entered
the Northeast, the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and
the Chinese People's Liberation Army sent large numbers of cadres and troops
to the Northeast to lead the people in wiping out the remnants of the Japanese
invaders and the puppet "Manchukuo" regime, cleaning out traitors, eradicating
bandits and establishing democratic local governments at various levels.
But at the same time the Kuomintang reactionaries, bent on exclusive control
over the entire Northeast, large numbers of troops there by land, sea and
air with the aid of U.S. imperialism and seized key places like Shanhaikuan
and Chinchow which had already been liberated by the People's Liberation
Army. A stern struggle was already inevitable in the Northeast, and this
struggle was obviously going to be of special significance for the situation
in the whole country. In this directive Comrade Mao Tse-tung foresaw how
arduous the struggle in the Northeast would be and pointed out in good time
that the centre of gravity of the work there should be in the cities and
vast rural areas comparatively remote from the centres of Kuomintang occupation;
that is, we should "leave the high road alone and seize the land on both
sides" in order to arouse the masses in earnest, build stable base areas,
gradually accumulate strength and prepare for the future shift to the
counter-offensive. This correct policy of the Central Committee and Comrade
Mao Tse-tung was effectively carried out by the Northeast Bureau headed by
Comrade Lin Piao; hence the great victory, the liberation of the entire Northeast
three years later in November 1948.] 
  

1. Our Party's present task in the Northeast is to built base areas, stable
military and political base areas in eastern, northern and western
Manchuria.[1] To build such base areas is no easy
job; it requires hard and bitter struggle. Three or four years are needed
to build such base areas. But a solid preliminary groundwork must be laid
in the year 1946. Otherwise we may not be able to stand our ground.

2. It should now be made clear that these base areas are not to be built
in the big cities or along the main communication lines that are or will
be occupied by the Kuomintang; under present conditions this is not practicable.
Nor are they to be built in regions close to big cities or main communication
lines held by the Kuomintang. The reason is that the Kuomintang, having seized
the big cities and the main communication lines, will not let us build stable
base areas in regions very close to them. Our Party should do adequate work
and set up our first line of military defence in these regions, which must
never be lightly abandoned. But they will be guerrilla zones for both parties
and not our stable base areas. Therefore, the regions in which to build stable
bases are the cities and vast rural areas comparatively remote from the centres
of Kuomintang occupation. Those regions should now be designated so that
we can dispose our forces accordingly and lead the whole Party towards this
goal.

3. After we have decided on the location of our stable base areas and disposed
our forces and after our army's numerical strength has greatly increased,
mass work will be the centre of gravity of our Party's work in the Northeast.
All cadres must be made to understand that the Kuomintang will be stronger
than our Party in the Northeast for some time and that unless our starting
point is to arouse the masses to struggle, solve their problems and rely
on them in every way and unless we mobilize all forces to work painstakingly
among the masses and lay a solid preliminary foundation within a year, and
particularly in the next few critical months, we shall become isolated in
the Northeast, be unable to build stable base areas or defeat the attacks
of the Kuomintang and indeed may encounter immense difficulties or even fail.
Conversely, if we rely firmly on the masses, we shall overcome all difficulties
and reach our goal step by step. Mass work consists in arousing the masses
for struggles to settle accounts with traitors and in launching campaigns
for rent reduction and wage increases and campaigns for production. In these
struggles we should form various kinds of mass organizations, set up Party
nuclei, build armed units of the masses and organs of people's political
power, speedily raise mass economic struggles to the level of political struggles
and lead the masses to take part in building the base areas. The directive
on arousing mass struggles recently issued by the Jehol Provincial Party
Committee [2] may be applied in the Northeast.
Our Party must bring tangible material benefits to the people in the Northeast;
only then will the masses support us and oppose the Kuomintang attacks.
Otherwise, the masses will be unable to see clearly which of the two parties,
the Kuomintang or the Communist Party, is good and which is bad, may be taken
in for a time by deceitful Kuomintang propaganda and may even turn against
our Party, and thus an extremely unfavourable situation would be created
for us in the Northeast.

4. At present there is a subjective difficulty for our Party in the Northeast.
Large numbers of our cadres and armed forces in the Northeast are newcomers,
unfamiliar with the place and the people. Cadres are dissatisfied because
we cannot occupy large cities and they are impatient with the arduous work
of arousing the masses and building base areas. These circumstances are in
contradiction with the present situation and the tasks of the Party. Again
and again we must teach all cadres from other areas to pay attention to
investigation and study, to acquaint themselves with the place and the people
and to resolve to become one with the people of the Northeast; and we must
train large numbers of activists and cadres from among the masses. We should
explain to the cadres that although the big cities and the communication
lines are in the of the hands of the Kuomintang, the situation in the Northeast
is nevertheless favourable to us. So long as we spread among all cadres and
soldiers the idea of arousing the masses and of building our base areas and,
so long as we mobilize all forces and undertake the struggle to build these
base areas, we shall be able to establish ourselves firmly in the Northeast
and in Jehol and be sure of victory. We must tell the cadres that they should
on no account underestimate the strength of the Kuomintang or become impatient
with arduous work because they think the Kuomintang is going to attack eastern
and northern Manchuria anyhow. Of course, in making these explanations we
should not lead the cadres to believe that the Kuomintang is terribly strong
and that its attacks cannot be smashed. It should be pointed out that the
Kuomintang has no deep, organized foundation in the Northeast and that its
attacks can be smashed; it is therefore possible for our Party to build base
areas. But the Kuomintang troops are now attacking the Jehol-Liaoning border,
and if no blows are dealt them, they will attack eastern and northern Manchuria
before long. All our Party members must therefore resolve to undertake the
most difficult tasks, swiftly arouse the masses, build our base areas and
smash the Kuomintang attacks in western Manchuria and Jehol resolutely and
in a planned way. In eastern and northern Manchuria we should quickly prepare
the conditions for smashing the Kuomintang attacks. We must thoroughly clear
away all ideas among our cadres of winning easy victories through good luck,
without hard and bitter struggle, without sweat and blood.

5. Promptly delimit military areas and sub-areas in western, eastern and
northern Manchuria and divide our forces into field armies and regional troops.
Distribute a considerable part of the regular troops among the military sub-areas
to arouse the masses, wipe out bandits, set up organs of political power,
organize guerrillas, people's militia and self-defence forces so as to make
our areas secure, co-ordinate with the field armies and smash the Kuomintang
attacks. All troops must be assigned to specific areas and specific tasks;
only in this way can they quickly unite with the people and build stable
base areas.

6. This time over 100,000 of our troops have entered the Northeast and Jehol;
the army there has recently expanded by more than 200,000, and the trend
is to keep on expanding. Adding Party and government workers, we estimate
that the total will exceed 400,000 within a year. A situation in which such
a large number of personnel, divorced from production, depends solely on
the people of the Northeast for supplies certainly cannot last long and is
very dangerous. Therefore, all army units and government organs must take
part in production when not fighting or doing their regular work, except
for those field armies which are concentrated and charged with major military
actions. The year 1946 must not pass without results; the entire Northeast
must promptly make plans accordingly.

7. In the Northeast the direction in which the workers and intellectuals
move is vitally important to building our base areas and winning future
victories. Our Party should therefore give its full attention to work in
the big cities and along the main communication lines and especially to winning
over the workers and intellectuals. In view of the fact that in the early
years of the War of Resistance our Party did not pay sufficient attention
to winning over the workers and intellectuals to come to the base areas,
the Party organizations in the Northeast should now do everything possible
to draw workers and intellectuals into our army and into the various construction
tasks in the base areas, besides paying attention to underground work in
the Kuomintang areas. 

NOTES


1. The eastern Manchuria base area included Kirin, Hsi-an,
Antu, Yenchi, Tunhua and other places east of the Shenyang-Changchun section
of the Chinese Changchun Railway. The northern Manchuria base area included
Harbin, Mutankiang, Pei-an and Kiamusze, among others. The western Manchuria
base area included Tsitsihar, Tao-an, Kailu, Fuhsin, Chengchiatun, Fuyu and
other places west of the Shenyang-Changchun section of the Chinese Changchun
Railway. The Party also built a base area in southern Manchuria. It included
Antung, Chuangho, Tunghua, Linchiang and Chingyuan and other places east
of the Shenyang-Talien section of the Chinese Changchun Railway and Liaochung,
southwest of Shenyang. The persistent struggle against the enemy in southern
Manchuria played an important role in the building of base areas in the
Northeast.

2. This refers to the "Directive on Arousing the Masses"
issued by the Jehol Provincial Committee of the Chinese Communist Party in
December 1945. It pointed out that the central task in arousing the masses
then was to launch a mass campaign of accusation and retribution to settle
accounts with traitors and secret agents, that through the campaign the
enthusiasm of the masses should be heightened, their social, political and
economic status should be raised, and that trade unions, peasant associations
and other mass organizations should be organized and that preparations should
be made to proceed, when this campaign was over, to a mass campaign for the
reduction of rent and interest. In arousing the masses in the cities, we
had to arouse the workers first so that they could play the vanguard and
leading role in the campaign to settle accounts with traitors and secret
agents. The directive also called for learning the entire work of city
administration, for making economical use of manpower and for planning everything
on a long-term basis. 


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Some Points in Appraisal of the present International Situation







SOME POINTS IN APPRAISAL OF THE PRESENT INTERNATIONAL SITUATION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

SOME POINTS IN APPRAISAL OF THE PRESENT INTERNATIONAL SITUATION


April 1946

[This document was written to counter a pessimistic appraisal of the
international situation at that time. In the spring of 1946, imperialism
headed by the United States of America, together with the reactionaries in
various countries, was daily intensifying its anti-Soviet, anti-Communist
and anti-popular activities and trumpeting that "war between the United States
and the Soviet Union is inevitable" and that "the outbreak of a third world
war is inevitable". In these circumstances, since some comrades overestimated
the strength of imperialism, underestimated the strength of the people, feared
U.S. imperialism and feared the outbreak of a new world war, they showed
weakness in the face of the armed attacks of the U.S.-Chiang Kai-shek reactionary
gang and dared not resolutely oppose counter-revolutionary war with revolutionary
war. In this document Comrade Mao Tse-tung was combating such erroneous thinking.
He pointed out that if the forces of the people throughout the world waged
resolute, effective struggles against the forces of world reaction, they
could overcome the danger of a new world war. At the same time, he pointed
out that it was possible for the imperialist countries and the socialist
countries to reach certain compromises but that such compromises do "not
require the people in the countries of the capitalist world to follow suit
and make compromises at home", and that "the people in those countries will
continue to wage different struggles in accordance with their different
conditions". This document was not made public at the time and was circulated
only among some leading comrades of the Central Committee. It was distributed
at the meeting of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China in
December 1947. Since the comrades present unanimously agreed with its contents,
the full text was later included in "A Circular on the Decisions Made at
the Central Committee Meeting of December 1947", issued by the Central Committee
in January 1948.] 
  
1. The forces of world reaction are definitely preparing a third world war,
and the danger of war exists. But the democratic forces of the people of
the world have surpassed the reactionary forces and are forging ahead; they
must and certainly can overcome the danger of war. Therefore, the question
in the relations between the United States, Britain and France and the Soviet
Union is not a question of compromise or break, but a question of compromise
earlier or compromise later. "Compromise" means reaching agreement through
|peaceful negotiation. "Earlier or later" means several years, or more than
ten years, or even longer.

2. The kind of compromise mentioned above does not mean compromise on all
international issues. That is impossible so long as the United States, Britain
and France continue to be ruled by reactionaries. This kind of compromise
means compromise on some issues, including certain important ones. But there
will not be many such compromises in the near future. There is, however,
a possibility that the trade relations of the United States, Britain and
France with the Soviet Union will expand.

3. Such compromise between the United States, Britain and France and the
Soviet Union can be the outcome only of resolute, effective struggles by
all the democratic forces of the world against the reactionary forces of
the United States, Britain and France. Such compromise does not require the
people in the countries of the capitalist world to follow suit and make
compromises at home. The people in those countries will continue to wage
different struggles in accordance with their different conditions. The principle
of the reactionary forces in dealing with the democratic forces of the people
is definitely to destroy all they can and to prepare to destroy later whatever
they cannot destroy now. Face to face with this situation, the democratic
forces of the people should likewise apply the same principle to the reactionary
forces. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Smash Chiang Kai-Shek's Offensive by a War of Self-Defence







SMASH CHIANG KAI-SHEK'S OFFENSIVE BY A WAR OF SELF-DEFENCE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

SMASH CHIANG KAI-SHEK'S OFFENSIVE BY A WAR OF SELF-DEFENCE


July 20, 1946

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China. Chiang Kai-shek tore up the "October
10th Agreement" in the winter of 1945, but his preparations for an all-out
civil war were not complete, mainly because large numbers of Kuomintang troops
had not yet been moved to the civil war fronts. Consequently, in January
1946, under the pressure of the demand of the entire people for peace and
democracy, the Kuomintang government had to convene the Political Consultative
Conference with the participation of the Communist Party of China and other
democratic parties. The Conference adopted a series of resolutions favourable
to peace and democracy, and on January 10 the Kuomintang government issued
an order to cease fire. Chiang Kai-shek was not willing to observe the
resolutions of the Political Consultative Conference and the cease-fire order.
In the first half of 1946 the Kuomintang troops continued to attack the Liberated
Areas at many points, the attack in the Northeast being on a particularly
large scale, and a situation was created with small-scale fighting south
of the Great Wall and large-scale fighting north of it. Meanwhile the United
States made very great efforts to transport and equip the Kuomintang troops.
By the end of June 1946 Chiang Kai-shek and his U.S. masters thought that
they were fully prepared and could wipe out the whole People's Liberation
Army in three to six months. Accordingly, they launched an all-out offensive
against the Liberated Areas, which began on June 26 with a massive encircling
attack on the Central Plains Liberated Area. Between July and September the
Kuomintang troops started successive large-scale attacks against the Liberated
Areas of Kiangsu-Anhwei, Shantung, Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan,
Shansi-Chahar-Hopei and Shansi-Suiyuan. In October they launched another
large-scale attack on the Northeast Liberated Area. At the same time they
continued to encircle the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Liberated Area with large
numbers of troops. When the country-wide civil war broke out, the Kuomintang
employed 193 brigades (divisions), or some 1,600,000 of its regular troops,
to attack the Liberated Areas; they constituted 80 per cent of its total
strength of 248 regular brigades (divisions), or 2,000,000 men. Under the
leadership of the Central Committee of the Party and its bureaus and sub-bureaus,
the army and people in the Liberated Areas fought heroically against the
offensive of Chiang Kai-shek's Troops. At that time there were six major
theatres of war in the Liberated Areas. These six theatres of war and the
forces of the People's Liberation Army fighting there were: 

  The Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Liberated Area with People's Liberation Army
  forces led by Liu Po-cheng, Teng Hsiao-ping and other comrades.


  The Eastern China Liberated Area (including the Shantung and the Kiangsu-Anhwei
  Liberated Areas) with People's Liberation Army forces led by Chen Yi, Su
  Yu, Tan Chen-lin and other comrades.


  The Northeast Liberated Area with People's Liberation Army forces led by
  Lin Piao, Lo Jung-huan and other comrades.


  The Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Liberated Area with People's Liberation Army forces
  led by Nieh Jung-chen and other comrades.


  The Shansi-Suiynan Liberated Area with People's Liberation Army forces led
  by Ho Lung and other comrades.


  The Central Plains Liberated Area with People's Liberation Army forces led
  by Li Hsien-nien, Cheng Wei-san and other comrades.


The People's Liberation Army, then totalling about 1,200,000 troops, was
outnumbered by the enemy. It correctly carried out the strategy laid down
by Comrade Mao Tse-tung and struck incessant, powerful blows at the invading
enemy. After wiping out 66 regular brigades and some irregular units of the
enemy, totalling more than 710,000 men, in about eight months, the People's
Liberation Army halted the enemy's all-out offensive. Then, step by step,
it unfolded its strategic counter-offensive.] 
  
1. Chiang Kai-shek, after violating the truce agreement,
[1] violating the resolutions of the Political
Consultative Conference [2] and occupying Szepingkai,
Changchun and other cities of ours in the Northeast, is now launching another
large-scale offensive against us in eastern and northern China; later, he
may again attack the Northeast. Only after completely smashing Chiang's offensive
in a war of self-defence can the Chinese people regain peace.

2. Our Party and our army are making every preparation to smash Chiang Kai-shek's
offensive and thus to win peace. Although Chiang Kai-shek has U.S. aid, the
feelings of the people are against him, the morale of his troops is low,
and his economy is in difficulty. As for us, although we have no foreign
aid, the feelings of the people are for us, the morale of our troops is high,
and we can handle our economy. Therefore, we can defeat Chiang Kai-shek.
The whole Party should be fully confident of this.

3. For defeating Chiang Kai-shek the general method of fighting is mobile
warfare. Therefore, the temporary abandonment of certain places or cities
is not only unavoidable but also necessary. Certain places or cities are
temporarily abandoned in order to win final victory, which would otherwise
be impossible. We must make all Party members and all the people in the Liberated
Areas understand this so that they will be mentally prepared.

4. In order to smash Chiang Kai-shek's offensive we must cooperate closely
with the masses of the people and win over all who can be won over. In the
rural areas, on the one hand, we should resolutely solve the land problem,
rely firmly on the farm labourers and poor peasants and unite with the middle
peasants; on the other hand, when solving the land problem, we should distinguish
the ordinary rich peasants and middle and small landlords from the traitors,
bad gentry and local tyrants. We should be more strict in our treatment of
the traitors, bad gentry and local tyrants, and more lenient in our treatment
of the rich peasants and middle and small landlords. In places where the
land problem has already been solved, we should change to a moderate attitude
towards the landlord class as a whole, with the exception of a few reactionaries.
In order to reduce the number of hostile elements and to consolidate the
Liberated Areas, we should help all those landlords who have difficulty in
making a living and induce runaway landlords to return and give them an
opportunity to earn a living. In the cities, besides uniting with the working
class, the petty bourgeoisie and all progressives, we should take care to
unite with all the middle elements and isolate the reactionaries. Among the
Kuomintang troops, we should win over all the possible opponents of civil
war and isolate the bellicose elements.

5. In order to smash Chiang Kai-shek's offensive we must plan on a long-term
basis. We must use our manpower and material resources with the utmost economy
and do everything possible to avoid waste. We must investigate and clean
up the petty graft which has appeared in some places. We must work hard in
production in order to become completely self-sufficient in all necessities
and first of all in grain and cloth. We must promote the extensive planting
of cotton and encourage every family to spin and every village to weave.
We should start to promote this even in the Northeast. In the spheres of
finance and supplies, we must meet the material needs of the war of self-defence
and at the same time lighten the burden on the people, so that there will
be some improvement in the livelihood of the people in our Liberated Areas
even under war-time conditions. To sum up, we rely entirely on our own efforts,
and our position is invincible; this is the very opposite of Chiang Kai-shek
who depends entirely on foreign countries. We live plainly and work hard,
we take care of the needs of both the army and the people; this is the very
opposite of the situation in Chiang Kai-shek's areas, where those at the
top are corrupt and degenerate, while the people under them are destitute.
Under these circumstances, we shall surely be victorious.

6. Difficulties lie ahead of us but they can and must be overcome. All Party
comrades and all the troops and people in the Liberated Areas must unite
as one, completely smash Chiang Kai-shek's offensive and build an independent,
peaceful and democratic new China.

NOTES


l. The "truce agreement" was the agreement concluded on
January 10, 1946 between representatives of the Communist Party of China
and Chiang Kai-shek's Kuomintang government. It stipulated that the troops
of both parties should cease military operations from their respective positions
as of midnight, January 13. But in fact Chiang Kai-shek used this agreement
as a smoke-screen behind which he made arrangements for a major war; at the
very time the cease-fire order was being transmitted, he ordered the Kuomintang
troops "to seize strategic points" and from then on moved up troops continuously
to attack the Liberated Areas. By July Chiang Kai-shek had openly torn up
the truce agreement and launched an all-out offensive against the Liberated
Areas. 

2. The Political Consultative Conference was attended by
representatives of the Kuomintang, the Communist Party of China and other
political parties, and by personages without party affiliation and was held
in Chungking from January 10 to 31, 1946. The Conference adopted five
agreements: 

  (1) Agreement on Government Organization. This agreement affirmed that "the
  Organic Law of the National Government shall be revised with a view to
  strengthening the National Government Council". It increased the number of
  National Government Councillors and provided that "the National Government
  Councillors shall be chosen by the President of the National Government from
  both Kuomintang and non-Kuomintang members"; that "the appointment of members
  of various parties as National Government Councillors by the President of
  the National Government shall be made on the recommendation of the parties
  concerned, which, in case of the President's disapproval, shall make new
  recommendations"; that "when the President of the National Government nominates
  as Government Councillor any personage without party affiliation, whose
  appointment is opposed by one-third of the Councillors already appointed,
  the President must reconsider the matter and make a new nomination for
  appointment"; and that "half the National Government Councillors shall be
  Kuomintang members and the other half members of other political parties
  and public personages". The National Government Council was nominally defined
  as "the supreme government organ in charge of state affairs", with powers
  to discuss and decide legislative principles, administrative polices and
  major military measures, financial plans and the budget as well as matters
  submitted by the President of the National Government for consideration;
  yet at the same time the President of the National Government was vested
  with great powers, including the power of nominating persons for office,
  the power of veto (which, though nominally limited was virtually absolute,
  for it required a majority of three-fifths to override a veto, while the
  President's own party, the Kuomintang, had half the seats) and emergency
  powers. The agreement also provided that "seven or eight members of the Executive
  Yuan shall be non-Kuomintang members who shall either hold the portfolios
  of existing ministries or hold the proposed posts of ministers of state without
  portfolio".


  (2) The Programme for Peace and National Reconstruction. This programme was
  composed of nine sections, namely, General Principles, Rights of the People,
  Political Affairs, Military Affairs, Foreign Relations, Economic and Financial
  Affairs, Education and Culture, Relief and Rehabilitation, and Overseas Chinese
  Affairs. The section on "General Principles" provided that all political
  parties of the country shall "unite closely to build a new China, united,
  free and democratic"; that there shall be "political democratization,
  nationalization of troops, and equality and legality for all political parties";
  and that "political disputes shall be settled by political means in order
  to ensure peace and national development". The section on "Rights of the
  People" provided that "the freedoms of person, thought, religious belief,
  speech, the press, assembly, association, residence, movement and correspondence
  shall be guaranteed to the people" and that "any organ or person other than
  the judiciary and the police is strictly forbidden to arrest, try and punish
  people, and anyone who violates this provision shall be punished". The section
  on "Political Affairs" provided that "all levels of the administration shall
  be overhauled, their powers and responsibilities unified and clearly defined,
  all duplicated agencies abolished, administrative procedures simplified and
  each level of administration charged with definite responsibilities"; that
  "competent office-holders shall be protected, appointments to government
  posts based not on party affiliation but on competency and seniority, and
  the holding of concurrent posts and the practice of favouritism forbidden";
  that "the supervisory system shall be strictly enforced, corruption severely
  punished and facilities given to the people freely to lodge accusations against
  corrupt officials", that "local self-government shall be actively promoted
  and elections from the lower level upwards through universal suffrage carried
  out"; and that "the powers of the central and local governments shall be
  defined according to the principle of fair distribution of powers, that the
  local governments may take such measures as are suitable to local circumstances,
  but those enacted by a province or county must not contradict those of the
  central government". The section on "Military Affairs" provided that "the
  military organizations shall be adapted to the needs of national defence,
  the military system reformed in line with a democratic system of government
  and the conditions in the country, military power separated from political
  parties, military authority separated from civil authority, military education
  improved, equipment be adequate and personnel and financial systems be improved
  in order to build a modernized national army" and that "the numerical strength
  of the nation's troops shall be effectively reduced and reorganized in accordance
  with the provisions of the Military Reorganization Plan". The section on
  "Economic and Financial Affairs" provided that "the development of
  bureaucrat-capital shall be curbed and government officials strictly forbidden
  to make use of their official position and influence to engage in speculation,
  monopoly, tax evasion, smuggling, embezzlement of public funds and unlawful
  use of the means of transport"; that "rents and rates of interest shall be
  reduced, the rights of lessees protected, the payment of farm rents ensured,
  agricultural credits expanded, usury strictly prohibited in order to better
  the life of the peasants and an agrarian law to attain the objective of 'land
  to the tillers' shall be put into effect"; that "labour laws shall be put
  into effect to improve working conditions"; that "the administration of finance
  shall be made public, the budget system and the system of financial reports
  strictly adhered to, budget expenditures drastically reduced, revenues and
  expenditures balanced, central and local government finances defined, the
  currency in circulation contracted and the monetary system stabilized and
  the raising of both domestic and foreign loans and their uses made public
  and subject to supervision by public bodies"; and that "the system of taxation
  shall be reformed and all exorbitant and miscellaneous levies and illegal
  exactions completely abolished". The section on "Education and Culture" provided
  that "academic freedom shall be guaranteed, and there shall be no interference
  with school and college administration for reasons of religious belief or
  political thought"; that "the proportion of the national budget allocated
  to education and culture shall be increased"; and that "the war-time censorship
  of the press, publications, motion pictures, the drama, posts and telegrams
  shall be abolished".


  (3) Agreement on the National Assembly. This agreement provided that "there
  shall be added to the National Assembly seven hundred delegates from various
  parties and from among public personages" and that "the duty and power of
  the first National Assembly shall be to frame and adopt a constitution".


  (4) Agreement on the Draft Constitution. This agreement provided for the
  establishment of a review committee to revise the draft constitution prepared
  by the Kuomintang and laid down the principles for revision. In addition
  to prescribing the principles governing the duties and powers of the National
  Assembly and government organizations, special provisions were made regarding
  "local government" and "the rights and duties of the people". With respect
  to "local government", it provided that "the province shall be the highest
  unit of local self-government"; that "the powers of the provincial government
  in relation to those of the central government shall be defined according
  to the principle of a fair distribution of powers"; that "the provincial
  governor shall be elected by the people"; and that "the province may have
  a provincial constitution which, however, must not contravene the provisions
  of the national constitution". With respect to "the rights and duties of
  the people", it provided that "all freedoms and rights which are generally
  enjoyed by the people of a democratic country shall be protected by the
  constitution against illegal violation"; that "if any provision is made by
  law regarding the freedom of the people, it shall be at the protection of
  such freedom and not at its restriction"; that "drafting of labour may be
  provided for in local laws, but not in the national constitution"; and that
  "the right of self-government shall be guaranteed to minority nationalities
  who live together in specific communities".


  (5) Agreement on Military affairs. This agreement provided that "the military
  system shall be reformed in line with a democratic system of government and
  the conditions in our country"; that "military conscription shall be improved";
  that "military education shall be conducted on the basis of the principles
  governing the building of the army and shall for ever be dissociated from
  political parties and personal relationships"; that "military power shall
  be separated from political parties" and "all political parties and individuals
  shall refrain from using the army as an instrument of political struggle";
  and that "military authority shall be separated from civil authority" and
  "no soldier in active service may serve concurrently as a civil official".
  With regard to the reorganization of the Kuomintang troops and the troops
  of the Liberated Areas, it provided that "the three-man military sub-committee
  proceed as planned with all possible speed to reach an agreement on measures
  for reorganizing the troops of the Communist Party of China and to complete
  their reorganization"; that the Kuomintang troops shall


  "be reorganized according to the plan already laid down by the Ministry of
  War into ninety divisions and this reorganization shall be completed at the
  highest possible speed within six months"; and that "when the above-mentioned
  two items of reorganization have been completed, all troops of the entire
  nation shall be unified and further reorganized into fifty or sixty divisions".


  These Political Consultative Conference agreements were, in varying degrees,
  favourable to the people and unfavourable to Chiang Kai-shek's reactionary
  rule. While expressing his approval of these agreements in an attempt to
  use them to carry out his peace fraud, Chiang Kai-shek actively made military
  preparations for launching a country-wide civil war. These Political Consultative
  Conference agreements were soon torn up by him one after another.


Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Talk With the American Correspondent Anna Louise Strong







TALK WITH THE AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT ANNA LOUISE STRONG



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

TALK WITH THE AMERICAN CORRESPONDENT ANNA LOUISE STRONG


August 1946

[This is a very important statement made by Comrade Mao Tse-tung on the
international and domestic situation not long after the conclusion of World
War II. Here, Comrade Mao Tse-tung put forward his famous thesis, "All
reactionaries are paper tigers." This thesis armed the people of our country
ideologically, strengthened their confidence in victory and played an exceedingly
great role in the People's War of Liberation. Just as Lenin considered
imperialism a "colossus with feet of clay", so Comrade Mao Tse-tung regards
imperialism and all reactionaries as paper tigers; both have dealt with the
essence of the matter. This thesis is a fundamental strategic concept for
the revolutionary people. Since the period of the Second Revolutionary Civil
War, Comrade Mao Tse-tung has repeatedly pointed out: strategically, with
regard to the whole, revolutionaries must despise the enemy, dare to struggle
against him and dare to seize victory; at the same time, tactically, with
regard to each part, each specific struggle, they must take the enemy seriously,
be prudent, carefully study and perfect the art of struggle and adopt forms
of struggle suited to different times, places and conditions in order to
isolate and wipe out the enemy step by step. On December 1, 1958, at a meeting
of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of
China held at Wuchang, Comrade Mao Tse-tung stated: 

  Just as there is not a single thing in the world without a dual nature (this
  is the law of the unity of opposites), so imperialism and all reactionaries
  have a dual nature -- they are real tigers and paper tigers at the same time.
  In past history, before they won state power and for some time afterwards,
  the slave-owning class, the feudal landlord class and the bourgeoisie were
  vigorous, revolutionary and progressive; they were real tigers. But with
  the lapse of time, because their opposites -- the slave class, the peasant
  class and the proletariat -- grew in strength step by step, struggled against
  them and became more and more formidable, these ruling classes changed step
  by step into the reverse, changed into reactionaries, changed into backward
  people, changed into paper tigers. And eventually they were overthrown, or
  will be overthrown, by the people. The reactionary, backward, decaying classes
  retained this dual nature even in their last life-and-death struggles against
  the people. On the one hand, they were real tigers; they ate people, ate
  people by the millions and tens of millions. The cause of the people's struggle
  went through a period of difficulties and hardships, and along the path there
  were many twists and turns. To destroy the rule of imperialism, feudalism
  and bureaucrat-capitalism in China took the Chinese people more than a hundred
  years and cost them tens of millions of lives before the victory in 1949.
  Look! Were these not living tigers, iron tigers, real tigers? But in the
  end they changed into paper tigers, dead tigers, bean-curd tigers. These
  are historical facts. Have people not seen or heard about these facts? There
  have indeed been thousands and tens of thousands of them! Thousands and tens
  of thousands! Hence, imperialism and all reactionaries, looked at in essence,
  from a long-term point of view, from a strategic point of view, must be seen
  for what they are -- paper tigers. On this we should build our strategic
  thinking. On the other hand, they are also living tigers, iron tigers, real
  tigers which can eat people. On this we should build our tactical thinking.


For the necessity of despising the enemy strategically and taking full account
of him tactically, see "Strategic Problems of China's Revolutionary War",
Chapter 5, Section 6, Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. I, and
"On Some Important the Party's Present Policy", Section I, pp. 181-82 of
this volume.] 
  
Strong: Do you think there is hope for a political,
a peaceful settlement of China's problems in the near future?

Mao: That depends on the attitude of the U.S. government. If the
American people stay the hands of the American reactionaries who are helping
Chiang Kai-shek fight the civil war, there is hope for peace.

Strong: Suppose the United States gives Chiang Kai-shek no help,
besides that already given, [1] how long can Chiang
Kai-shek keep on fighting?

Mao: More than a year.

Strong: Can Chiang Kai-shek keep on that long, economically?

Mao: He can.

Strong: What if the United States makes it clear that it will give
Chiang Kai-shek no more help from now on?

Mao: There is no sign yet that the U.S. government and Chiang Kai-shek
have any desire to stop the war within a short time.

Strong: How long can the Communist Party keep on?

Mao: As far as our own desire is concerned, we don't want to fight
even for a single day. But if circumstances force us to fight, we can fight
to the finish.

Strong: If the American people ask why the Communist Party is fighting,
what should I reply?

Mao: Because Chiang Kai-shek is out to slaughter the Chinese people,
and if the people want to survive they have to defend themselves. This the
American people can understand.

Strong: What do you think of the possibility of the United States
starting a war against the Soviet Union?

Mao: There are two aspects to the propaganda about an anti-Soviet
war. On the one hand, U.S. imperialism is indeed preparing a war against
the Soviet Union; the current propaganda about an anti-Soviet war, as well
as other anti-Soviet propaganda, is political preparation for such a war.
On the other hand, this propaganda is a smoke-screen put up by the U.S.
reactionaries to cover many actual contradictions immediately confronting
U.S. imperialism. These are the contradictions between the U.S. reactionaries
and the American people and the contradictions of U.S. imperialism with other
capitalist countries and with the colonial and semi-colonial countries. At
present, the actual significance of the U.S. slogan of waging an anti-Soviet
war is the oppression of the American people and the expansion of the U.S.
forces of aggression in the rest of the capitalist world. As you know, both
Hitler and his partners, the Japanese warlords, used anti-Soviet slogans
for a long time as a pretext for enslavement of the people at home and aggression
against other countries. Now the U.S. reactionaries are acting in exactly
the same way.

To start a war, the U.S. reactionaries must first attack the American people.
They are already attacking the American people - oppressing the workers and
democratic circles in the United States politically and economically and
preparing to impose fascism there. The people of the United States should
stand up and resist the attacks of the U.S. reactionaries. I believe they
will.

The United States and the Soviet Union are separated by a vast zone which
includes many capitalist, colonial and semi-colonial countries in Europe,
Asia and Africa. Before the U.S. reactionaries have subjugated these countries,
an attack on the Soviet Union is out of the question. In the Pacific the
United States now controls areas larger than all the former British spheres
of influence there put together; it controls Japan, that part of China under
Kuomintang rule, half of Korea, and the South Pacific. It has long controlled
Central and South America. It seeks also to control the whole of the British
Empire and Western Europe. Using various pretexts, the United States is making
large-scale military arrangements and setting up military bases in many
countries. The U.S. reactionaries say that the military bases they have set
up and are preparing to set up all over the world are aimed against the Soviet
Union. True, these military bases are directed against the Soviet Union.
At present, however, it is not the Soviet Union but the countries in which
these military bases are located that are the first to suffer U.S. aggression.
I believe it won't be long before these countries come to realize who is
really oppressing them, the Soviet Union or the United States. The day will
come when the U.S. reactionaries find themselves opposed by the people of
the whole world.

Of course, I do not mean to say that the U.S. reactionaries have no intention
of attacking the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union is a defender of world peace
and a powerful factor preventing the domination of the world by the U.S.
reactionaries. Because of the existence of the Soviet Union, it is absolutely
impossible for the reactionaries in the United States and the world to realize
their ambitions. That is why the U.S. reactionaries rabidly hate the Soviet
Union and actually dream of destroying this socialist state. But the fact
that the U.S. reactionaries are now trumpeting so loudly about a U.S.-Soviet
war and creating a foul atmosphere, so soon after the end of World War II,
compels us to take a look at their real aims. It turns out that under the
cover of anti-Soviet slogans they are frantically attacking the workers and
democratic circles in the United States and turning all the countries which
are the targets of U.S. external expansion into U.S. dependencies. I think
the American people and the peoples of all countries menaced by U.S. aggression
should unite and struggle against the attacks of the U.S. reactionaries and
their running dogs in these countries. Only by victory in this struggle can
a third world war be avoided; otherwise it is unavoidable.

Strong: That is very clear. But suppose the United States uses the
atom bomb? Suppose the United States bombs the Soviet Union from its bases
in Iceland, Okinawa and China?

Mao: The atom bomb is a paper tiger which the U.S. reactionaries
use to scare people. It looks terrible, but in fact it isn't. Of course,
the atom bomb is a weapon of mass slaughter, but the outcome of a war is
decided by the people, not by one or two new types of weapon.

All reactionaries are paper tigers. In appearance, the reactionaries are
terrifying, but in reality they are not so powerful. From a long-term point
of view, it is not the reactionaries but the people who are really powerful.
In Russia, before the February Revolution in 1917, which side was really
strong? On the surface the tsar was strong but he was swept away by a single
gust of wind in the February Revolution. In the final analysis, the strength
in Russia was on the side of the Soviets of Workers, Peasants and Soldiers.
The tsar was just a paper tiger. Wasn't Hitler once considered very strong?
But history proved that he was a paper tiger. So was Mussolini, so was Japanese
imperialism. On the contrary, the strength of the Soviet Union and of the
people in all countries who loved democracy and freedom proved much greater
than had been foreseen.

Chiang Kai-shek and his supporters, the U.S. reactionaries, are all paper
tigers too. Speaking of U.S. imperialism, people seem to feel that it is
terrifically strong. Chinese reactionaries are using the "strength" of the
United States to frighten the Chinese people. But it will be proved that
the U.S. reactionaries, like all the reactionaries in history, do not have
much strength. In the United States there are others who are really strong
-- the American people.

Take the case of China. We have only millet plus rifles to rely on, but history
will finally prove that our millet plus rifles is more powerful than Chiang
Kai-shek's aeroplanes plus tanks. Although the Chinese people still face
many difficulties and will long suffer hardships from the joint attacks of
U.S. imperialism and the Chinese reactionaries, the day will come when these
reactionaries are defeated and we are victorious. The reason is simply this:
the reactionaries represent reaction, we represent progress. 

NOTES 

1. To help Chiang Kai-shek start civil war against the
people, U.S. imperialism gave his government a very great amount of aid.
By the end of June 1946 the United States had equipped 45 Kuomintang divisions.
It had trained 150,000 Kuomintang military personnel - army, naval and air
forces, secret agents, communications police, staff officers, medical officers,
supply personnel, etc. U.S. warships and aircraft transported to the front
against the Liberated Areas 14 Kuomintang corps (41 divisions) and 8 regiments
of the communications police corps, or over 540,000 men in all. The U.S.
government landed 90,000 of its marines in China and stationed them at such
important cities as Shanghai, Tsingtao, Tientsin, Peiping and Chinwangtao.
They guarded the lines of communication for the Kuomintang in northern China.
According to data disclosed in United States Relations with China (The
White Paper), released by the State Department on August 5, 1949, the total
value of various kinds of U.S. aid given to the Chiang Kai-shek government
from the time of the War of Resistance Against Japan to 1948 was more than
4,500 million dollars (the overwhelming bulk of U.S. aid given during the
War of Resistance had been hoarded by the Kuomintang for the ensuing civil
war against the people). But the actual amount of U.S. aid to Chiang Kai-shek
far exceeded this total. The U.S. White Paper admitted that U.S. aid was
equivalent to "more than 50 percent of the monetary expenditures" of the
Chiang Kai-shek government and was of "proportionately greater magnitude
in relation to the budget of that Government than the United States has provided
to any nation of Western Europe since the end of the war". 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Concentrate a Superior Force to Destroy the Enemy Forces One by One







CONCENTRATE A SUPERIOR FORCE TO DESTROY THE ENEMY FORCES ONE BY ONE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

CONCENTRATE A SUPERIOR FORCE TO DESTROY THE ENEMY FORCES ONE BY ONE


September 16, 1946

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the
Revolutionary Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China.]

  

1. The method of fighting by concentrating a superior force to destroy the
enemy forces [1] one by one must be employed not
only in the disposition of troops for a campaign but also in the disposition
of troops for a battle.

2. With regard to the disposition for a campaign, when the enemy
employs many brigades [2] (or regiments) and advances
against our army from several directions, our army must concentrate an absolutely
superior force -- six, five, four or at least three times the enemy strength
-- and pick an opportune moment to encircle and wipe out one enemy brigade
(or regiment) first. It should be one of the enemy's weaker brigades (or
regiments), or one that has less support, or one stationed where the terrain
and the people are most favourable to us and unfavourable to the enemy. We
should tie down the rest of the enemy brigades (or regiments) with small
forces in order to prevent them from rushing reinforcements to the brigade
(or regiment) we are encircling and attacking so that we can destroy it first.
When this has been achieved, we should, according to the circumstances, either
wipe out one or several more enemy brigades or retire to rest and consolidate
for further fighting. (Here are two examples of the former. Our troops under
the command of Su Yu and Tan Chen-lin wiped out five thousand of the enemy's
communications police corps [3] near Jukao on August
22, one enemy brigade on August 26 and one and a half brigades on
August 27.[4] Our troops under Liu Po-cheng and
Teng Hsiao-ping annihilated one enemy brigade near Tingtao between September
3 and 6,another in the afternoon of September 6 and two more on September
7-8.[5] ) In the disposition for a campaign,
we must reject the wrong method of fighting, which underrates the enemy and
therefore divides our forces to deal with all the enemy detachments, for
by this method we cannot destroy even one enemy detachment but will land
ourselves in a passive position.

3. In the disposition for a battle, when we have concentrated an absolutely
superior force and encircled one of the enemy detachments (a brigade or
regiment), our attacking formations (or units) should not attempt to wipe
out all the encircled enemy simultaneously at one swoop and thus divide
themselves and strike everywhere without enough strength anywhere, losing
time and making it hard to get results. Instead, we should concentrate an
absolutely superior force, that is to say, a force six, five, four or at
least three times that of the enemy, concentrate the whole or the bulk of
our artillery, select one (not two) of the weak spots in the enemy's positions,
attack it fiercely and be sure to win. This accomplished, swiftly exploit
the victory and destroy the enemy forces one by one.

4. The effects of this method of fighting are, first, complete annihilation
and, second, quick decision. Only complete annihilation can deal the most
telling blows to the enemy, for when we wipe out one regiment, he will have
one regiment less, and when we wipe out one brigade, he will have one brigade
less. This method is most useful when employed against an enemy lacking
second-line troops. Only complete annihilation can replenish our own forces
to the greatest possible extent. It is now not only the main source of our
arms and ammunition, but also an important source of our manpower. Complete
annihilation demoralizes the enemy's troops and depresses his followers;
it raises the morale of our troops and inspires our people. A quick decision
makes it possible for our troops either to wipe out the enemy reinforcements
one by one or evade them. Quick decision in battle and campaign is a necessary
condition for the strategy of a protracted war.

5. Among our military cadres there are still many who, when not in action,
approve the principle of concentrating our forces to wipe out the enemy forces
one by one, but often fail to apply it in action. That is due to underestimation
of the enemy and to lack of intensive education and study. It is necessary
to cite detailed cases of past battles to explain again and again the advantages
of this method of fighting and to point out that it is the chief method of
defeating Chiang Kai-shek's attacks. Using this method we shall win. Acting
counter to it we shall lose.

6. The principle of concentrating our forces to wipe out the enemy forces
one by one has been a fine tradition of our army ever since its founding
more than a decade ago; this is not the first time it has been put forward.
During the War of Resistance Against Japan, however, the dispersal of our
forces for guerrilla warfare was primary, and the concentration of our forces
for mobile warfare was supplementary. In the present civil war, as conditions
have changed, so should the method of fighting. The concentration of our
forces for mobile warfare should be primary, and the dispersal of our forces
for guerrilla warfare should be supplementary. Now that Chiang Kai-shek's
army has acquired more powerful weapons, it is necessary for our army to
lay special stress on the method of concentrating a superior force to wipe
out the enemy forces one by one.

7. When the enemy is on the offensive and we are on the defensive, this method
must be employed. However, when the enemy is on the defensive and we are
on the offensive, we should distinguish between two kinds of situations and
adopt different methods. When our force is big and the enemy in that locality
is rather weak, or when we are making a surprise attack on the enemy, we
may strike at several of his units simultaneously. For example, between June
5 and 10, our troops in Shantung Province simultaneously attacked and captured
more than ten towns on the Tsingtao-Tsinan and the Tientsin-Pukow
Railways.[6] Or to take another example, between
August 10 and 21, our troops under Liu Po-cheng and Teng Hsiao-ping attacked
and captured more than ten towns along the section of the Lunghai Railway
between Kaifeng and Hsuchow.[7] On the other hand,
when we do not have enough forces, we should seize the enemy-occupied towns
one by one and should not attack the enemy at several towns simultaneously.
That was how our forces in Shansi Province took the towns along the Tatung-Puchow
Railway.[8]

8. When the main force of our troops is concentrated to annihilate the enemy,
it must co-ordinate its operations with vigorous activities by the regional
formations, local guerrillas and people's militia. When regional formations
(or troops) attack an enemy regiment, battalion or company, they should also
adopt the principle of concentrating our forces to annihilate the enemy forces
one by one.

9. The principle of concentrating our forces to wipe out the enemy forces
one by one is aimed chiefly at annihilating the enemy's effective strength,
not at holding or seizing a place. In some circumstances, it is permissible
to abandon certain places for the purpose of concentrating our forces to
wipe out the enemy or of enabling our main force to avoid heavy enemy attacks
and to facilitate rest and consolidation for further fighting. So long as
we are able to wipe out the enemy's effective strength on a large scale,
it will be possible to recover lost territory and seize new territory. Therefore,
all those who succeed in destroying the enemy's effective strength should
be commended. This applies not only to those who destroy the enemy's regular
forces but also to those who destroy his peace preservation corps, home-going
contingents [9] and other reactionary local armed
bands. However, we must hold or seize territory wherever the relative strength
of the enemy and our own forces makes this possible or wherever such territory
is significant for our campaigns or battles; to do otherwise would be a mistake.
Therefore, those who succeed in holding or seizing such territory should
also be commended. 

NOTES


1. The expressions "to destroy the enemy", "to wipe out
the enemy" and "to annihilate the enemy" are used as synonyms in this book.
They all include enemy troops killed, wounded and captured. To wipe out
(annihilate, destroy) an enemy force means either to wipe it out completely
or to wipe out the major part of that force.

2. A regular corps of the Kuomintang army originally consisted
of three (sometimes two) divisions, each with three regiments. Beginning
in May 1946 the Kuomintang regular troops south of the Yellow River were
reorganized in stages; what had been a corps became a reorganized division
and with three (sometimes two) regiments. Part of the Kuomintang troops north
of the Yellow River were not reorganized, and their designations remained
the same. Some of the reorganized divisions later reverted to their original
designation of corps.

3. The communications police corps of the Kuomintang was
formed in March 1945. Following Japan's surrender, the corps was deployed
along communication lines for "garrison duties" under the pretext of guarding
the railways, but actually to carry on secret police activities. It was one
of the forces the Kuomintang used for fighting the civil war.

4. In July 1946 the Kuomintang forces began a large-scale
invasion of the Kiangsu-Anhwei Liberated Area, and our army fought bravely
in self-defence. The Kuomintang troops attacking the Central Kiangsu Liberated
Area consisted of fifteen brigades with about 120,000 men under Tang En-po.
From July 13 to August 27, eighteen regiments of the Eastern China People's
Liberation Army, commanded by Su Yu, Tan Chen-lin and other comrades,
concentrated superior forces and fought seven successive battles in the region
of Taihsing, Jukao, Hai-an and Shaopai in central Kiangsu. Our forces wiped
out six enemy brigades and five battalions of the enemy's communications
police corps. The text refers to the results of two of these battles.

5. In August 1946 the Kuomintang forces advanced along
two routes from the Hsuchow and Chengchow sectors and attacked the
Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Liberated Area. The People's Liberation Army
of this area, under the command of Liu Po-cheng, Teng Hsiao-ping and other
comrades, concentrated superior forces to engage the enemy detachment advancing
from Chengchow. Between September 3 and 8 they wiped out four enemy brigades
in succession in the region of Hotse, Tingtao and Tsaohsien in Shantung Province.

6. Early in June 1946 the Shantung People's Liberation
Army sent an expedition against the puppet troops along the Tsingtao-Tsinan
and Tientsin-Pukow Railways and liberated more than ten towns, including
Chiaohsien, Changtien, Choutsun, Tehchow, Tai-an and Tsaochuang.

7. From August 10 to 21, 1946, the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan
People's Liberation Army, supporting the Central Plains and Eastern China
People's Liberation Armies, moved by several routes and attacked the enemy
troops stationed along the Kaifeng-Hsuchow section of the Lunghai Railway,
capturing more than ten towns, including Tangshan, Lanfeng, Huangkou, Lichuang
and Yangchi.

8. In July 1946 the Kuomintang forces under Hu Tsung-nan
and Yen Hsi-shan jointly attacked the Southern Shansi Liberated Area. The
Taiyueh units of the Shansi-Hopei- Shantung-Honan People's Liberation Army
and a part of the Shansi-Suiynan People's Liberation Army counter-attacked
and beat back the enemy in southern Shansi. In August they started an offensive
against the enemy between Linfen and Lingshih along the Tatung-Puchow Railway
and liberated the towns of Hungtung, Chaocheng, Huohsien, Lingshih and Fenhsi.

9. During the People's War of Liberation some landlords
and local tyrants in the Liberated Areas fled to the Kuomintang areas. They
were organized by the Kuomintang into "home-going contingents", "home-going
legions" and other reactionary armed bands to attack the Liberated Areas
together with the Kuomintang troops. Everywhere they robbed, killed and committed
all kinds of atrocities. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Truth About U.S. "Mediation" and the Future of the Civil War in China







THE TRUTH ABOUT U.S. "MEDIATION" AND THE FUTURE OF THE CIVIL WAR



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE TRUTH ABOUT U.S. "MEDIATION" AND THE FUTURE OF THE CIVIL WAR
  IN CHINA


  Talk with the American Correspondent A. T. Steele


September 29, 1946


Steele: Sir, do you consider that the U.S. effort to mediate in
the Chinese civil war has failed? If the policy of the United States continues
as at present, what will it lead to?

Mao: I doubt very much that the policy of the U.S. government is
one of "mediation".[1]Judging by the large amount
of aid the United States is giving Chiang Kai-shek to enable him to wage
a civil war on an unprecedented scale, the policy of the U.S. government
is to use the so-called mediation as a smoke-screen for strengthening Chiang
Kai-shek in every way and suppressing the democratic forces in China through
Chiang Kai-shek's policy of slaughter so as to reduce China virtually to
a U.S. colony. The continuation of this policy will certainly arouse the
firm resistance of all patriotic people throughout China.

Steele: How long will the Chinese civil war go on? What will be
its outcome?

Mao: If the U.S. government abandons its present policy of aiding
Chiang Kai-shek, withdraws its forces now stationed in China and carries
out the agreement reached at the Moscow Conference of the Foreign Ministers
of the Soviet Union, the United States and Britain,
[2] the Chinese civil war is sure to end at an early
date. Otherwise it may turn into a long war. This would of course bring suffering
to the Chinese people, but on the other hand, the Chinese people would certainly
unite, fight for survival and decide their own fate. Whatever the difficulties
and hardships, the Chinese people will certainly fulfil their task of achieving
independence, peace and democracy. No forces of suppression, domestic or
foreign, can prevent the fulfilment of this task.

Steele: Sir, do you consider Chiang Kai-shek the "natural leader"
of the Chinese people? Is the Communist Party of China going to reject Chiang
Kai-shek's five demands [3] in all circumstances?
If the Kuomintang tries to convene a National Assembly without the participation
of the Communist Party, [4] what action will the
Communist Party take?

Mao: There is no such thing in the world as a "natural leader".
If Chiang deals with the political, military, economic and other problems
of China in accordance with the truce agreement [5]
signed last January and the joint resolutions then adopted by the Political
Consultative Conference, [6] and not in accordance
with the so-called "five demands" or ten demands, which are one-sided and
run counter to the agreement and joint resolutions, we will still be willing
to work with him. The National Assembly must be convened jointly by various
political parties, in line with the resolutions adopted by the Political
Consultative Conference; otherwise we will firmly oppose it. 

NOTES


1. In December 1945 the U.S. government sent George C.
Marshall to China as the president's special representative and used "mediation
in the hostilities between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party of China"
as a cover for strengthening the U.S. forces of aggression and the reactionary
Kuomintang rule in various ways. To gain time to prepare for his civil war,
Chiang Kai-shek, prompted by U.S. imperialism, pretended to accept the demand
of the Chinese Communist Party and the Chinese people to stop the civil war.
In January 1946 representatives of the Kuomintang government and the Chinese
Communist Party signed a truce agreement, issued a cease-fire order and formed
the "Committee of Three" and the "Peiping Executive Headquarters" with the
participation of U.S. representatives. During the "mediation", Marshall resorted
to all kinds of ruses to help the Kuomintang forces attack the Liberated
Areas, first in northeastern China and later in northern, eastern and central
China; he actively trained and equipped the Kuomintang troops and supplied
Chiang Kai-shek with a vast amount of arms and other war matériel.
By June 1946 Chiang Kai-shek had massed 80 per cent of his regular forces
(which were about two million men) at the front for attacks on the Liberated
Areas; more than 540,000 of these troops were transported directly by the
warships and planes of the U.S. armed forces. In July, when the disposition
of his troops had been completed, Chiang Kai-shek launched a country-wide
counter-revolutionary war. Subsequently, on August 10, Marshall and Leighton
Stuart, U.S. ambassador to China, issued a joint statement declaring that
"mediation" had failed in order to give Chiang Kai-shek a free hand to wage
civil war.

2. This refers to the agreement on China reached at the
Moscow Conference of the Foreign Ministers of the Soviet Union, the United
States and Britain in December 1945. In the conference communiqué
the three foreign ministers "reaffirmed their adherence to the policy of
non-interference in the internal affairs of China". The foreign ministers
of the Soviet Union and the United States agreed that Soviet and U.S. forces
should be withdrawn from China at the earliest possible time. The Soviet
Union faithfully carried out the terms of this agreement. It was only because
of repeated requests from the Kuomintang government that the Soviet forces
postponed the date of withdrawal. On May 3, 1946, the armed forces of the
Soviet Union completed their withdrawal from northeastern China. But the
U.S. government broke its promise completely, refused to withdraw its troops
and stepped up its interference in China's internal affairs.

3. On two occasions, in June and August 1946, Chiang Kai-shek
put forward his "five demands" to the Chinese Communist Party, declaring
that only if the Communist Party accepted them would the Kuomintang consider
stopping the civil war. The five demands stipulated that the Chinese People's
Liberation Army withdraw from the following places: (1) all areas
south of the Lunghai Railway; (2) the entire length of the Tsingtao-Tsinan
Railway; (3) Chengteh and the area south of it; (4) most of northeastern
China, and (5) all areas liberated since June 7, 1946, from the puppet troops
in Shantung and Shansi Provinces by the people's armed forces of the Liberated
Areas. The Chinese Communist Party categorically rejected all these
counter-revolutionary demands.

4. According to the resolution of the Political Consultative
Conference held in January 1946, the National Assembly was to be an assembly
of democracy and unity, in which various political parties would take part,
and was to be convened under the auspices of a reorganized government after
the terms of the agreements reached at the Political Consultative Conference
had been carried out. On October 11, 1946, the Kuomintang troops occupied
Changchiakou, and this "victory" turned the heads of the Chiang Kai-shek
clique. On that very afternoon it openly violated the terms of the PCC resolution
and ordered the convening of a divisive and dictatorial "National Assembly"
controlled exclusively by the Kuomintang. Officially opened in Nanking on
November 15, 1946, this "National Assembly" was firmly opposed and boycotted
by the Chinese Communist Party, the democratic parties and the entire people.

5. See "Smash Chiang Kai-shek's Offensive by a War of
Self-Defence", Note 1, p. 92 of this volume.

6. See the same article, Note 2, pp. 92-95 of this volume.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## A Three Months' Summary







A THREE MONTHS' SUMMARY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

A THREE MONTHS' SUMMARY


October 1, 1946

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China. It summed up in detail the series
of experiences in the three months of fighting beginning with the outbreak
of the country-wide civil war in July 1946, set forth the strategy and fighting
tasks of the People's Liberation Army from then on and pointed out that after
overcoming a period of difficulties we were certain to win victory in the
People's War of Liberation. The directive also explained in principle the
problems which needed to be solved for the support of and in co-ordination
with the People's War of Liberation, such as land reform, the development
of production in the Liberated Areas, the strengthening of leadership in
the mass struggles in the Kuomintang areas and other relevant problems. ]

  

1. The Central Committee's directive of situation
[1] stated: "We can defeat Chiang Kai-shek. The
whole Party should be fully confident of this." The fighting in July, August
and September has proved this judgement to be correct.

2. Apart from the fundamental political and economic contradictions which
Chiang Kai-shek cannot resolve and which are the basic cause rendering our
victory certain and Chiang's defeat inevitable, a sharp contradiction has
arisen in the military sphere between Chiang's over-extended battle lines
and his shortage of troops. That contradiction is bound to be the direct
cause of our victory and Chiang Kai-shek's defeat.

3. The total of Chiang Kai-shek's regular troops attacking the Liberated
Areas, not counting the puppet troops, the peace preservation corps and
communications police corps, is more than 190 brigades. Besides this total,
the most he can do is again to move part of his troops from the south to
the north as reinforcements; but after that it will be hard for him to send
any more reinforcements. Of the 190 odd brigades, 25 have been wiped out
by our army in the past three months. This does not include the forces we
wiped out in the Northeast from February to June this year.

4. Of Chiang Kai-shek's more than 190 brigades, nearly half must perform
garrison duties; only a little more than half can be put into the field.
And when these field forces advance to certain regions, part or even a majority
will have to switch over to garrison duty. The enemy's field forces are bound
to dwindle as the fighting goes on because, first, they will be continually
wiped out by us and, second, many will have to perform garrison duties.

5. Of the 25 brigades we destroyed in the past three months, 7 were under
the command of Tang En-po (previously under Li Mo-an), 2 under Hsueh Yueh,
7 under Ku Chu-tung (previously under Liu Chih), 2 under Hu Tsung-nan, 4
under Yen Hsi-shan, 2 under Wang Yao-wu and 1 under Tu Yu-ming. Only the
4 groups under Li Tsung-jen, Fu Tso-yi, Ma Hung-kuei and Cheng Chien have
not yet received crushing blows from our army; all the remaining 7 groups
have received serious blows or initial blows. Those who have received serious
blows are Tu Yu-ming (taking into account the fighting in the Northeast from
February to June this year), Tang En-po, Ku Chutung and Yen Hsi-shan. Those
who have received initial blows are Hsueh Yueh, Hu Tsung-nan and Wang Yao-wu.
All this proves that our army can defeat Chiang Kai-shek.

6. In the coming period our task is to wipe out some 25 more enemy brigades.
The completion of this task will make it possible to halt Chiang Kai-shek's
offensive and recover part of our lost territory. It can be predicted that
after wiping out this second batch of 25 brigades our army will certainly
be able to seize the strategic initiative and go over from the defensive
to the offensive. Our task then will be to destroy a third batch of 25 enemy
brigades. If we achieve that, we can recover most or even all of the lost
territory and expand the Liberated Areas. By that time a tremendous change
will surely have taken place in the relative military strength of the Kuomintang
and the Communist Party. To attain this we must follow up our great achievement
of wiping out 25 brigades in the past three months and destroy about 25 more
in the coming three months or so. This is the key to changing the situation
as between the enemy and ourselves.[2]

7. In the past three months we have lost a few dozen medium and small towns,
such as Huaiyin, Hotse, Chengteh and Chining. The abandonment of most of
these towns was unavoidable and it was right to abandon them temporarily
on our own initiative. Some others we were forced to abandon because we did
not fight well. In any case, we shall be able to recover our lost territory,
provided we fight well from now on. In the future there may still be places
we cannot prevent the enemy from taking, but we shall be able to recover
all of them later. All areas should critically review their past experience
in fighting in order to draw lessons and avoid repeating mistakes.

8. In the past three months our Central Plains Liberation Army has shown
matchless stamina in overcoming difficulties and hardships and, aside from
that part of the army which has moved into the old Liberated Areas, its main
force has established two guerrilla bases in southern Shensi and western
Hupeh.[3] Moreover, in both eastern and central
Hupeh our troops are persisting in guerrilla warfare. All this has greatly
helped, and is still helping, the fighting in the old Liberated Areas, and
it will play a greater role in the long war ahead.

9. In the past three months of war we have pinned down south of the Great
Wall several of Chiang Kai-shek's crack forces, which he had originally planned
to send to the Northeast, and have thus gained time for resting and consolidating
our troops and for arousing the masses in the Northeast. This, too, is of
great significance for our future struggles.

10. To concentrate a superior force to wipe out the enemy forces one by one
is the only correct method of fighting, the method we have used in the past
three months to destroy 25 enemy brigades. Only by concentrating a force
six, five, four or at least three times as strong as the enemy's force can
we be effective in wiping it out. This must be done both in campaigns and
in battles. This method of fighting must be mastered not only by all high-ranking
commanders but also by all middle and lower-ranking cadres.

11. In the past three months, in addition to 25 regular brigades of the enemy,
our army has destroyed considerable numbers of reactionary forces, such as
puppet troops, peace preservation corps and communications police corps;
this also is a great achievement. We should continue to annihilate such troops
in large numbers.

12. The experience of the past three months has proved that in order to wipe
out 10,000 enemy troops we have to pay a price of 2,000 to 3,000 casualties
of our own. This is unavoidable. To cope with a long war (and everything,
everywhere should be considered with such a war in mind) we must expand our
army in a planned way, ensure that our main forces are always kept at full
strength and train large numbers of military cadres. We must develop production
and regulate finances according to plan and firmly put into effect the principles
of developing our economy and ensuring supply, of unified leadership and
decentralized management and of giving consideration to both the army and
the people and to both public and private interests.

13. The experience of these three months has proved that higher fighting
efficiency was shown by all troops who, during the period of the truce from
January to June, intensified their military training according to the directives
of the Central Committee (which has repeatedly instructed the various areas
to regard troop training, production and land reform as their three central
tasks). It has also proved that all troops not so trained showed much lower
fighting efficiency. From now on, all areas must utilize the intervals between
battles for intensified military training. All army units must strengthen
their political work.

14. The experience of these three months has proved that the peasants stood
with our Party and our army against the attacks of Chiang Kai-shek's troops
wherever the Central Committee's directive of May 4
[4] was carried out firmly and speedily and the
land problem was solved radically and thoroughly. The peasants took a
wait-and-see attitude wherever the "May 4th Directive" was not carried out
firmly or the arrangements were made too late, or wherever this work was
mechanically divided into stages or land reform was neglected on the excuse
of preoccupation with the war. In the coming few months all areas, no matter
how busy they are with the war, must resolutely lead the peasant masses to
solve the land problem and, on the basis of the land reform, make arrangements
for large-scale production work next year.

15. The experience of these three months has proved that wherever the regional
armed forces, including the people's militia, the guerrillas and the armed
working teams,[5] are well organized, we can control vast
rural areas even though many points and lines are temporarily occupied by
the enemy. But wherever the regional armed forces are weak and the leadership
is poor, the enemy is given a much easier time. From now on, in areas temporarily
occupied by the enemy, we must strengthen the Party's leadership, develop
the regional armed forces, persevere in guerrilla warfare, safeguard the
interests of the masses and strike blows at the activities of the reactionaries.

16. Three months of war have almost exhausted the reserve forces of the
Kuomintang and seriously weakened its military strength in its own areas.
At the same time, the Kuomintang's resumption of conscription and grain
levies[6] has aroused popular discontent and created a
situation favourable for the development of mass struggles. The whole Party
must strengthen its leadership of the mass struggles in the Kuomintang areas
and intensify the work of disintegrating the Kuomintang army.

17. The Kuomintang reactionaries, under the direction of the United States,
have violated the truce agreement and the resolutions of the Political
Consultative Conference of January this year and are determined to wage the
civil war in their attempt to destroy the people's democratic forces. All
their fine words are nothing but humbug; we must expose all the plots of
the United States and Chiang Kai-shek.

18. In these three months the broadest strata of the people in the Kuomintang
areas, including the national bourgeoisie,[7] have quickly
arrived at a better understanding of the fact that the Kuomintang and the
United States government are working in collusion, have started the civil
war and are oppressing the people. More and more people now realize the truth
that Marshall's mediation is a fraud and that the Kuomintang is the arch-criminal
of the civil war. The broad masses, disillusioned with the United States
and the Kuomintang, now place their hopes on the victory of our Party. This
domestic political situation is extremely favourable. The reactionary policy
of U.S. imperialism is rousing increasing discontent among the broad masses
of the people in all countries. The level of political consciousness of the
people in all countries is rising every day. The people's democratic struggle
is mounting in all capitalist countries, the strength of the Communist Parties
in many countries has greatly increased, and it will be impossible for the
reactionaries to reduce them to submission. The might of the Soviet Union
and its prestige among the peoples are growing daily. The U.S. reactionaries
and the reactionaries whom they support in other countries are bound to become
more and more isolated. This international political situation is extremely
favourable. The situation both at home and abroad differs greatly from that
after World War I. The revolutionary forces have grown tremendously since
World War II. We can defeat the Chinese and foreign reactionaries, no matter
how rampant they are (this rampancy is historically inevitable and not at
all strange). Leading comrades in all areas should explain this fully to
those comrades in the Party who are gloomy about the future of the struggle
owing to their inadequate understanding of the favourable situation at home
and abroad. It must be made clear that the enemy still has strength, that
we ourselves still have some weaknesses and that the struggle is still a
long and cruel one. But we can certainly win victory. This understanding
and conviction must be firmly established throughout the Party.

19. The coming few months will be an important and difficult period. We must
strenuously mobilize the whole Party, undertake meticulously planned military
operations and radically change the military situation. All areas must resolutely
carry out the above policies and strive for a radical change in the military
situation. 

NOTES


1. See "Smash Chiang Kai-shek's Offensive by a War of
Self-Defence", pp. 89-95 of this volume.

2. Later developments showed that the situation between
the enemy and ourselves began to change in July 1947, when the
Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan People's Liberation Army forced the Yellow River
and marched towards the Tapieh Mountains. By then the People's Liberation
Army had fought for twelve months and wiped out about a hundred enemy brigades,
averaging eight a month. This exceeded the estimate made in this article
because, with the support of U.S. imperialism, Chiang Kai-shek had used all
his available forces in the offensive.

3. At the end of June 1946 the Central Plains Liberation
Army led by Li Hsien-nien, Cheng Wei-san and other comrades initiated a strategic
shift of its forces and victoriously broke through an encirclement by 300,000
Kuomintang troops. The units mentioned by Comrade Mao Tse-tung as having
moved into the old Liberated Areas were those led by Wang Chen and other
comrades; they entered the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region after breaking
through the encirclement. The guerrilla base in southern Shensi was founded
by a part of the main force of the Central Plains Liberation Army and included
Lushih and Hsichuan in western Honan and Lonan and Shanyang in southern Shensi.
The guerrilla base in western Hupeh was set up by another part of the same
army with the Wutang Mountains in northwestern Hupeh as its centre.

4. This refers to the "Directive on the Land Question"
issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on May 4,
1946. After Japan's surrender, in view of the peasants' eager demand for
land, the Central Committee decided to change the land policy of the period
of the War of Resistance, that is, to change from the reduction of rent and
interest to confiscation of the land of the landlords and its distribution
among the peasants. The "May 4th Directive" marked this change.

5. The armed working teams were small working teams which
went deep into the enemy-occupied areas to organize the masses and strike
blows at the enemy. Such a team consisted of cadres drawn from various
organizations -- the Communist Party, the governments in the Liberated Areas,
the people's army and mass organizations -- and was equipped with some weapons.
This was a convenient form of organization for carrying out activities in
the enemy-occupied areas.

6. This refers to land taxes in kind.

7. The national bourgeoisie is the section of the bourgeoisie
which has little or no connection with imperialism, as distinguished from
that section of the bourgeoisie which is closely dependent on imperialism
and is comprador in character, that is, the big bourgeoisie or
bureaucrat-capitalists. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Greet the New High Tide of the Chinese Revolution







GREET THE NEW HIGH TIDE OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

GREET THE NEW HIGH TIDE OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION


February 1, 1947

[This inner Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse -tung for the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.] 
  

1. All circumstances now show that the situation in China is about to enter
a new stage of development. This new stage is one in which the country-wide
struggle against imperialism and feudalism will develop into a great new
people's revolution. We are now on the eve of this revolution. The task of
our Party is to struggle for the advent of this high tide and its triumph
.

2. The military situation has now developed in a direction favourable to
the people. In seven months of fighting, from last July to this January,
we wiped out 56 brigades of Chiang Kai-shek's regular forces which invaded
the Liberated Areas, a monthly average of 8 brigades, not counting the numerous
puppet troops and the peace preservation corps which were wiped out and those
of Chiang's regular forces which were routed. Although Chiang Kai-shek's
offensive continues in southern and western Shantung, in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region, along the northern section of the Peiping-Hankow Railway and
in southern Manchuria, it has become much feebler than it was last autumn.
Chiang Kai-shek's army does not have enough troops to dispose and cannot
fulfil its conscription quotas; this fact is in serious contradiction with
its extended battle lines and the enormous drain on its manpower. The morale
of Chiang's army is sinking lower every day. During the recent fighting in
northern Kiangsu, southern and western Shantung and western Shansi, the morale
of many of Chiang's forces sank to a very low level. On several fronts our
armies are beginning to seize the initiative, while Chiang Kai-shek's armies
are beginning to lose it. We can foresee that in the next few months we may
achieve the objective of wiping out a grand total of 100 of Chiang's brigades,
including those previously destroyed. Chiang Kai-shek has altogether 93 regular
infantry and cavalry divisions (corps), composed of 248 brigades (divisions),
totalling 1,916,000 men, not counting the puppet troops, police, local peace
preservation corps, communications police corps, rear services and technical
arms. The forces attacking the Liberated Areas number 78 divisions (corps),
composed of 218 brigades (divisions), totalling 1,713,000 men, or about 90
per cent of Chiang Kai-shek's regular troops. Only 15 divisions, with 30
brigades, totalling 203,000 men, or about 10 per cent of the total, remain
in the Kuomintang rear areas. Therefore, Chiang Kai-shek can no longer send
large combat-worthy reinforcements from his rear areas to attack the Liberated
Areas. We have already wiped out more than a quarter of the 218 brigades
attacking the Liberated Areas. Although some have been replenished and restored
under their original designations after having been wiped out, their combat
effectiveness is very low. Some have been wiped out a second time. Some have
not been replenished at all. If our armies can wipe out another 40 to 50
brigades in the next few months and bring the total up to about 100, there
will be an important change in the military situation.

3. Meanwhile, a great people's movement is unfolding in the Kuomintang areas.
The riots of the people in Shanghai, [1] which
began on November 30 of last year as a result of the Kuomintang's persecution
of the street vendors, and the student movement in Peiping, which began last
December 30 as a result of the rape of a Chinese girl student by U.S. soldiers,
[2] both mark a new upsurge in the struggle of
the people in the Chiang Kai-shek areas. The student movement which began
in Peiping has spread to other big cities all over the country, with hundreds
of thousands taking part and on a larger scale than the December 9th Student
Movement against Japanese imperialism.[3]

4. The victories of the People's Liberation Army in the Liberated Areas and
the development of the people's movement in the Kuomintang areas foretell
that a great new people's revolution against imperialism and feudalism is
surely approaching and can be victorious.

5. The circumstances in which this situation has arisen are that U.S. imperialism
and its running dog Chiang Kai-shek have replaced Japanese imperialism and
its running dog Wang Ching-wei and adopted the policies of turning China
into a U.S. colony, launching a civil war and strengthening the fascist
dictatorship. Confronted by these reactionary policies of U.S. imperialism
and Chiang Kai-shek, the Chinese people have no way out except through struggle.
The struggle for independence, peace and democracy still constitutes the
basic demand of the Chinese people in the present period. As far back as
April 1945, our Party's Seventh National Congress foresaw the possibility
that U.S. imperialism and Chiang Kai-shek would carry out these reactionary
policies and formulated a complete and fully correct political line to defeat
them.

6. These reactionary policies of U.S. imperialism and Chiang Kai-shek have
forced all strata of the Chinese people to unite for their own salvation.
These strata include the workers, peasants, urban petty bourgeoisie, national
bourgeoisie, enlightened gentry, other patriotic elements, the minority
nationalities and overseas Chinese. This is a very broad united front of
the whole nation. In comparison with the united front in the period of the
War of Resistance Against Japan, it is not only as broad in scope but has
even deeper foundations. All Party comrades must strive to consolidate and
develop this united front. In the Liberated Areas the policy of the "three
thirds system"[4] is to remain unchanged, on the
condition that the policy of land to the tillers is carried out resolutely
and unhesitatingly. In addition to Communists, we should continue to draw
the broad ranks of progressives outside the Party and the middle elements
(such as the enlightened gentry) into the organs of political power and into
social undertakings. In the Liberated Areas, all citizens, irrespective of
class, sex or belief, have the right to elect and stand for election, except
traitors and those reactionaries who have opposed the interests of the people
and incurred their bitter hatred. After the system of land to the tillers
has been thoroughly carried out, the right to private property of the people
in the Liberated Areas will continue to be guaranteed.

7. Because the Chiang Kai-shek government has pursued reactionary financial
and economic policies for a long time and because Chiang Kai-shek's
bureaucrat-comprador capital [5] has become linked
with U.S. imperialist capital through the notorious and treasonable Sino-U.S.
Treaty of Commerce,[6] malignant inflation has
swiftly developed; the industry and commerce of China's national bourgeoisie
are daily going bankrupt; the livelihood of the working masses, government
employees and teachers is deteriorating every day; large numbers of middle
class elements are losing their savings and becoming penniless; and therefore
strikes of workers and students and other struggles are constantly occurring.
An economic crisis more serious than China has ever faced before is threatening
all strata of the people.

In order to carry on the civil war, Chiang Kai-shek has restored the extremely
vicious system of conscription and grain levies of the period of the War
of Resistance; this makes life impossible for the vast rural population,
particularly the poverty-stricken peasants; as a result, peasant revolts
have already started and will continue to spread. Hence, the reactionary
Chiang Kai-shek ruling clique will become more and more discredited in the
eyes of the broad masses of the people and be confronted with serious political
and military crises. On the one hand, this situation is daily pushing forward
the people's anti-imperialist, anti-feudal movement in the areas under Chiang
Kai-shek's control; on the other hand, it is further demoralizing Chiang's
troops and increasing the possibility of victory by the People's Liberation
Army.

8. The illegal and divisive "National Assembly", which was convened by Chiang
Kai-shek in order to isolate our Party and other democratic forces, and the
bogus constitution fabricated by that body enjoy no prestige at all among
the people. Instead of isolating our Party and other democratic forces, they
have isolated the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek ruling clique itself. Our Party
and other democratic forces adopted the policy of refusing to participate
in the bogus National Assembly; this was perfectly correct. The reactionary
Chiang Kai-shek ruling clique has brought over to its side the Youth Party
[7] and the Democratic Socialist
Party,[8] two small parties which never had the
slightest prestige in Chinese society, as well as certain so-called "public
personages",[9] and it can be foreseen that some
of the middle-of-the-roaders may also go over to the side of reaction. The
reason is that the democratic forces in China are getting stronger and stronger
while the reactionary forces are becoming more and more isolated, and therefore
the line between the enemy and ourselves has to be so sharply drawn. All
elements which hide in the democratic front and deceive the people will
eventually be revealed in their true colours and be cast aside by the people;
and the people's anti-imperialist and anti-feudal ranks will grow even stronger
because they have drawn a clear line of demarcation between themselves and
these hidden reactionaries.

9. The development of the international situation is extremely favourable
for the Chinese people's struggle. The growing might of the Soviet Union
and the successes of its foreign policy, the growing radicalization of the
peoples of the world and their ever-developing struggles against reactionary
forces both at home and abroad -- these two great factors have forced U.S.
imperialism and its running dogs in various countries into ever greater isolation
and will continue to do so. If one adds the factor of an inevitable economic
crisis in the United States, then U.S. imperialism and its running dogs will
be forced into an even worse predicament. The power of U.S. imperialism and
its running dog Chiang Kai-shek is only temporary; their offensives can be
smashed. The myth that the offensives of the reactionaries cannot be smashed
should have no place in our ranks. The Central Committee has pointed this
out time and again, and the development of the international and domestic
situation has increasingly borne out the correctness of this judgement.

10. In order to gain a respite in which to replenish his troops and launch
a fresh offensive, to obtain new loans and munitions from the United States
and to allay the indignation of the people, Chiang Kai-shek is perpetrating
a new hoax by demanding the resumption of so-called peace negotiations with
our Party.[10] Our Party's policy is not to refuse
negotiations and in this way expose his deception.

11. In order to smash Chiang Kai-shek's offensive thoroughly, we must wipe
out another forty to fifty of his brigades in the next few months; this is
the key that will decide everything. To achieve this objective, we must put
into full effect the Central Committee's directive of October 1 last year,
"A Three Months' Summary",[11] and the Military
Commission's directive of September 16 last year on concentrating our forces
to destroy the enemy forces one by one.[12] Here,
we are once again emphasizing a few points for the attention of the comrades
in all areas:

(a) The Military Problem. In the past seven months of bitter fighting our
army has proved that it can certainly smash Chiang Kai-shek's offensive and
win final victory. Our army has improved in both equipment and tactics. From
now on, the central task in building our armed forces is to make every effort
to step up the building of our artillery and engineer corps. All military
areas, big and small, and all field armies should solve the concrete problems
involved in strengthening the artillery and engineer corps and, first of
all, the two problems of training cadres and manufacturing ammunition.

(b) The Land Problem. In about two-thirds of the territory in each Liberated
Area, the Central Committee's directive of May 4, 1946,
[13] has been put into effect, the land problem
has been solved and the policy of land to the tillers has been carried out;
this is a great victory. There remains around one-third of the territory,
however, where further efforts must be made to arouse the masses fully and
put the policy of land to the tillers into effect. In places where the policy
of land to the tillers has been carried out, there are still shortcomings
insofar as the solution was not thorough -- mainly because the masses were
not fully aroused, so that the confiscation and the distribution of land
were not thorough and the masses became dissatisfied. In such places, we
must check carefully and must "even up" [14] to
ensure that the peasants with little or no land obtain some and the bad gentry
and local tyrants are punished. In the entire process of carrying out the
policy of land to the tillers, we must unite firmly with the middle peasants,
and it is absolutely impermissible to encroach on the interests of the middle
peasants (including the well-to-do middle peasants); if cases occur where
the interests of the middle peasants are encroached upon, there must be
compensation and apology. Moreover, during and after the land reform, appropriate
consideration in accordance with the will of the masses should be given to
ordinary rich peasants and middle and small landlords, and it should be given
in accordance with the "May 4th Directive". To sum up, in the land reform
movement in the rural areas we must unite with the more than 90 per cent
of the masses who support the reform and isolate the small number of feudal
reactionaries who oppose it so that we can speedily realize the policy of
land to the tillers.

(c) The Production Problem. All places must plan on a long-term basis, work
hard at production, practice economy and correctly solve the financial problem
on the basis of production and economy. The first principle here is to develop
production and ensure supply. For this reason, we must oppose the wrong view
which lays one-sided emphasis on finance and commerce and neglects agricultural
and industrial production. The second principle is to give consideration
to both the army and the people, to both public and private interests. Therefore,
we must oppose the wrong view which takes only one side into account and
neglects the other. The third principle is unified leadership and decentralized
management. Therefore, except where conditions call for centralized management,
we must oppose the wrong view which favours centralizing everything, regardless
of circumstances, and which dares not give full rein to decentralized management.

12. Our Party and the Chinese people have every assurance of final victory;
there is not the slightest doubt about it. But that does not mean there are
no difficulties before us. China's anti-imperialist and anti-feudal struggle
is protracted in nature, Chinese and foreign reactionaries will continue
to oppose the Chinese people with all their strength, fascist rule in the
areas under Chiang Kai-shek's control will be intensified; certain parts
of the Liberated Areas will temporarily become enemy-occupied areas or guerrilla
zones, some of the revolutionary forces may suffer temporary losses, and
there will be losses of manpower and material resources in a long war. The
comrades throughout the Party must take all this fully into account and be
prepared to overcome all difficulties with an indomitable will and in a planned
way. The reactionary forces and we both have difficulties. But the difficulties
of the reactionary forces are insurmountable because they are forces on the
verge of death and have no future. Our difficulties can be overcome because
we are new and rising forces and have a bright future.

NOTES


1. Beginning in August 1946 the Kuomintang authorities
in Shanghai forbade the street vendors in the Whangpoo and Louza districts
to carry on their business. In late November nearly a thousand who were still
operating were arrested. On November 30 three thousand street vendors
demonstrated and surrounded the Whangpoo district police station. The Kuomintang
authorities gave the order to fire; seven demonstrators were killed and a
great many were wounded and arrested. On December 1, the street vendors continued
their struggle. Despite the fact that ten more were killed and over a hundred
wounded, the number taking part in the struggle grew to over five thousand.
All shops in Shanghai closed down to show sympathy. Thus the incident developed
into a city-wide mass movement against Chiang Kai-shek.

2. This incident occurred in Peiping on December 24, 1946.
A girl student of Peking University was raped by U.S. soldiers. Consequently,
from December 30 through January 1947, students in scores of big and medium
cities in the Kuomintang areas struck and demonstrated against the United
States and Chiang Kai-shek, demanding the withdrawal of U.S. troops from
China. More than half a million students took part in this movement.

3. In 1935 a new upsurge began in the patriotic movement
of the people of the whole country. Students in Peking, under the leadership
of the Communist Party of China, were the first to hold a patriotic demonstration
on December 9, putting forward such slogans as "Stop the civil war and unite
to resist foreign aggression" and "Down with Japanese imperialism!" This
movement broke open the long reign of terror imposed by the Kuomintang government
in league with the Japanese invaders and soon won the support of the people
throughout the country. It is known as the "December 9th Movement". As a
consequence, new changes became manifest in the relations among various classes
in the country, and the Anti-Japanese National United Front proposed by the
Communist Party of China became the openly advocated policy of all patriotic
people. The Kuomintang government became very isolated with its traitorous
policy.

4. The "three thirds system" was the Chinese Communist
Party's policy for united front organs of political power in the Liberated
Areas during the War of Resistance Against Japan. According to this policy,
the proportion of personnel in the and-Japanese democratic political organs
was about one-third each for Communist Party members, for left progressives,
and for middle elements and others.

5. See "The Present Situation and Our Tasks", Section 6,
pp. 167-69 of this volume.

6. The "Sino-U.S. Treaty of Commerce" or "Sino-U.S. Treaty
of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation" was concluded between the Chiang
Kai-shek government and the U.S. government on November 4, 1946, in Nanking.
This treaty, which sold out a large part of China's sovereignty to the United
States, contains thirty articles, the main contents of which are as follows:

  (1) U.S. nationals shall enjoy in "the whole extent of . . . the territories"
  of China the rights to reside, travel, carry on commercial, manufacturing,
  processing, scientific, educational, religious and philanthropic activities,
  explore and exploit mineral resources, lease and hold land, and follow various
  occupations and pursuits. In regard to economic rights U.S. nationals in
  China shall be accorded the same treatment as Chinese.


  (2) In respect of taxation, sale, distribution and use in China, U.S. commodities
  shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded to the
  commodities of any third country or to Chinese commodities. "No prohibition
  or restriction shall be imposed" by China on the importation from the United
  States of any article grown, produced or manufactured in the United States,
  or on the exportation to the United States of any Chinese article.


  (3) U.S. vessels shall have the freedom of sailing in any of the ports, places
  or waters in China which are open to foreign commerce or navigation, and
  their personnel and freight shall have freedom of transit through Chinese
  territory "by the routes most convenient". On the pretext of "any . . .
  distress", U.S. vessels including warships, can sail into "any of the ports,
  places or waters" of China which are "not open to foreign commerce or
  navigation".


Wellington Koo, then Chiang Kai-shek's ambassador to the United States, openly
and shamelessly stated that this treaty meant "the opening of the entire
territory of China to U.S. merchants".

7. The Youth Party was the shortened name of the Chinese
Youth Party, also called the Étatiste Party; its predecessor was the
Chinese Étatiste Youth League. This party was composed of a handful
of fascist politicians. They made counter-revolutionary careers for themselves
by opposing the Communist Party and the Soviet Union and therefore received
subsidies from various groups of reactionaries in power and from the
imperialists.

8. The Democratic Socialist Party was formed in August
1946 through the merger of the Democratic Constitutional Party and the National
Socialist Party. It consisted mainly of reactionary politicians and feudal
dregs from the time of the Northern warlords.

9. "Certain so-called public personages" refers to shameless
politicians like Wang Yun-wu, Fu Sze-nien and Hu Cheng-chih, who posed as
persons with no party affiliation and served as a window-dressing for Chiang
Kai-shek's "National Assembly".

10. On January 16, 1947, because of repeated setbacks
in its military offensives and because of its worsening military situation,
the Kuomintang government, in an attempt to gain a respite and prepare a
fresh offensive, asked the Chinese Communist Party, through the U.S. ambassador
to China, Leighton Stuart, for permission to send delegates to Yenan for
"peace negotiations". This new U.S.-Chiang deception was promptly and thoroughly
exposed by the Chinese Communist Party. The Chinese Communist Party pointed
out that negotiations could be renewed only if two minimum conditions were
fulfilled: (1) the bogus constitution framed and adopted by the Kuomintang
in violation of the resolutions of the Political Consultative Conference
had to be abolished, and (2) Kuomintang troops had to evacuate all the territory
of the Liberated Areas they had occupied since the truce agreement went into
effect on January 13, 1946; otherwise, there would be no guarantee that the
Kuomintang would not again tear up any agreement reached in renewed negotiations.
The Kuomintang government realized that the ruse of "peace" did not work
and on February 27 and 28 it notified all the representatives of the Chinese
Communist Party stationed in Nanking, Shanghai and Chungking for negotiations
and liaison that they had to leave and announced the complete breakdown of
the negotiations between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party.

11. This refers to the article, "A Three Months' Summary",
pp. 113-18 of this volume.

12. This refers to the article, "Concentrate a Superior
Force to Destroy the Enemy Forces One by One", pp. 103-07 of this volume.

13. This refers to the "Directive on the Land Question"
of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party dated May 4, 1946.
See "A Three Months' Summary", Note 4, p. 118 of this volume.

14. "Evening up" was a policy adopted in the old Liberated
Areas; where a comparatively thorough land reform had been carried out. The
purpose was to solve the problem of insufficient land and other means of
production among some of the poor peasants and farm labourers and other problems
left over from the reform. The method was, on a limited scale, to take from
those who had better and give to those who had worse, to take from those
who had a surplus and give to those who had a shortage, so that the distribution
of land and other means of production could be rationally readjusted. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Temporary Abandonment of Yenan and the Defence of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region — Two Documents Issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China







ON THE TEMPORARY ABANDONMENT OF YENAN AND THE DEFENCE OF THE SHENSI-KANSU-NINGSIA
  BORDER REGION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON THE TEMPORARY ABANDONMENT OF YENAN AND THE DEFENCE OF THE
  SHENSI-KANSU-NINGSIA BORDER REGION


 TWO DOCUMENTS ISSUED BY THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY
OF CHINA

November 1946 and April 1947

[The first of these two documents was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung in
Yenan in the winter of 1946 when Kuomintang troops were preparing to attack
that city, and the second at Chingyangcha, Hengshan County, northern Shensi,
twenty days after Kuomintang troops occupied Yenan on March 19, 1947. After
the bankruptcy of Chiang Kai-shek's plan for an all-out offensive against
the Liberated Areas, he adopted frantic measures to save his dying regime,
convened a bogus National Assembly, expelled the representatives of the Communist
Party of China from the Kuomintang areas and launched an attack on Yenan,
the seat of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. As these
documents pointed out, the outcome of Chiang Kai-shek's measures was his
complete self-destruction politically. Militarily he concentrated his forces
on the eastern and western flanks of the Liberated Areas that is, the Shantung
Liberated Area and the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Liberated Area in an attempt
to carry out "attacks against key sectors"; and again the outcome was complete
failure. The Kuomintang troops attacking the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border
Region were more than 230,000 strong, while the Northwest People's Liberation
Army had only some 20,000 in that region. Therefore the enemy forces were
able to occupy Yenan and all the region's county towns, which we abandoned
on our own initiative. The enemy, however, failed to achieve his objective
of destroying the headquarters of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China and the Northwest People's Liberation Army or of driving them
east of the Yellow River. On the contrary, he suffered many heavy blows from
our army, lost about 100,000 men and finally had to flee in confusion from
the Border Region, while our army triumphantly went over to the offensive
for the liberation of the Great Northwest. Moreover, our army in the Northwest
theatre, employing a very small force, pinned down and destroyed large numbers
of the enemy's main force, and thereby strongly supported the operations
of our troops in other theatres, particularly in the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan
theatre, and helped them go over more quickly to the offensive. Comrade Mao
Tse-tung, the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the General
Headquarters of the People's Liberation Army remained in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia
Border Region the whole time from March 1947, when our army withdrew from
Yenan, to a year later when we went over to the offensive in the Northwest
theatre. This fact was of great political significance. It greatly inspired
and strengthened the will to fight and the confidence in victory of the army
and the people in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and in other Liberated
Areas throughout the country. While in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region,
Comrade Mao Tse-tung not only continued to direct the People's War of Liberation
on all fronts throughout the country but also took personal command in the
Northwest theatre and successfully achieved the aim set forth in the present
document, "defend and expand the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the
Liberated Areas in the Northwest with a firm fighting spirit". Concerning
the operations in the Northwest theatre see "The Concept of Operations for
the Northwest War Theatre", pp. 133-34 and "On the Great Victory in the Northwest
and on the New Type of Ideological Education Movement in the Liberation Army",
pp. 211-17, of this volume.] 
  
I. DIRECTIVE OF NOVEMBER 18, 1946

Chiang Kai-shek is at the end of his rope. He wants to strike at our Party
and strengthen himself by two methods, by convening the "National Assembly"
and by attacking Yenan. Actually, he will accomplish the very opposite. The
Chinese people resolutely oppose the "National Assembly" stage-managed by
Chiang Kai-shek to split the nation; the opening day of that assembly marked
the beginning of the self-destruction of the Chiang Kai-shek clique. Now
that we have wiped out thirty-five brigades[1] of Chiang
Kai-shek's troops and their offensive power is nearly exhausted, even if
his troops should occupy Yenan by means of a sudden thrust, it would not
damage the general prospect of victory in the People's War of Liberation,
nor could it save Chiang Kai-shek from the doom awaiting him. In short, Chiang
Kai-shek has taken the road to ruin; as soon as he makes these two moves
of convening the "National Assembly" and attacking Yenan, all his trickery
will be exposed, this will help the progress of the People's War of Liberation.
In every area we should fully explain to people inside and outside the Party
these two actions of Chiang Kai-shek, the convening of the "National Assembly"
and the attack on Yenan, and unite the whole Party, the whole army and the
whole people in the fight to smash Chiang Kai-shek's offensive and build
a democratic China. 

II. CIRCULAR OF APRIL 9, 1947 

In order to save its moribund regime, the Kuomintang, besides taking such
steps as convening the bogus National Assembly, drawing up the bogus
constitution, driving out the representative agencies of our Party from Nanking,
Shanghai and Chungking and proclaiming a break between the Kuomintang and
the Communist Party,[2] has taken the further step of
attacking Yenan, the seat of our Party's Central Committee and the General
Headquarters of the People's Liberation Army, and of attacking the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region.

The fact that the Kuomintang has taken these steps does not in the least
indicate that its regime is strong but rather that the crisis of the Kuomintang
regime has become extremely deep. Its attack on Yenan and the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region is moreover a vain attempt to settle the
Northwest question first, cut off our Party's right arm, drive our Party's
Central Committee and the General Headquarters of the People's Liberation
Army from the Northwest, then move its troops to attack northern China and
so achieve the objective of defeating our forces one by one.

In these circumstances, the Central Committee has decided as follows:

1. We must defend and expand the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the
Liberated Areas in the Northwest with a firm fighting spirit; it is entirely
possible to achieve this objective.

2. The Central Committee of our Party and the General Headquarters of the
People's Liberation Army must remain in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region.
It is an area where we have a favourable mountainous terrain, a good mass
base, plenty of room for manoeuvre, and full guarantee for security

3. At the same time, to facilitate our work, we have set up a Working Committee
of the Central Committee to proceed to north western Shansi or some other
suitable place to carry out the tasks entrusted to it by the Central Committee.

These three decisions were made last month and have already been put into
effect. You are hereby notified. 

NOTES

1. The statistics were for the period from early July to
November 13, 1946.

2. On February 27-28, 1947, the representatives and personnel
of the Chinese Communist Party stationed in Nanking, Shanghai and Chungking
for negotiations and liaison were forced by the Kuomintang government to
leave within a stated time. On March 15, 1947, the Central Executive Committee
of the Kuomintang convened its third plenary session, at which Chiang Kai-shek
proclaimed the Kuomintang's break with the Communist Party and his determination
to fight the civil war to the finish. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Concept of Operations for the Northwest War Theatre







THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE NORTHWEST WAR THEATRE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE NORTHWEST WAR THEATRE


April 15, 1947

[This telegram was sent by Comrade Mao Tse-tung to the Northwest Field Army,
which was then composed of the People's Liberation Army forces of the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia and Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Areas and commanded by
Peng Teh-huai, Ho Lung, Hsi Chung-hsun and other comrades. ] 
  

1. The enemy is now quite tired, but not yet tired out. He is in considerable
difficulties with his food supply, but not yet in extreme difficulties. Although
our army has not destroyed any large number of the enemy's forces since wiping
out his 31st Brigade,[1] in the last twenty days we have
achieved the objective of tiring him and considerably reducing his food supplies,
thus creating favourable conditions for tiring him out completely, cutting
off all his food supplies and finally wiping him out.

2. At present, despite the enemy's fatigue and shortage of food, his policy
is to drive our main force east across the Yellow River, then seal off Suiteh
and Michih and divide his forces for "mopping-up" operations. The enemy troops
reached Chingchien on March 31 but did not advance north immediately; their
purpose was to leave us a clear passage. Their advance west towards Wayaopao
was designed to drive us to Suiteh and Michih. Having discovered our troops,
they are now veering to the south and west of Wayaopao and then they will
again advance towards that town to drive us northward.

3. Our policy is to continue our former method, that is, to keep the enemy
on the run in this area for a time (about another month); the purpose is
to tire him out completely, reduce his food supplies drastically and then
look for an opportunity to destroy him. There is no need for our main force
to hurry north to attack Yulin or south to cut off the enemy's retreat. It
should be made clear to the commanders and fighters and also to the masses
that this method of our army is the necessary road to the final defeat of
the enemy. Unless we reduce the enemy to extreme fatigue and complete starvation,
we cannot win final victory. This may be called the tactics of "wear and
tear", that is, of wearing the enemy down to complete exhaustion and then
wiping him out.

4. As you are now in localities east and north of Wayaopao, it would be best
to induce the enemy to move to the north of Wayaopao; then you may attack
the weaker part of Liao Ang's[2] forces and induce the
enemy to move east; afterwards you may turn towards Ansai, and induce the
enemy to move west again.

5. But within a few days you must order the entire 359th Brigade to complete
its preparations for a southward drive, so that a week from now it can be
sent southward to make a surprise attack on the area south of the Yenchang-Yenan
line and north of the Yichuan-Lochuan line and cut the enemy's food transport
line.

6. Please reply whether you consider the above views sound. 
NOTES

1. Having withdrawn from Yenan on its own initiative, the
Northwest People's Liberation Army sent out a small force to lure the enemy's
main force as far as Ansai, northwest of Yenan, while leaving its main force
to ambush the enemy in the Chinghuapien sector, northeast of Yenan. On March
25, 1947, a Kuomintang regiment of the 31st Brigade of Hu Tsung-nan's Reorganized
27th Division, led by the brigade headquarters, walked right into this trap
and was completely destroyed in a battle lasting just over an hour.

2. Liao Ang, Commander of the Reorganized 76th Division
of the Kuomintang forces under Hu Tsung-nan, was later captured in a battle
at Chingchien on October 11, 1947. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Chiang Kai-Shek Government is Besieged by the Whole People







THE CHIANG KAI-SHEK GOVERNMENT IS BESIEGED BY THE WHOLE PEOPLE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE CHIANG KAI-SHEK GOVERNMENT IS BESIEGED BY THE WHOLE
  PEOPLE


May 30, 1947

[This commentary was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Hsinhua News
Agency. It pointed out that the march of events in China was faster than
people had expected and called upon the people to prepare speedily all necessary
conditions for the country-wide victory of the Chinese revolution. This
prediction was soon confirmed. Both this commentary and "The Concept of
Operations for the Northwest War Theatre" were written at Wangchiawan, Chingpien
County, northern Shensi.] 
  

The Chiang Kai-shek government, hostile to the whole people, now finds itself
besieged by the whole people. On both the military and political fronts,
it has met defeats, is now besieged by the forces it has declared to be its
enemies and can kind no way of escape.

The traitorous Chiang Kai-shek clique and its master, U.S. imperialism, have
wrongly appraised the situation. They overestimated their own strength and
underestimated the strength of the people. They regarded China and the world
after World War II as being the same as in the past; they would permit nothing
to change nor anyone to go against their will. After Japan's surrender they
were determined to restore the old order in China. And having gained time
by such deceptions as political consultation and military mediation, the
traitorous Chiang Kai-shek government mustered two million troops and launched
an all-out offensive.

There are now two battle fronts in China. The war between Chiang Kai-shek's
invading troops and the People's Liberation Army constitutes the first front.
Now a second front has emerged, that is, the sharp struggle between the great
and righteous student movement and the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek
government.[1] The slogan of the student movement
is "Food, Peace, Freedom" or "Against Hunger, Against Civil War, Against
Persecution". Chiang Kai-shek has promulgated the "Provisional Measures for
the Maintenance of Public Order".[2] Everywhere
his army, police, gendarmes and secret agents are clashing with the student
masses. Chiang Kai-shek is using brute force against unarmed students, subjecting
them to arrest, imprisonment, beating and slaughter; as a result the student
movement is daily growing in strength. Public sympathy is all on the side
of the students, Chiang Kai-shek and his running dogs are completely isolated,
and his ferocious features have been completely unmasked. The student movement
is part of the whole people's movement. The upsurge of the student movement
will inevitably promote an upsurge of the whole people's movement. This is
borne out by the historical experience of the May 4th Movement of 1919
[3] and the December 9th Movement of 1935.

Since U.S. imperialism and its running dog Chiang Kai-shek have taken the
place of Japanese imperialism and its running dog Wang Ching-wei and adopted
the policies of turning China into a U.S. colony, launching a civil war and
strengthening the fascist dictatorship, they have declared themselves to
be enemies of the entire Chinese people and driven all strata of the people
to the brink of starvation and death. This has compelled all strata of the
people to unite in a life-and-death struggle against the reactionary Chiang
Kai-shek government and brought about the speedy development of that struggle.
For the people there is no other way out. The strata of the Chinese people
oppressed by the reactionary policies of the Chiang Kai-shek government and
united for their own salvation include the workers, peasants, urban petty
bourgeoisie, national bourgeoisie, enlightened gentry, other patriotic elements,
the minority nationalities and overseas Chinese. This is a very broad national
united front.

The extremely reactionary financial and economic policies long pursued by
the Chiang Kai-shek government have now been aggravated by the Sino-U.S.
Treaty of Commerce, the most treasonable treaty ever known. On the basis
of this treaty, U.S. monopoly capital and Chiang Kai-shek's bureaucrat-comprador
capital have become tightly intertwined and control the economic life of
the whole country. The results are unbridled inflation, unparalleled soaring
prices, ever-spreading bankruptcy of the industry and commerce of the national
bourgeoisie and daily deterioration in the livelihood of the working masses,
government employees and teachers. In these circumstances all strata of the
people cannot but unite and fight for their very survival.

Military suppression and political deception have been the two main instruments
by which Chiang Kai-shek maintains his reactionary rule. People are now
witnessing the rapid collapse of both these instruments.

On every battlefield Chiang Kai-shek's army has met with defeat. About ninety
brigades of his regular troops alone have been wiped out in the eleven months
since last July. His troops no longer display the overweening pride of last
year when they occupied Changchun, Chengteh, Changchiakou, Hotse, Huaiyin
and Antung, or even of this year when they occupied Linyi and Yenan. Chiang
Kai-shek and Chen Cheng made a wrong appraisal of the strength and fighting
methods of the People's Liberation Army. Mistaking our retreats for cowardice
and our abandonment of a number of cities for defeats, they had fondly hoped
to finish us off south of the Great Wall in three months or at most six,
and then proceed to finish us off in the Northeast. But after ten months,
all Chiang Kai-shek's invading troops are in desperate straits; they are
completely besieged by the people of the Liberated Areas and the People's
Liberation Army and find it very difficult to escape.

As more and more news of the defeats of Chiang Kai-shek's troops at the front
reaches his rear areas, the broad masses of the people there, suffocating
under the oppression of his reactionary government, see more and more hope
of ending their sufferings and winning their emancipation. At this very time,
all Chiang Kai-shek's political tricks are failing as fast as he plays them.
Everything has gone against the expectations of the reactionaries. Such steps
as convening a "National Assembly" to adopt a "constitution", reorganizing
the one-party government into a "multi-party government" and what not, were
originally aimed at isolating the Communist Party and other democratic forces.
They have produced the opposite result; it is not the Communist Party or
any other democratic forces that are isolated but the reactionaries themselves.
After this the Chinese people know from their own experience what Chiang
Kai-shek's "National Assembly", "constitution" and "multi-party government"
really are. Previously, many Chinese people, mainly those of the middle strata,
had illusions to a greater or lesser extent about these maneuvers of Chiang
Kai-shek. It is the same with his "peace negotiations". Now that Chiang Kai-shek
has torn several solemn truce agreements to shreds and used bayonets against
the student masses demanding peace and opposing civil war, nobody will any
longer believe in his so-called peace negotiations except those bent on deceiving
people or those absolutely inexperienced politically.

All events have proved our appraisal to be correct. We have repeatedly pointed
out that the Chiang Kai-shek government is nothing but a government of treason,
civil war and dictatorship. It seeks to wipe out the Chinese Communist Party
and all other democratic forces by civil war in order to turn China into
a U.S. colony and maintain its own dictatorial rule. Because it has adopted
these reactionary policies, this government has lost all prestige and strength
politically. The power of the Chiang Kai-shek government is only temporary
and superficial; in fact, it is a government outwardly strong but inwardly
weak. Its offensives can be smashed no matter where or on what fronts they
are launched. Its inevitable end will be rebellion by the masses, desertion
by its followers and the total destruction of its army. All events have borne
out and will continue to bear out the correctness of this appraisal.

The march of events in China is faster than people expected. On the one hand,
there are the victories of the People's Liberation Army; on the other, there
is the advance of the people's struggle in the areas under Chiang Kai-shek's
control; both are moving at high speed. The Chinese people should quickly
prepare all the necessary conditions for the establishment of a peaceful,
democratic and independent new China. 

NOTES

1. After December 1946 the democratic and patriotic movement
of the broad masses of students in the Kuomintang areas against hunger, civil
war and persecution gathered new momentum with the development of the People's
War of Liberation and gradually became a second front in the struggle against
Chiang Kai-shek's reactionary rule. In late December 1946 and early January
1947, more than 500,000 students in scores of big and medium cities, including
Peiping, Tientsin, Shanghai and Nanking, went on strike and held demonstrations
in protest against the atrocity of the raping of a Peking University girl
student perpetrated by U.S. soldiers and demanded the withdrawal of U.S.
armed forces from China. This struggle won the immediate support of workers,
teachers and other people. On May 4, 1947, students in Shanghai demonstrated
against the civil war. At the same time eight thousand workers and students
besieged the Kuomintang police headquarters. The patriotic movement soon
spread to Nanking, Peiping, Hangchow, Shenyang, Tsingtao, Kaffeng and many
other cities. The Kuomintang reactionaries resorted to extremely brutal measures
to suppress the students' patriotic and democratic movement. On May 20 more
than a hundred students were wounded and arrested in Nanking and Tientsin
in the notorious "Bloody Incident of May 20th". Nevertheless, the patriotic
student movement, supported by the broad masses of the people, could not
be quelled. The students' strikes and demonstrations under the slogan, "Against
Hunger, Against Civil War, Against Persecution", and the people's anti-U.S.
and anti-Chiang Kai-shek struggles, such as strikes of workers and teachers,
spread to more than sixty large and medium cities. In May 1948 the students
in Shanghai, together with cultural workers, journalists and people from
other walks of life, started a patriotic movement against the revival of
the Japanese forces of aggression fostered by the United States, a movement
which also spread rapidly to many other cities. The patriotic struggles of
the students never ceased until the country-wide victory; they struck heavy
blows at the Kuomintang.

2. Promulgated on May 18, 1947 by the Chiang Kai-shek
government, these measures strictly prohibited the presentation of petitions
by more than ten persons together and forbade all strikes by workers and
students and all demonstrations. They also authorized the Kuomintang local
authorities to take "necessary steps" and "emergency measures" for the sanguinary
suppression of the patriotic and democratic movements of the people.

3. On May 4, 1919, students in Peking demonstrated against
the handing over to Japan of many of China's sovereign rights in Shantung
by Britain, the United States, France, Japan, Italy and other imperialist
countries then in conference in Paris. This student movement evoked an immediate
response throughout the country. After June 3, it developed into a country-wide
and-imperialist and anti-feudal revolutionary movement embracing large numbers
of the proletariat, the urban petty bourgeoisie and even the national
bourgeoisie. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Strategy for the Second Year of the War of Liberation







STRATEGY FOR THE SECOND YEAR OF THE WAR OF LIBERATION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

STRATEGY FOR THE SECOND YEAR OF THE WAR OF LIBERATION


September 1, 1947

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China when he and the Central Committee
were at Chukuanchai, Chiahsien County, northern Shensi. The directive formulated
the basic task for the second year of the War of Liberation. This task was
to carry the war into the Kuomintang areas with our main forces and to switch
from fighting on interior lines to fighting on exterior lines, that is, to
pass from the stage of the strategic defensive to that of the strategic
offensive. In accordance with the strategic plan laid down by Comrade Mao
Tse-tung, the People's Liberation Army went over to the offensive on a
country-wide scale during July-September 1947. The Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan
Field Army forced the Yellow River in southwestern Shantung on June 30, crossed
the Lunghai Railway early in August and thrust into the Tapieh Mountains.
The Taiyueh Army of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Field Army forced the
Yellow River from southern Shansi in late August and thrust into western
Honan. The Eastern China Field Army thrust into southwestern Shantung early
in September after smashing a concentrated attack by the enemy. In the same
month the Shantung Army of the Eastern China Field Army started an offensive
against the enemy in eastern Shantung. The Northwest Field Army went over
to the offensive late in August. The Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Field Army started
an offensive against the enemy along the northern section of the Peiping-Hankow
Railway early in September. Immediately after its summer offensive throughout
the Northeast, the Northeast Field Army, beginning in September, launched
a large-scale autumn offensive in the Changchun-Kirin-Szepingkai region and
in the Chinhsi-Ihsien sector along the Peiping-Liaoning Railway. The offensives
in all these theatres of war constituted a general offensive by the entire
People's Liberation Army. This large-scale offensive led to a turning point
in the War of Liberation, marking a radical change in the war situation.
See "The Present Situation and Our Tasks", pp. 157-76 of this volume.]

  

1. In the first year's fighting (from July last year to June this year),
we wiped out 97 regular brigades, or 780,000 men, and puppet troops, peace
preservation corps and others totalling 340,000 -- altogether 1,120,000 of
the enemy. This was a great victory. It dealt the enemy a heavy blow, created
profound defeatism in the whole enemy camp, elated the people throughout
the country and laid the foundation for the complete annihilation of the
enemy by our army and for final victory.

2. In the first year's fighting, the enemy launched a large-scale offensive
against the Liberated Areas, using 218 of his 248 regular brigades, or more
than 1,600,000 men, and nearly 1,000,000 men from the special arms (navy,
air force, artillery, engineer corps and armoured units) and from the puppet
troops, communications police corps and peace preservation corps. Our army
rightly adopted the strategy of fighting on interior lines; and in order
to hold the initiative at all times and places it did not balk at paying
the price of over 300,000 casualties and of enemy occupation of large tracts
of territory. Consequently, we succeeded in wiping out 1,120,000 enemy troops,
forced the enemy to disperse his troops, steeled and strengthened our own
forces, launched strategic counter-offensives in the Northeast, Jehol, eastern
Hopei, southern Shansi and northern Honan, recovered large territories and
liberated vast new areas.[1]

3. In the second year of fighting, our army's basic task is to launch a
country-wide counter-offensive, that is, to use our main forces to fight
our way to exterior lines, carry the war into the Kuomintang areas, wipe
out large numbers of the enemy on the exterior lines and completely wreck
the Kuomintang's counter-revolutionary strategy, which is, on the contrary,
to continue to carry the war into the Liberated Areas, further damage and
drain our manpower and material resources and make it impossible for us to
hold out very long. In the second year's fighting, a partial task of our
army is to use a portion of our main forces and large numbers of our regional
troops to continue fighting on interior lines, wipe out the enemy there and
recover lost territory.

4. Our army will of course meet many difficulties in carrying out the policy
of fighting on exterior lines and bringing the war into the Kuomintang areas.
For it takes time to build new bases in the Kuomintang areas and we can build
stable bases only when we have wiped out large numbers of the enemy in many
back-and-forth mobile operations, aroused the masses, distributed land,
established our political power and built up the people's armed forces. Until
then, there will be quite a few difficulties. But they can and must be overcome.
For the enemy will be forced to spread out even more, and vast territories
will be available to our army as battlefields for mobile operations, and
so we will be able to wage mobile warfare; the broad masses in those territories
hate the Kuomintang and support us; and though part of the enemy forces still
has a comparatively high combat effectiveness, on the whole the enemy's morale
and combat effectiveness are much lower than a year ago.

5. The keys to victory in fighting in the Kuomintang areas are, first, to
be good at seizing the opportunities for fighting, to be brave and determined
and win as many battles as possible; and, second, to carry out resolutely
the policy of winning the masses and enable the broad masses to benefit so
that they side with our army. If these two points are carried out, we shall
win victory.

6. Up to the end of August this year, the distribution of enemy forces, including
those which had been wiped out or dealt crushing blows, was 157 brigades
on the southern front, 70 on the northern front and 21 in the Kuomintang
rear areas. The total in the whole country was still 248 brigades and the
actual number of troops was about 1,500,000. Troops in the special arms,
puppet troops, communications police and peace preservation corps numbered
about 1,200,000. Non-combatants in the military institutions in the enemy
rear were about 1,000,000. The entire enemy forces totalled about 3,700,000
men. Of the troops on the southern front, 117 brigades belong to Ku Chu-tung's
group, 7 to Cheng Chien's group and others, and 33 to Hu Tsung-nan's group.
Of the 117 brigades of Ku Chu-tung's group, 63 have been wiped out or have
received crushing blows. Of these, some have not been replenished; others,
although they are being replenished, have few men and low combat effectiveness;
and others, although their manpower and arms have been fairly well replenished
and their combat effectiveness has to some extent been restored, are still
far weaker than before. There are only 54 brigades which have neither been
wiped out nor received crushing blows. Of Ku Chutung's entire forces, 82
to 85 brigades are employed for garrison duty and can be used only for local
manoeuvres, and no more than 32 to 35 brigades can be used for strategic
manoeuvres. The 7 brigades of Cheng Chien's group and others can in the main
be used only for garrison duty, and one has already received a crushing blow.
Of the 33 brigades of Hu Tsung-nan's group (including those east of Lanchow,
south of Ningsia and Yulin, and west of Linfen and Loyang), 12 have been
wiped out or received crushing blows, only 7 can be used for strategic
manoeuvres, and the rest are on garrison duty. On the northern front the
enemy has 70 brigades altogether. Of these, the Northeast group has 26 brigades,
of which 16 have been wiped out or have received crushing blows, Sun Lien-chung's
group has 19 brigades, of which 8 have been wiped out or received crushing
blows; Fu Tso-yi has 10 brigades, of which 2 have received crushing blows;
and Yen Hsi-shan has 15 brigades, of which 9 have been wiped out or received
crushing blows. These enemy troops are now mainly on the defensive and only
a small part is available for mobile operations. In the Kuomintang rear areas
there are only 21 brigades on garrison duty. Of these, 8 brigades are in
Sinkiang and western Kansu, 7 in Szechuan and Sikang, 2 in Yunnan, 2 in Kwangtung
(that is, the 69th Division that was wiped out) and 2 in Taiwan. There are
no regular troops at all in the six provinces of Hunan, Kwangsi, Kweichow,
Fukien, Chekiang and Kiangsi. The Kuomintang is planning, with U.S. assistance,
to draft 1,000,000 men this year to replenish the front and to train a number
of new brigades and replacement regiments. However, if our army can wipe
out an average of 8 enemy brigades a month, as it did in the first year of
fighting, and wipe out another 96 to 100 brigades in the second year (already
in July and August 16 brigades were wiped out), then the enemy army will
be further and greatly weakened, its strategic reserve will be reduced to
the minimum, and it will be forced into a defensive position in all parts
of the country and will be attacked by us everywhere. Although the Kuomintang
has this plan of drafting 1,000,000 men and training new brigades and replacement
regiments, it will be of no avail. Since its only methods of recruiting are
pressganging and hiring, to reach a million will certainly be difficult and
many will desert. Moreover, by carrying out the policy of fighting on exterior
lines our army will be able to reduce the enemy's manpower and material
resources.

7. The operational principles of our army are still the same as those laid
down before:

Attack dispersed, isolated enemy forces first (this applies also to a large-scale
campaign of annihilation directed against several brigades, such as the Laiwu
campaign[2] in February and the Southwestern Shantung
campaign[3] in July this year); attack concentrated, strong
enemy forces later.

Take medium and small cities and extensive rural areas first; take big cities
later.

Make wiping out the enemy's effective strength our main objective; do not
make holding or seizing a place our main objective. Holding or seizing a
place is the outcome of wiping out the enemy's effective strength, and often
a place can be held or seized for good only after it has changed hands a
number of times.

In every battle, concentrate an absolutely superior force, encircle the enemy
forces completely, strive to wipe them out thoroughly and do not let any
escape from the net. In special circumstances, use the method of dealing
crushing blows to the enemy, that is, concentrate all our strength to make
a frontal attack and also to attack one or both of his flanks, with the aim
of wiping out one part and routing another so that our army can swiftly move
its troops to smash other enemy forces.

On the one hand, be sure to fight no battle unprepared, fight no battle you
are not sure of winning; make every effort to be well prepared for each battle,
make every effort to ensure victory in the given set of conditions as between
the enemy and ourselves. On the other hand, give full play to our fine style
of fighting -- courage in battle, no fear of sacrifice, no fear of fatigue,
and continuous fighting (that is, fighting successive battles in a short
time).

Strive to draw the enemy into mobile warfare, but at the same time lay great
stress on learning the tactics of positional attack and on stepping up the
building of the artillery and engineer corps in order to capture enemy fortified
points and cities on a large scale.

Resolutely attack and seize all fortified points and cities which are weakly
defended. Attack and seize at opportune moments all fortified points and
cities defended with moderate strength, provided circumstances permit. For
the time being, leave alone all fortified points and cities which are strongly
defended.

Replenish our strength with all the arms and most of the soldiers captured
from the enemy (80-90 per cent of the men and a small number of the junior
officers). Seek replenishment chiefly from the enemy and from the Kuomintang
areas and only partly from the old Liberated Areas; this applies especially
to the armies on the southern front.

In all the new and old Liberated Areas, we must resolutely carry through
the land reform (which is the most fundamental requirement for supporting
a long war and winning country-wide victory), develop production, practice
economy and strengthen the building of war industry -- all for victory at
the front. Only by doing this can we support a long war and win victory in
the whole country. If we do so, we shall certainly be able to support a long
war and win victory throughout the country.

8. The above sums up the year's fighting and sets forth the principles for
future fighting. Leading comrades in all areas are requested to pass the
contents on to all cadres of regimental rank and above, of the level of
prefectural Party committee and above and of the level of prefectural
commissioner's office and above, so that everyone will understand his own
task and carry it out resolutely and unwaveringly.
NOTES 

1. This strategic counter-offensive in the Northeast, Jehol
and eastern Hopei was the 1947 summer offensive of the Northeast People's
Liberation Army. On May 13, the People's Liberation Army began simultaneous
offensives on these fronts and by July 1 had wiped out over 80,000 enemy
troops and recovered more than 40 county towns. The enemy plan of cutting
up the Liberated Areas in northeastern China was thus completely wrecked.
The enemy troops, driven into two narrow corridors along the Chinese Changchun
Railway and the Peiping-Liaoning Railway, were forced into the "defence of
key points". This changed the whole situation in northeastern China. The
strategic counter-offensive in southern Shansi and northern Honan comprised
the offensives launched by the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan People's Liberation
Army in northern Honan and on the flanks of the Tatung-Puchow Railway in
southern Shansi between March and May 1947. Our army in northern Honan started
attacking on March 23. After taking Yenchin, Yangwu, Puyang and Fengchiu
one after another, our army turned north to exploit these successes. By May
28 it had captured Tsihsien, Chunhsien, Huahsien and Tangyin and wiped out
over 45,000 enemy troops. Our troops in southern Shansi began offensive
operations on April 4. By May 4 they had captured twenty-two county towns,
including Chuwo, Hsinchiang and Yungtsi, and two important ferry crossings
on the Yellow River, Yumenkou and Fenglingtu, and had wiped out over 18,000
enemy troops.

2. The Laiwu campaign was a campaign of mobile warfare
fought by the Eastern China People's Liberation Army in the Laiwu region,
southeast of Tsinan, Shantung Province. Towards the end of January 1947 the
Kuomintang troops launched an offensive against the Shantung Liberated Areas
from both the north and the south. From the south, eight Kuomintang reorganized
divisions drove northward by three routes along the Yiho and Shuho Rivers
towards Linyi and from the north, in coordination with them, three Kuomintang
corps belonging to the Li Hsien-chou group advanced southward on Laiwu and
Hsintai from Mingshui, Tsechuan and Poshan, seeking to engage the main force
of the Eastern China People's Liberation Army in a decisive battle in the
Yi-Meng mountain area. Our army used part of its forces to block the enemy
from the south but marched its main force north towards Laiwu to destroy
the Li Hsien-chou group. All the enemy troops, over 60,000 men, were wiped
out in a battle which started on February 20 and ended on the afternoon of
February 23. Li Hsien-chou, Deputy Commander of the 2nd Pacification Zone
of the Kuomintang's Hsuchow Pacification Headquarters, was captured, and
thirteen towns were recovered.

3. This Southwestern Shantung campaign was the campaign
fought by the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan People's Liberation Army in July
1947 in the region of Hotse, Yuncheng, Chuyeh, Tingtao, Chinhsiang and Tsaohsien,
in southwestern Shantung Province. In this campaign 4 Kuomintang division
headquarters and 9 brigades, totalling more than 56,000 men, were wiped out.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Manifesto of the Chinese Peoples Liberation Army







MANIFESTO OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

MANIFESTO OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY


October 1947

[This political manifesto was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the General
Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army. It analysed the political
situation in China at the time, raised the slogan "Overthrow Chiang Kai-shek
and liberate all China!" and announced the eight basic policies of the Chinese
People's Liberation Army, which were also those of the Communist Party of
China. The manifesto was issued on October 10, 1947, and was known as the
"October 10th Manifesto". It was drafted at Shenchuanpao, Chiahsien County,
northern Shensi.] 
  

The Chinese People's Liberation Army, having smashed Chiang Kai-shek's offensive,
has now launched a large-scale counter-offensive. Our armies on the southern
front are advancing on the Yangtse River valley, our armies on the northern
front are advancing on the Chinese Changchun Railway and the Peiping-Liaoning
Railway. Wherever our troops go, the enemy flees pell-mell before us and
the people give thunderous cheers. The whole situation between the enemy
and ourselves has fundamentally changed as compared with a year ago.

The aim of our army in this war, as proclaimed time and again to the nation
and the world, is the liberation of the Chinese people and the Chinese nation.
And today, our aim is to carry out the urgent demand of the people of the
whole country, that is, to overthrow the arch-criminal of the civil war,
Chiang Kai-shek, and form a democratic coalition government in order to attain
the general goal of liberating the people and the nation.

For eight long years the Chinese people fought heroically against Japanese
imperialism for their own liberation and national independence. After the
Japanese surrender the people longed for peace, but Chiang Kai-shek wrecked
all their peace efforts and forced on them the disaster of an unprecedented
civil war. Hence the people of all strata throughout the country were forced
to unite to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek, having no other way out.

Chiang Kai-shek's present policy of civil war is no accident but is the
inevitable outcome of the anti-popular policy which he and his reactionary
clique have consistently followed. As far back as 1927, Chiang Kai-shek,
devoid of all gratitude, betrayed the revolutionary alliance between the
Kuomintang and the Communist Party[1] and betrayed the
revolutionary Three People's principles and the Three Great Policies of Sun
Yat-sen;[2] then he set up a dictatorship, capitulated
to imperialism, fought ten years of civil war and brought on the aggression
of the Japanese bandits. In the Sian Incident of 1936, the Communist Party
of China returned good for evil and, acting together with Generals Chang
Hsueh-liang and Yang Hu-cheng, set Chiang Kai-shek free in the hope that
he would repent, turn over a new leaf and join in the fight against the Japanese
aggressors. But once again he proved devoid of all gratitude; he was passive
against the Japanese invaders, active in suppressing the people and extremely
hostile to the Communist Party. The year before last (1945), Japan surrendered
and the Chinese people once more forgave Chiang Kai-shek, demanding that
he should stop the civil war he had already started, put democracy into practice
and unite with all parties and groups for peace and national reconstruction.
But no sooner had the truce agreement been signed, the resolutions of the
Political Consultative Conference adopted and the four
pledges[3] proclaimed than the utterly faithless Chiang
Kai-shek went back on his word completely. Time and again the people showed
themselves forbearing and conciliatory for the sake of the common good but,
aided by U.S. imperialism, Chiang Kai-shek was determined to launch an
unprecedented all-out offensive against the people, in utter disregard of
the fate of the country and the nation. From January last year (1946), when
the truce agreement was announced, up to the present, Chiang Kai-shek has
mobilized more than 220 brigades of his regular troops and nearly a million
miscellaneous troops[4] and launched large-scale attacks
against the Liberated Areas which the Chinese people wrested from Japanese
imperialism after bloody battles; he has seized successively the cities of
Shenyang, Fushun, Penki, Szepingkai, Changchun, Yungchi, Chengteh, Chining,
Changchiakou, Huaiyin, Hotse, Linyi, Yenan and Yentai and vast rural areas.
Wherever Chiang Kai-shek's troops go, they murder and burn, rape and loot,
carry out the policy of three atrocities[5] and behave
exactly like the Japanese bandits. In November last year Chiang Kai-shek
convened the bogus National Assembly and proclaimed the bogus constitution.
In March this year he expelled the representatives of the Communist Party
from the Kuomintang areas. In July he issued an order of general mobilization
against the people.[6] Towards the just movement of the
people in different parts of the country against civil war, against hunger
and against U.S. imperialist aggression and towards the struggle for existence
waged by the workers, peasants, students, townspeople, government employees
and teachers, Chiang Kai-shek's policy is one of repression, arrest and massacre.
Towards our country's minority nationalities, his policy is one of Han
chauvinism, of persecution and repression by every possible means. In all
the areas under Chiang Kai-shek's rule corruption is rife, secret agents
run amuck, taxes are innumerable and crushing, prices are skyrocketing, the
economy is bankrupt, all business languishes, conscription and the grain
levy are imposed and voices of discontent are heard everywhere; all this
has plunged the overwhelming majority of people throughout the country into
an abyss of suffering. Meanwhile the financial oligarchs, corrupt officials,
local bullies and bad gentry, all headed by Chiang Kai-shek, have amassed
vast fortunes. Chiang Kai-shek and his like made these fortunes by using
their dictatorial powers to extort taxes and levies and promote their private
interests under the guise of serving the public. To maintain his dictatorship
and carry on the civil war, Chiang Kai-shek has not hesitated to sell out
our country's sovereign rights to foreign imperialism, to collude with the
U.S. armed forces so that they should remain in Tsingtao and elsewhere and
to procure advisers from the United States to take part in directing the
civil war and training troops to slaughter his own fellow-countrymen. Aircraft,
tanks, guns and ammunition for the civil war are shipped from the United
States in great quantities. Funds for the civil war are borrowed from the
United States on a large scale. In return for its favours, Chiang Kai-shek
has presented U.S. imperialism with military bases and the rights of air
flight and navigation and concluded with it a commercial treaty of
enslavement[7] -- acts of treason many times worse than
those of Yuan Shih-kai.[8] In a word, Chiang Kai-shek's
twenty-year rule has been traitorous, dictatorial and against the people.
Today, the overwhelming majority of the people throughout the country, north
and south, young and old, know his towering crimes and hope that our army
will quickly launch the counter-offensive, overthrow Chiang Kai-shek and
liberate all China.

We are the army of the Chinese people and in all things we take the will
of the Chinese people as our will. The policies of our army represent the
urgent demands of the Chinese people and chief among them are the following:

(1) Unite workers, peasants, soldiers, intellectuals and businessmen, all
oppressed classes, all people's organizations, democratic parties, minority
nationalities, overseas Chinese and other patriots; form a national united
front; overthrow the dictatorial Chiang Kai-shek government; and establish
a democratic coalition government.

(2) Arrest, try and punish the civil war criminals headed by Chiang Kai-shek.

(3) Abolish the Chiang Kai-shek dictatorship, carry out the system of people's
democracy and guarantee freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly and
of association for the people.

(4) Abolish the rotten institutions of the Chiang Kai-shek regime, clear
out all corrupt officials and establish clean government.

(5) Confiscate the property of the four big families[9]
of Chiang Kai-shek, T. V. Soong, H. H. Kung and the Chen Li-fu brothers,
and the property of the other chief war criminals; confiscate bureaucrat-capital,
develop the industry and commerce of the national bourgeoisie, improve the
livelihood of workers and employees, and give relief to victims of natural
calamities and to poverty-stricken people.

(6) Abolish the system of feudal exploitation and put into effect the system
of land to the tillers.

(7) Recognize the right to equality and autonomy of the minority nationalities
within the borders of China.

(8) Repudiate the traitorous foreign policy of Chiang Kai-shek's dictatorial
government, abrogate all the treasonable treaties and repudiate all the foreign
debts contracted by Chiang Kai-shek during the civil war period. Demand that
the U.S. government withdraw its troops stationed in China, which are a menace
to China's independence, and oppose any foreign country's helping Chiang
Kai-shek to carry on civil war or trying to revive the forces of Japanese
aggression. Conclude treaties of trade and friendship with foreign countries
on the basis of equality and reciprocity. Unite in a common struggle with
all nations which treat us as equals.

The above are the basic policies of our army. They will be put into practice
at once wherever our army goes. These policies conform with the demands of
more than 90 per cent of the people in our country.

Our army does not reject all Chiang Kai-shek's personnel but adopts a policy
of dealing with each case on its merits. That is, the chief criminals shall
be punished without fail, those who are accomplices under duress shall go
unpunished and those who perform deeds of merit shall be rewarded. As for
Chiang Kai-shek, the arch-criminal who started the civil war and who has
committed most heinous crimes, and as for all his hardened accomplices who
have trampled the people underfoot and are branded as war criminals by the
broad masses, our army will hunt them down, even to the four corners of the
earth, and will surely bring them to trial and punishment. Our army warns
all officers and men in Chiang Kai-shek's army, all officials in his government
and all members of his party whose hands are not yet stained with the blood
of innocent people that they should strictly refrain from joining these criminals
in their evil-doing. Those who have been doing evil should immediately stop,
repent and start anew and break with Chiang Kai-shek, and we will give them
a chance to make amends for their crimes by good deeds. Our army will not
kill or humiliate any of Chiang Kai-shek's army officers and men who lay
down their arms, but will accept them into our service if they are willing
to remain with us or send them home if they wish to leave. As for those troops
of Chiang Kai-shek who rise in revolt and join our army and those who work
for our army openly or in secret, they shall be rewarded.

In order to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek and form a democratic coalition government
at an early date, we call on our fellow-countrymen in all walks of life to
co-operate actively with us wherever our army goes in cleaning up the reactionary
forces and setting up a democratic order. In places we have not yet reached,
they should take up arms on their own, resist pressganging and the grain
levy, distribute the land, repudiate debts and take advantage of the enemy's
gaps to develop guerrilla warfare.

In order to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek and form a democratic coalition government
at an early date, we call on the people in the Liberated Areas to carry through
the land reform, consolidate the foundations of democracy, develop production,
practice economy, strengthen the people's armed forces, eliminate the remaining
strongholds of the enemy and support the fighting at the front.

All comrade commanders and fighters of our army! We are shouldering the most
important, the most glorious task in the history of our country's revolution.
We should make great efforts to accomplish our task. Our efforts will decide
the day when our great motherland will emerge from darkness into light and
our beloved fellow-countrymen will be able to live like human beings and
to choose the government they wish. All officers and fighters of our army
must improve their military art, march forward courageously towards sure
victory in the war and resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely wipe
out all enemies. They must all raise their level of political consciousness,
learn the two skills of wiping out the enemy forces and arousing the masses,
unite intimately with the masses and rapidly build the new Liberated Areas
into stable areas. They must heighten their sense of discipline and resolutely
carry out orders, carry out policy, carry out the Three Main Rules of Discipline
and the Eight Points for Attention -- with army and people united, army and
government united, officers and soldiers united, and the whole army united
-- and permit no breach of discipline. All our officers and fighters must
always bear in mind that we are the great People's Liberation Army, we are
the troops led by the great Communist Party of China. Provided we constantly
observe the directives of the Party, we are sure to win.

Down with Chiang Kai-shek!

Long live New China! 
NOTES 

1. See "The Situation and Our Policy After the Victory
in the War of Resistance Against Japan", Note 7, p. 23 of this volume.

2. See "On a Statement by Chiang Kai-shek's Spokesman",
Note 2, pp. 44-45 of this volume.

3. The "four pledges" were made by Chiang Kai-shek at the
opening session of the Political Consultative Conference in 1946. They were,
to guarantee freedom of the people, to guarantee the legal status of political
parties, to hold a general election and to release political prisoners.

4. By miscellaneous troops are meant the Kuomintang's irregular
troops which included the local peace preservation corps, communications
police corps, gendarmes, the puppet troops taken over and reorganized by
the Kuomintang, etc.

5. The Japanese invaders carried out the policy of three
atrocities -- burn all, kill all, loot all -- against the Liberated Areas
in China.

6. On July 4, 1947, the reactionary Kuomintang government
adopted Chiang Kai-shek's "General Mobilization Bill" and immediately afterwards
issued the "Order for General Mobilization to Suppress the Insurrection of
the Communist Bandits". In fact, Chiang Kai-shek had carried out a general
mobilization for his counterrevolutionary civil war much earlier. By that
time the Chinese People's Liberation Army had begun to shift to a country-wide
offensive. Chiang Kai-shek himself admitted that his regime was in a "serious
crisis". The "Order for General Mobilization" was merely his dying kick.

7. This refers to the "Sino-U.S. Treaty of Friendship,
Commerce and Navigation" concluded between the Chiang Kai-shek government
and the U.S. government on November 4, 1946. The treaty sold out China's
sovereign rights to the United States. See "Greet the New High Tide of the
Chinese Revolution", Note 6, p. 126 of this volume.

8. Yuan Shih-kai was the head of the Northern warlords
in the last years of the Ching Dynasty. After the Ching Dynasty was overthrown
by the Revolution of 1911, he usurped the presidency of the Republic and
organized the first government of the Northern warlords, which represented
the big landlord and big comprador classes; he did this by relying on a
counter-revolutionary armed force and the support of the imperialists and
by taking advantage of the compromising nature of the bourgeoisie then leading
the revolution. In 1915 he wanted to make himself emperor and, to gain the
support of the Japanese imperialists, he accepted Japan's Twenty-one Demands
which were designed to obtain exclusive control of all China. In December
of the same year an uprising against his assumption of the throne took place
in Yunnan Province and promptly won country-wide response and support. Yuan
Shih-kai died in June 1916.

9. This refers to the four big monopoly capitalist groups
of Chiang Kai-shek, T. V. Soong, H. H. Kung and Chen Li-fu. See "The Present
Situation and Our Tasks", Section 6, pp. 167-69 of this volume. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Reissue of the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for Attention — Instruction of the general Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army







ON THE REISSUE OF THE THREE MAIN RULES OF DISCIPLINE AND THE EIGHT
  POINTS FOR ATTENTION -- INSTRUCTION OF THE GENERAL HEADQUARTERS OF THE CHINESE
  PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON THE REISSUE OF THE THREE MAIN RULES OF DISCIPLINE AND THE EIGHT POINTS
  FOR ATTENTION -- INSTRUCTION OF THE GENERAL HEADQUARTERS OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S
  LIBERATION ARMY


October 10, 1947


1. Our Army's Three Main Rules of Discipline and Eight Points for Attention
[1] have been practiced for many years, but their
contents vary slightly in army units in different areas. They have now been
unified and are hereby reissued. It is expected that you will take this version
as the standard one for thorough education and strict enforcement. As to
other matters needing attention, the high command of the armed forces in
different areas may lay down additional points in accordance with specific
conditions and order their enforcement.

2. The Three Main Rules of Discipline are as follows: 

  (1) Obey orders in all your actions.


  (2) Don't take a single needle or piece of thread from the masses.


  (3) Turn in everything captured.


3. The Eight Points for Attention are as follows: 

  (1) Speak politely.


  (2) Pay fairly for what you buy.


  (3) Return everything you borrow.


  (4) Pay for anything you damage.


  (5) Don't hit or swear at people.


  (6) Don't damage crops.


  (7) Don't take liberties with women.


  (8) Don't ill-treat captives.


NOTES

1. The Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points
for Attention were the rules of discipline laid down by Comrade Mao Tse-tung
for the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army during the Second Revolutionary
Civil War. They formed an important part of the political work of the Red
Army and played a great role in building the people's armed forces, handling
relations within the army correctly, forging unity with the masses of the
people and laying down the correct policy of the people's army towards captives.
From the earliest days of the Red Army, Comrade Mao Tse-tung required the
soldiers to speak politely to the masses, pay fairly for all purchases and
never impress people into forced labour or hit or swear at people. In the
spring of 1928, when the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army was in the Chingkang
Mountains, Comrade Mao Tse-tung set down Three Rules of Discipline: (1)
Obey orders in your actions; (2) Don't take anything from the workers and
peasants; and (3) Turn in all things taken from local bullies. In the summer
of 1928 he set forth Six Points for Attention: (1) Put back the doors you
have taken down for bed-boards; (2) Put back the straw you have used for
bedding; (3) Speak politely; (4) Pay fairly for what you buy; (5) Return
everything you borrow; and (6) Pay for anything you damage. After 1929 Comrade
Mao Tse-tung made the following changes: Rule 2 became "Don't take a single
needle or piece of thread from the masses", and Rule 3 was changed first
to "Turn in all money raised" and then to "Turn in everything captured".
To the Six Points for Attention he added two more: "Don't bathe within sight
of women" and "Don't search the pockets of captives". This was the origin
of the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for Attention.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Present Situation and Our Tasks







THE PRESENT SITUATION AND OUR TASKS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE PRESENT SITUATION AND OUR TASKS


December 25, 1947

[This report was made by Comrade Mao Tse-tung to a meeting of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China held on December 25-28 1947, at
Yangchiakou, Michih County, northern Shensi. In addition to those members
and alternate members of the Central Committee able to attend, responsible
comrades of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region and the Shansi-Suiyuan
Border Region were present. The meeting discussed and adopted this report
and also another document written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung,
"Some Points in Appraisal of the Present International
Situation" (see pp. 87-88 of this volume). Concerning Comrade Mao Tse-tung's
report, the decision adopted at the meeting stated, "This report is a
programmatic document in the political, military and economic fields for
the entire period of the overthrow of the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek ruling
clique and of the founding of a new-democratic China. The whole Party and
the whole army should carry on intensive education around, and strictly apply
in practice, this document and, in connection with it, the documents published
on October 10, 1947 [namely, 'Manifesto of the Chinese People's Liberation
Army', 'Slogans of the Chinese People's Liberation Army', 'Instruction on
the Reissue of the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for
Attention', 'Outline Land Law of China' and 'Resolution of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China on the Promulgation of the Outline Land Law
of China']. In carrying out policies in different places any departure from
the principles laid down in the report should be rectified at once." Other
important decisions taken at the meeting were: 

(1) That every effort should be made to carry the Chinese people's revolutionary
war forward uninterruptedly to complete victory, and that the enemy should
not be allowed to use stalling tactics (peace negotiations) to gain time
for rest and reorganization for a fresh attack on the people.

(2) That the time was not yet ripe for the formation of a revolutionary central
government, which was to be considered only when our army had won greater
victories, and that the promulgation of a constitution was even more a question
for the future.

The meeting also discussed in detail current tendencies in the Party and
certain specific policies in the land reform and the mass movements. The
results of these discussions were subsequently set forth by Comrade Mao Tse-tung
in the article "On Some Important Problems of the
Party's Present Policy" (see pp. 181-89 of this volume). All the articles
in this book starting with this report and ending with
"A Circular on the Situation", dated March 20,
1948 (pp. 219-26), were written at Yangchiakou, Michih County, northern Shensi.]



I 

The Chinese people's revolutionary war has now reached a turning point. That
is, the Chinese People's Liberation Army has beaten back the offensive of
several million reactionary troops of Chiang Kai-shek, the running dog of
the United States of America, and gone over to the offensive. Already in
the first year of the present war, from July 1946 to June 1947, the People's
Liberation Army beat back Chiang Kai-shek's offensive on several fronts and
forced him onto the defensive. And beginning with the first quarter of the
second year of the war, July-September 1947, the People's Liberation Army
went over to the offensive on a national scale and wrecked Chiang Kai-shek's
counter-revolutionary plan of continuing to carry the war into the Liberated
Areas in order to destroy them completely. Now the war is no longer being
fought chiefly in the Liberated Areas but in the Kuomintang areas; the main
forces of the People's Liberation Army have carried the fight into the Kuomintang
areas.[1] In this land of China, the People's
Liberation Army has turned back the wheel of counterrevolution -- of U.S.
imperialism and its lackey, the Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang -- and sent it
down the road to destruction and has pushed the wheel of revolution forward
along the road to victory. This is a turning point in history. It is the
turning point from growth to extinction for Chiang Kai-shek's twenty-year
counter-revolutionary rule. It is the turning point from growth to extinction
for imperialist rule in China, now over a hundred years old. This is a momentous
event. It is momentous because it is occurring in a country with a population
of 475 million and, having occurred, it will certainly culminate in victory
throughout the country. Furthermore, it is momentous because it is occurring
in the East, where over 1,000 million people -- half of mankind -- suffer
under imperialist oppression. The turn of the Chinese People's War of Liberation
from the defensive to the offensive cannot but gladden and inspire these
oppressed nations. It is also of assistance to the oppressed people now
struggling in many countries in Europe and the Americas.

II

From the day Chiang Kai-shek started his counter-revolutionary war we said
that we not only must defeat him but can defeat him. We must defeat him because
the war he started is a counter-revolutionary war directed by U.S. imperialism
against the independence of the Chinese nation and the liberation of the
Chinese people. After the conclusion of World War II and the overthrow of
Japanese imperialism, the task of the Chinese people was to complete the
new-democratic transformation politically, economically and culturally, to
achieve national unification and independence and to change China from an
agricultural into an industrial country. But at that time, after the victorious
conclusion of the anti-fascist Second World War, U.S. imperialism and its
lackeys in various countries stepped into the shoes of German and Japanese
imperialism and their lackeys and formed a reactionary camp against the Soviet
Union, against the People's Democracies in Europe, against the workers' movements
in the capitalist countries, against the national movements in the colonies
and semi-colonies and against the liberation of the Chinese people. At such
a time the Chinese reactionaries headed by Chiang Kai-shek acted as the running
dog for U.S. imperialism, just as Wang Ching-wei had done for Japanese
imperialism, sold out China to the United States and unleashed a war against
the Chinese people to check the advance of their liberation. At such a time,
if we had shown weakness or given ground and had not dared to rise resolutely
to oppose counterrevolutionary war with revolutionary war, China would have
become a world of darkness and the future of our nation would have been
forfeited. The Communist Party of China has led the Chinese People's Liberation
Army in firmly waging a patriotic, just and revolutionary war against Chiang
Kai-shek's offensive. The Communist Party of China, having made a clear-headed
appraisal of the international and domestic situation on the basis of the
science of Marxism-Leninism, recognized that all attacks by the reactionaries
at home and abroad not only had to be defeated but could be defeated. When
dark clouds appeared in the sky, we pointed out that this was only temporary,
that the darkness would soon pass and the sun break through. When the Chiang
Kai-shek bandit gang launched the country-wide counter-revolutionary war
in July 1946, they thought it would take them only three to six months to
defeat the People's Liberation Army. They reckoned that they had a regular
army of two million, more than a million irregulars and another million or
more men in the military establishments and armed units in the rear, making
a total military strength of more than four million; that they had taken
time to complete their preparations for the offensive; that they had regained
control of the big cities; that they had a population of more than 300 million;
that they had taken over all the equipment of a million Japanese invading
troops; and that they had received huge military and financial aid from the
U.S. government. They also reckoned that the People's Liberation Army was
tired after fighting for eight years in the War of Resistance Against Japan
and was far inferior to the Kuomintang army in numbers and equipment; that
the population of the Liberated Areas was only a little more than 100 million;
and that in most of these areas the reactionary feudal forces had not yet
been cleaned up and the land reform had not yet been universally and thoroughly
carried out, namely, that the rear area of the People's Liberation Army had
not yet been consolidated. Proceeding from this appraisal, the Chiang Kai-shek
bandit gang ignored the Chinese people's desire for peace, finally tore up
the truce agreement signed by the Kuomintang and the Communist Party in January
1946 as well as the resolutions adopted by the Political Consultative Conference
of all parties and launched an adventurist war. We said then that Chiang
Kai-shek's superiority in military forces was only transient, a factor which
could play only a temporary role, that U.S. imperialist aid was likewise
a factor which could play only a temporary role, while the anti-popular character
of Chiang Kai-shek's war and the feelings of the people were factors that
would play a constant role, and that in this respect the People's Liberation
Army was in a superior position. Patriotic, just and revolutionary in character,
the war waged by the People's Liberation Army was bound to win the support
of the people of the whole country. That was the political foundation for
victory over Chiang Kai-shek. The experience of eighteen months of war has
fully confirmed our judgement.

III

In seventeen months of fighting (from July 1946 to November 1947; December
figures are not yet available), we killed, wounded and captured 1,690,000
of Chiang Kai-shek's regular and irregular troops -- 640,000 killed and wounded
and 1,050,000 captured. Thus we were able to beat back Chiang Kai-shek's
offensive, preserve the main territories of the Liberated Areas and go over
to the offensive. Speaking from the military aspect, we were able to do this
because we employed the correct strategy. Our principles of operation are:


1. Attack dispersed, isolated enemy forces first; attack concentrated, strong
enemy forces later.

2. Take small and medium cities and extensive rural areas first; take big
cities later.

3. Make wiping out the enemy's effective strength our main objective; do
not make holding or seizing a city or place our main objective. Holding or
seizing a city or place is the outcome of wiping out the enemy's effective
strength, and often a city or place can be held or seized for good only after
it has changed hands a number of times.

4. In every battle, concentrate an absolutely superior force (two, three,
four and sometimes even five or six times the enemy's strength), encircle
the enemy forces completely, strive to wipe them out thoroughly and do not
let any escape from the net. In special circumstances, use the method of
dealing crushing blows to the enemy, that is, concentrate all our strength
to make a frontal attack and also to attack one or both of his flanks, with
the aim of wiping out one part and routing another so that our army can swiftly
move its troops to smash other enemy forces. Strive to avoid battles of attrition
in which we lose more than we gain or only break even. In this way, although
we are inferior as a whole (in terms of numbers), we are absolutely superior
in every part and every specific campaign, and this ensures victory in the
campaign. As time goes on, we shall become superior as a whole and eventually
wipe out all the enemy.

5. Fight no battle unprepared, fight no battle you are not sure of winning;
make every effort to be well prepared for each battle, make every effort
to ensure victory in the given set of conditions as between the enemy and
ourselves.

6. Give full play to our style of fighting -- courage in battle, no fear
of sacrifice, no fear of fatigue, and continuous fighting (that is, fighting
successive battles in a short time without rest).

7. Strive to wipe out the enemy through mobile warfare. At the same time,
pay attention to the tactics of positional attack and capture enemy fortified
points and cities.

8. With regard to attacking cities, resolutely seize all enemy fortified
points and cities which are weakly defended. Seize at opportune moments all
enemy fortified points and cities defended with moderate strength, provided
circumstances permit. As for strongly defended enemy fortified points and
cities, wait till conditions are ripe and then take them.

9. Replenish our strength with all the arms and most of the personnel captured
from the enemy. Our army's main sources of manpower and matériel are
at the front.

10. Make good use of the intervals between campaigns to rest, train and
consolidate our troops. Periods of rest, training and consolidation should
in general not be very long, and the enemy should so far as possible be permitted
no breathing space.

These are the main methods the People's Liberation Army has employed in defeating
Chiang Kai-shek. They are the result of the tempering of the People's Liberation
Army in long years of fighting against domestic and foreign enemies and are
completely suited to our present situation. The Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang
and the U.S. imperialist military personnel in China are very well acquainted
with these military methods of ours. Seeking ways to counter them, Chiang
Kai-shek has often assembled his generals and field officers for training
and distributed for their study our military literature and the documents
captured in the war. The U.S. military personnel have recommended to Chiang
Kai-shek one kind of strategy and tactics after another for destroying the
People's Liberation Army; they have trained Chiang Kai-shek's troops and
supplied them with military equipment. But none of these efforts can save
the Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang from defeat. The reason is that our strategy
and tactics are based on a people's war; no army opposed to the people can
use our strategy and tactics. On the basis of a people's war and of the
principles of unity between army and people, of unity between commanders
and fighters and of disintegrating the enemy troops, the People's Liberation
Army has developed its vigorous revolutionary political work, which is an
important factor in winning victory over the enemy. When we abandoned many
cities on our own initiative in order to evade fatal blows from superior
enemy forces and shift our forces to destroy the enemy in mobile warfare,
our enemies were jubilant. They took this to be their victory and our defeat.
They became dizzy with this momentary "victory". On the afternoon of the
day he seized Changchiakou, Chiang Kai-shek ordered the convening of his
reactionary National Assembly, as though his reactionary regime had from
that moment become as stable as Mount Taishan. The U.S. imperialists, too,
danced with joy, as though their wild scheme for converting China into a
U.S. colony could now be realized without obstruction. But with the lapse
of time, Chiang Kai-shek and his U.S. masters began to change their tune.
Now all our enemies, domestic and foreign, are gripped by pessimism. They
heave great sighs, wail about a crisis and no longer show any sign of joy.
In the past eighteen months, most of Chiang Kai-shek's high-ranking field
commanders have been replaced for losing battles. Among them are Liu Chih
(Chengchow), Hsueh Yueh (Hsuchow), Wu Chi-wei (northern Kiangsu), Tang En-po
(southern Shantung), Wang Chung-lien (northern Honan), Tu Yu-ming and Hsiung
Shih-hui (Shenyang) and Sun Lien-chung (Peiping). Chen Cheng, too, was relieved
of his post as Chiang Kai-shek's chief of staff in over-all command of operations
and demoted to command a single front in the
Northeast.[2] However, it was in the very period
when Chiang Kai-shek himself assumed overall command in Chen Cheng's place
that the situation changed and that his armies shifted from the offensive
to the defensive, while the People's Liberation Army went over from the defensive
to the offensive. By now the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek clique and its U.S.
masters should have realized their mistake. They had regarded as signs of
cowardice and weakness all the efforts for peace and against civil war which
the Communist Party of China, representing the wishes of the Chinese people,
had made over a long period after the surrender of Japan. They had overestimated
their own strength, underestimated the strength of the revolution and rashly
unleashed the war and so were caught in their own trap. Our enemy's strategic
calculations failed completely.

IV

The rear areas of the People's Liberation Army are much more consolidated
now than eighteen months ago. The reason is that our Party, standing resolutely
on the side of the peasants, has carried out the land reform. During the
War of Resistance Against Japan, our Party, on its own initiative and for
the sake of forming an anti-Japanese united front with the Kuomintang and
uniting with those who could still oppose Japanese imperialism, changed its
pre-war policy of confiscating the land of the landlords and distributing
it among the peasants to the policy of reducing rent and interest. This was
entirely necessary. After the Japanese surrender, the peasants urgently demanded
land, and we made a timely decision to change our land policy from reducing
rent and interest to confiscating the land of the landlord class for distribution
among the peasants. The directive issued by the Central Committee of our
Party on May 4, 1946,[3] marked this change. In
September 1947 our Party called the National Land Conference and drew up
the Outline Land Law of China,[4] which was promptly
carried out in all areas. This measure not only reaffirmed the policy set
forth in last year's "May 4th Directive" but also explicitly corrected a
certain lack of thoroughness in that directive. The Outline Land Law provides
for equal distribution of land per head,[5] based
on the principle of abolishing the land system of feudal and semi-feudal
exploitation and putting into effect the system of land to the tillers. This
is a method which most thoroughly abolishes the feudal system and fully meets
the demands of the broad masses of China's peasants. To carry out the land
reform resolutely and thoroughly, it is necessary to organize in the villages,
as lawful bodies for carrying out the reform, not only peasant associations
on the broadest mass basis, including farm labourers, poor peasants and middle
peasants and their elected committees, but first of all poor peasant leagues
composed of poor peasants and farm labourers and their elected committees;
and these poor peasant leagues should be the backbone of leadership in all
rural struggles. Our policy is to rely on the poor peasants and unite solidly
with the middle peasants to abolish the feudal and semi-feudal system of
exploitation by the landlord class and by the old-type rich peasants. Landlords
or rich peasants must not be allotted more land and property than the peasant
masses. But there should be no repetition of the wrong ultra-Left policy,
which was carried out in 1931-34, of "allotting no land to the landlords
and poor land to the rich peasants". Although the proportion of landlords
and rich peasants in the rural population varies from place to place, it
is generally only about 8 per cent (in terms of households), while their
holdings usually amount to 70 to 80 per cent of all the land. Therefore the
targets of our land reform are very few, while the people in the villages
who can and should take part in the united front for land reform are many
-- more than 90 per cent (in terms of households). Here two fundamental
principles must be observed. First, the demands of the poor peasants and
farm labourers must be satisfied; this is the most fundamental task in the
land reform. Second, there must be firm unity with the middle peasants, and
their interests must not be damaged. As long as we grasp these two basic
principles, we can certainly carry out our tasks in the land reform successfully.
The reason why, under the principle of equal distribution, the surplus land
and part of the property of the old-type rich peasants should be handed over
for distribution is that the rich peasants in China generally and to a great
degree have the character of feudal and semi-feudal exploiters; most of them
also rent out land and practice usury and they hire labour on semi-feudal
terms.[6] Furthermore, as the rich peasants have
more and better land,[7] the demands of the poor
peasants and farm labourers cannot be satisfied unless this land is distributed.
However, in accordance with the Outline Land Law, rich peasants should generally
be treated differently from landlords. In the land reform, the middle peasants
show approval of equal distribution because it does no harm to their interests.
Under equal distribution, the land of one section of the middle peasants
remains unchanged and that of another is increased; only the section of
well-to-do middle peasants has a little surplus land, and they are willing
to hand it over for equal distribution because their burden of land tax will
then be lightened. Nevertheless, in carrying out equal distribution of land
in different places, it is necessary to listen to the opinions of the middle
peasants and make concessions to them if they object. During the confiscation
and distribution of the land and property of the feudal class, the needs
of certain middle peasants should receive attention. In determining class
status care must be taken to avoid the mistake of classifying middle peasants
as rich peasants. The active middle peasants must be drawn into the work
of the peasant association committees and the government. With respect to
the burdens of the land tax and of supporting the war, the principle of being
fair and reasonable must be observed. These are the specific policies our
Party must follow in carrying out its strategic task of uniting solidly with
the middle peasants. The whole Party must understand that thoroughgoing reform
of the land system is a basic task of the Chinese revolution in its present
stage. If we can solve the land problem universally and completely, we shall
have obtained the most fundamental condition for the defeat of all our enemies.

V

To carry out the land reform resolutely and thoroughly and to consolidate
the rear areas of the People's Liberation Army, it is necessary to educate
and reorganize the ranks of our Party. On the whole, the rectification
movement[8] inside the Party during the War of
Resistance Against Japan was successful. Its main success was that our leading
bodies and large numbers of cadres and Party members obtained a firmer grasp
of our basic orientation, which is to unite the universal truth of
Marxism-Leninism with the concrete practice of the Chinese revolution. In
this respect our Party has taken a big stride forward as compared with all
the historical stages before the War of Resistance. However, in the Party's
local organizations, especially the organizations at the primary level in
the countryside, the problem of impurities in the class composition of our
ranks and in our style of work is still unsolved. During the eleven years
1937-47 the membership of our Party has grown from several tens of thousands
to 2,700,000, and this is a very big leap forward. This has made our Party
a more powerful party than any in Chinese history. It has enabled us to defeat
Japanese imperialism, beat back Chiang Kai-shek's offensives, lead the Liberated
Areas with a population of more than 100 million and lead a People's Liberation
Army two million strong. But shortcomings have also cropped up. Many landlords,
rich peasants and riffraff have seized the opportunity to sneak into our
Party. In the rural areas they control a number of Party, government and
people's organizations, tyrannically abuse their power, ride roughshod over
the people, distort the Party's policies and thus alienate these organizations
from the masses and prevent the land reform from being thorough. This grave
situation sets us the task of educating and reorganizing the ranks of our
Party. We cannot make headway in the countryside unless we perform this task.
The Party's National Land Conference discussed this problem thoroughly and
laid down the proper measures and methods. These are now being resolutely
applied everywhere, together with the decision on the equal distribution
of land. First and foremost comes the unfolding of criticism and self-criticism
within the Party and the thorough exposure of mistaken ideas and serious
situations in the local organizations, which are departures from the Party
line. All Party members must realize that a decisive link in the solution
of the land problem and for the support of the long-drawn-out war is the
removal of impurities from Party organizations and the education and
reorganization of the Party's ranks, so that the Party and the broadest masses
of working people can all march in the same direction and the Party can lead
the masses forward.

VI

Confiscate the land of the feudal class and turn it over to the peasants.
Confiscate monopoly capital, headed by Chiang Kai-shek, T. V. Soong, H. H.
Kung and Chen Li-fu, and turn it over to the new-democratic state. Protect
the industry and commerce of the national bourgeoisie. These are the three
major economic policies of the new-democratic revolution. During their
twenty-year rule, the four big families, Chiang, Soong, Kung and Chen, have
piled up enormous fortunes valued at ten to twenty thousand million U.S.
dollars and monopolized the economic lifelines of the whole country. This
monopoly capital, combined with state power, has become state-monopoly
capitalism. This monopoly capitalism, closely tied up with foreign imperialism,
the domestic landlord class and the old-type rich peasants, has become comprador,
feudal, state-monopoly capitalism. Such is the economic base of Chiang Kai-shek's
reactionary regime. This state-monopoly capitalism oppresses not only the
workers and peasants but also the urban petty bourgeoisie, and it injures
the middle bourgeoisie. This state-monopoly capitalism reached the peak of
its development during the War of Resistance and after the Japanese surrender;
it has prepared ample material conditions for the new-democratic revolution.
This capital is popularly known in China as bureaucrat-capital. This capitalist
class, known as the bureaucrat-capitalist class, is the big bourgeoisie of
China. Besides doing away with the special privileges of imperialism in China,
the task of the new-democratic revolution at home is to abolish exploitation
and oppression by the landlord class and by the bureaucrat-capitalist class
(the big bourgeoisie), change the comprador, feudal relations of production
and unfetter the productive forces. The upper petty bourgeoisie and middle
bourgeoisie, oppressed and injured by the landlords and big bourgeoisie and
their state power, may take part in the new-democratic revolution or stay
neutral, though they are themselves bourgeois. They have no ties, or
comparatively few, with imperialism and are the genuine national bourgeoisie.
Wherever the state power of New Democracy extends, it must firmly and
unhesitatingly protect them. In Chiang Kai-shek's areas, there are a small
number of people among the upper petty bourgeoisie and the middle bourgeoisie,
the right wing of these classes, who have reactionary political tendencies,
spread illusions about U.S. imperialism and the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek
clique and oppose the people's democratic revolution. As long as their
reactionary tendencies can affect the masses, we should unmask them before
the people under their political influence, attack this influence and liberate
the masses from it. But political attack and economic annihilation are two
different matters, and we shall make mistakes if we confuse the two. The
new-democratic revolution aims at wiping out only feudalism and monopoly
capitalism, only the landlord class and the bureaucrat-capitalist class (the
big bourgeoisie), and not at wiping out capitalism in general, the upper
petty bourgeoisie or the middle bourgeoisie. In view of China's economic
backwardness, even after the country-wide victory of the revolution, it will
still be necessary to permit the existence for a long time of a capitalist
sector of the economy represented by the extensive upper petty bourgeoisie
and middle bourgeoisie. In accordance with the division of labour in the
national economy, a certain development of all parts of this capitalist sector
which are beneficial to the national economy will still be needed. This
capitalist sector will still be an indispensable part of the whole national
economy. The upper petty bourgeoisie referred to here are small industrialists
and merchants employing workers or assistants. In addition, there are also
great numbers of small independent craftsmen and traders who employ no workers
or assistants and, needless to say, they should be firmly protected. After
the victory of the revolution all over the country, the new-democratic state
will possess huge state enterprises taken over from the bureaucrat-capitalist
class and controlling the economic lifelines of the country, and there will
be an agricultural economy liberated from feudalism which, though it will
remain basically scattered and individual for a fairly long time, can later
be led to develop, step by step, in the direction of co-operatives. In these
circumstances the existence and development of these small and middle capitalist
sectors will present no danger. The same is true of the new rich peasant
economy which will inevitably emerge in the rural areas after the land reform.
It is absolutely impermissible to repeat such wrong ultra-Left polices towards
the upper petty bourgeois and middle bourgeois sectors in the economy as
our Party adopted during 1931-34 (unduly advanced labour conditions, excessive
income tax rates, encroachment on the interests of industrialists and merchants
during the land reform, and the adoption as a goal of the so-called "workers'
welfare", which was a short-sighted and one-sided concept, instead of the
goal of developing production, promoting economic prosperity, giving
consideration to both public and private interests and benefiting both labour
and capital). To repeat such mistakes would certainly damage the interests
both of the working masses and of the new-democratic state. One of the provisions
in the Outline Land Law of China reads, "The property and lawful business
of industrialists and merchants shall be protected from encroachment."
"Industrialists and merchants" refers to all small independent craftsmen
and traders as well as all small and middle capitalist elements. To sum up,
the economic structure of New China will consist of: (1) the state-owned
economy, which is the leading sector; (2) the agricultural economy, developing
step by step from individual to collective; and (3) the economy of small
independent craftsmen and traders and the economy of small and middle private
capital. These constitute the whole of the new-democratic national economy.
The principles guiding the new-democratic national economy must closely conform
to the general objective of developing production, promoting economic prosperity,
giving consideration to both public and private interests and benefiting
both labour and capital. Any principle, policy or measure that deviates from
this general objective is wrong.

VII

The People's Liberation Army issued a manifesto in October 1947 which stated
in part: 

Unite workers, peasants, soldiers, intellectuals and businessmen, all oppressed
classes, all people's organizations, democratic parties, minority nationalities,
overseas Chinese and other patriots; form a national united front; overthrow
the dictatorial Chiang Kai-shek government; and establish a democratic coalition
government.

That is the fundamental political programme of the People's Liberation Army
and of the Communist Party of China. On the surface, our revolutionary national
united front appears to have narrowed in the present period as compared with
the period of the War of Resistance. As a matter of fact, it has been precisely
in the present period, after Chiang Kai-shek sold out the nation's interests
to U.S. imperialism and launched the country-wide civil war against the people
and after the crimes of U.S. imperialism and the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek
clique were completely exposed before the Chinese people, that our national
united front has really broadened. During the War of Resistance, Chiang Kai-shek
and the Kuomintang were not yet completely discredited among the Chinese
people and were still able to deceive them in many ways. Now it is different;
all their deceptions have been shown up by their own deeds, they no longer
have any mass following, they are completely isolated. In contrast to the
Kuomintang, the Communist Party of China not only has the confidence of the
broadest masses of the people in the Liberated Areas but has also won the
support of the broad masses in the areas and big cities under Kuomintang
control. If in 1946 a section of the upper petty bourgeois and middle bourgeois
intellectuals under Chiang Kai-shek's rule still cherished the idea of a
so-called third road,[9] this idea is now bankrupt.
Because our Party adopted a thoroughgoing land policy, it has won whole-hearted
support from much broader masses of peasants than during the War of Resistance.
As a result of U.S. imperialist aggression, Chiang Kai-shek's oppression
and our Party's correct policy of firmly protecting the interests of the
masses, our Party has won the sympathy of the broad masses of the working
class, the peasantry and the urban petty and middle bourgeoisie in Chiang
Kai-shek's areas. Driven by hunger, political oppression and Chiang Kai-shek's
civil war against the people, which has made life impossible, the masses
have been waging incessant struggles against U.S. imperialism and Chiang
Kai-shek's reactionary government; their basic slogans are against hunger,
against persecution, against civil war and against U.S. interference in China's
internal affairs. Never before has their awakening reached such a level,
neither before nor during the War of Resistance, nor in the period immediately
after the Japanese surrender. That is why we say that our new-democratic
revolutionary united front is now broader and more consolidated than ever.
This development is not only linked with our land and urban policies but
is also closely linked with the whole political situation-with the victories
of the People's Liberation Army, with Chiang Kai-shek's turn from the offensive
to the defensive, with the People's Liberation Army's turn from the defensive
to the offensive, with the period of a new high tide in the Chinese revolution.
Realizing that Chiang Kai-shek's regime is inevitably doomed, people now
place their hopes on the Communist Party of China and the People's Liberation
Army, and this is quite natural. Without the broadest united front of the
overwhelming majority of the population, it will be impossible to win victory
in China's new-democratic revolution. Moreover, this united front must be
under the firm leadership of the Communist Party of China. Without the Party's
firm leadership, no revolutionary united front can win victory. When the
Northern Expedition reached its climax in 1927, the capitulationists in our
Party's leading body voluntarily gave up the Party's leadership of the peasant
masses, urban petty bourgeoisie and middle bourgeoisie, and in particular
gave up the Party's leadership of the armed forces, thus causing the defeat
of the revolution. During the War of Resistance, our Party combated ideas
similar to those of the capitulationists, that is, such ideas as making
concessions to the Kuomintang's anti-popular policies, having more confidence
in the Kuomintang than in the masses, not daring to arouse and give full
rein to mass struggles, not daring to expand the Liberated Areas and the
people's armies in the Japanese-occupied areas, and handing over the leadership
in the War of Resistance to the Kuomintang. Our Party waged a resolute struggle
against such impotent and degenerate ideas, which run counter to the principles
of Marxism-Leninism, resolutely carried out its political line of "developing
the progressive forces, winning over the middle forces and isolating the
die-hard forces" and resolutely expanded the Liberated Areas and the People's
Liberation Army. This ensured not only that our Party was able to defeat
Japanese imperialism in the period of its aggression, but also that, in the
period after the Japanese surrender when Chiang Kai-shek launched his
counter-revolutionary war, our Party was able to switch smoothly and without
loss to the course of opposing Chiang Kai-shek's counter-revolutionary war
with a people's revolutionary war and to win great victories in a short time.
All Party comrades must keep these lessons of history firmly in mind.



VIII

When the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek clique launched the country-wide civil
war against the people in 1946, the reason they dared take this risk was
that they relied not merely on their own superior military strength but mainly
on the U.S. imperialists with their atom bombs, whom they regarded as
"exceptionally powerful" and "matchless in the world". On the one hand, they
thought U.S. imperialism could meet their military and financial needs with
a stream of supplies. On the other hand, they wildly speculated that "war
between the United States and the Soviet Union is inevitable" and that "the
outbreak of a third world war is inevitable". This dependence on U.S. imperialism
is the common feature of the reactionary forces in all countries since World
War II. It reflects the severity of the blows world capitalism received in
World War II; it reflects the weakness of the reactionary forces in all
countries, their panic and loss of confidence; and it reflects the might
of the world revolutionary forces -- all of which make reactionaries in all
countries feel that there is no way out except to rely on U.S. imperialist
support. But, in fact, is U.S. imperialism after World War II as powerful
as Chiang Kai-shek and the reactionaries of other countries imagine? Can
it really pour out a stream of supplies for them? No, that is not so. The
economic power of U.S. imperialism, which grew during World War II, is confronted
with unstable and daily shrinking domestic and foreign markets. The further
shrinking of these markets will cause economic crises to break out. The war
boom in the United States of America was only temporary. The strength of
the United States of America is only superficial and transient. Irreconcilable
domestic and international contradictions, like a volcano, menace U.S.
imperialism every day. U.S. imperialism is sitting on this volcano. This
situation has driven the U.S. imperialists to draw up a plan for enslaving
the world, to run amuck like wild beasts in Europe, Asia and other parts
of the world, to muster the reactionary forces in all countries, the human
dregs cast off by their peoples, to form an imperialist and anti-democratic
camp against all the democratic forces headed by the Soviet Union, and to
prepare for war in the hope that in the future, at a distant time, some day,
they can start a third world war to defeat the democratic forces. This is
a preposterous plan. The democratic forces of the world must defeat this
plan and certainly can defeat it. The strength of the world anti-imperialist
camp has surpassed that of the imperialist camp. It is we, not the enemy,
who are in the superior position. The anti-imperialist camp headed by the
Soviet Union has already been formed. The socialist Soviet Union is free
from crises, on the ascendant and cherished by the world's broad masses;
its strength has already surpassed that of the imperialist United States,
which is seriously menaced by crises, on the decline and opposed by the world's
broad masses. The People's Democracies in Europe are consolidating themselves
internally and are uniting with each other. In the European capitalist countries
the people's anti-imperialist forces are developing, with those in France
and Italy taking the lead. Within the United States, there are people's
democratic forces which are getting stronger every day. The peoples of Latin
America are not slaves obedient to U.S. imperialism. In the whole of Asia
a great national liberation movement has arisen. All the forces of the
anti-imperialist camp are uniting and forging ahead. The Communist and Workers'
Parties of nine European countries have established their Information Bureau
and issued a call to the people of the world to rise against the imperialist
plan of enslavement.[10] This call to battle has
inspired the oppressed people of the world, charted the course of their struggle
and strengthened their confidence in victory. It has thrown world reaction
into panic and confusion. All the anti-imperialist forces in the countries
of the East, too, should unite together, oppose oppression by imperialism
and by their domestic reactionaries and make the goal of their struggle the
emancipation of the more than 1,000 million oppressed people of the East.
We certainly should grasp our own destiny in our own hands. We should rid
our ranks of all impotent thinking. All views that overestimate the strength
of the enemy and underestimate the strength of the people are wrong. If everyone
makes strenuous efforts, we, together with all the democratic forces of the
world, can surely defeat the imperialist plan of enslavement, prevent the
outbreak of a third world war, overthrow all reactionary regimes and win
lasting peace for mankind. We are soberly aware that on our way forward there
will still be all kinds of obstacles and difficulties and that we should
be prepared to deal with the maximum resistance and desperate struggle by
all our enemies, domestic and foreign. But so long as we can grasp the science
of Marxism-Leninism, have confidence in the masses, stand closely together
with the masses and lead them forward, we shall be fully able to surmount
any obstacle and overcome any difficulty. Our strength will be invincible.
This is the historic epoch in which world capitalism and imperialism are
going down to their doom and world socialism and people's democracy are marching
to victory. The dawn is ahead, we must exert ourselves.
NOTES 

1. For the circumstances of how the People's Liberation
Army went over to the offensive on various fronts in succession and carried
the war into the Kuomintang areas, see "On the Great Victory in the Northwest
and on the New Type of Ideological Education Movement in the Liberation Army",
Note 4, pp. 215-16 of this volume.

2. Liu Chih, Director of the Kuomintang's Pacification
Headquarters in Chengchow, Honan Province, was dismissed in November 1946
for his defeat in the battle of Tingtao, southwestern Shantung Province,
in September. Hsueh Yueh, Director of the Kuomintang's Pacification Headquarters
in Hsuchow, Kiangsu Province, was dismissed in March 1947 for a series of
heavy defeats suffered by the Kuomintang troops under his command: in the
campaign in the area north of Suchien, Kiangsu Province in December 1946;
in the campaign in southern Shantung in January 1947; and in the Laiwu campaign,
central Shantung, in February 1947. Wu Chi-wei, Deputy Director of the
Kuomintang's Pacification Headquarters in Hsuchow, was dismissed in March
1947 for his defeat in the campaign in the area north of Suchien in December
1946. Tang En-po, Commander of the Kuomintang's 1st Army, was dismissed in
June 1947 because the Kuomintang's Reorganized 74th Division was wiped out
in the battle of Mengliangku, southern Shantung, in May. Wang Chung-lien,
Commander of the Kuomintang's 4th Army, was dismissed in August 1947 for
his defeat in the Southwestern Shantung campaign in July. Tu Yu-ming, Commander
of the Kuomintang's Peace Preservation Headquarters in the Northeast, and
Hsiung Shih-hui Director of the Kuomintang Generalissimo's Headquarters in
the Northeast, were both dismissed for being severely defeated by the People's
Liberation Army in its summer offensive in the Northeast in June 1947. Sun
Lien-chung, Commander of the Kuomintang's 11th War Zone, was demoted to Director
of the Pacification Headquarters in Paoting, Hopei Province, for his defeats
in the Ching-Tsang campaign and the campaign in the Hsushui area north of
Paoting in June 1947. Chen Cheng Chiang Kai-shek's chief of general staff,
was demoted to governor-general of the Northeast in August 1947 because of
the successive defeats of the campaigns he directed in Shantung Province.

3. For the directive, see "A Three Months' Summary", Note
4, p. 118 of this volume.

4. The National Land Conference of the Communist Party
of China was held in September 1947 in Hsipaipo Village, Pingshan County,
Hopei Province. The Outline Land Law of China, adopted by the conference
on September 13, was published by the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China on October 10, 1947. It stipulated the following: 

Abolish the land system of feudal and semi-feudal exploitation and put into
effect the system of land to the tillers.

All the land of the landlords and the public land in the villages is to be
taken over by the local peasant associations and, together with all other
land there, is to be equally distributed among the entire rural population,
regardless of sex or age.

The peasant associations of the villages shall take over the draught animals
farm tools, houses, grain and other property of the landlords, requisition
the surplus of such property of the rich peasants, distribute all this property
among the peasants and other poor people who are in need of it and allot
the same share to the landlords.

Thus the Outline Land Law not only confirmed the principle of "confiscation
of the land of the landlords and its distribution among the peasants" laid
down in the "May 4th Directive" of 1946 but also made up for the lack of
thoroughness in that directive, which had shown too much consideration for
certain landlords.

5. Subsequently in the implementation some changes were
made in the method of equal distribution of land provided in the Outline
Land Law of China. In February 1948 the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China specified in its "Directive on the Work of Land Reform and
of Party Consolidation in the Old and Semi-Old Areas that in the old and
semi-old Liberated Areas where the feudal system had already been overthrown,
there would be no further equal distribution of land, but that the poor peasants
and farm labourers who had not yet completely shaken off the feudal yoke
should, if circumstances so required, be given a certain amount of land and
other means of production through readjustment, by the method of taking from
those who had a surplus and giving to those who had a shortage and taking
from those who had better and giving to those who had worse, while the middle
peasants would be allowed to keep more land than the average poor peasant.
In areas where the feudal system still existed, equal distribution was confined
mainly to the land and property of landlords and the surplus land and property
of old-type rich peasants. In all areas, it was permissible to take the surplus
land of middle peasants and new-type rich peasants for purposes of readjustment
only if this was actually necessary and if the owners really consented. In
the land reform in the new Liberated Areas, no land was to be taken from
any middle peasant.

6. The question of the rich peasants in China's land reform
was a peculiar one arising from her specific historical and economic conditions.
China's rich peasants differed from those in many capitalist countries in
two respects: first, they generally and to a great degree had the character
of feudal and semi-feudal exploiters and, second, this rich peasant economy
did not occupy an important place in the country's agricultural economy.
In the struggle against feudal exploitation by the landlord class in China,
the broad masses of poor peasants and farm labourers also demanded the abolition
of feudal and semi-feudal exploitation by the rich peasants. During the War
of Liberation, the Communist Party of China adopted the policy of requisitioning
the surplus land and property of rich peasants for distribution among the
peasants, and thus satisfied the demands of the masses of poor peasants and
farm labourers and ensured victory in the People's War of Liberation. As
the war progressed towards victory, the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China in February 1948 laid down new policies for the land reform
in the new Liberated Areas. The reform was to be divided into two stages:
in the first stage, neutralize the rich peasants and concentrate the blows
on the landlords, primarily the big landlords; in the second stage, while
distributing the land of the landlords, also distribute the land rented out
by rich peasants and their surplus land, but continue to treat the rich peasants
differently from the landlords (see "Essential Points in Land Reform in the
New Liberated Areas", pp. 201-02 of this volume). After the founding of the
People's Republic of China, the Central People's Government in June 1950
promulgated the Land Reform Law, which provided that in the land reform only
the land rented out by the rich peasants should partly or wholly be
requisitioned, while the rest of their land and property was to be protected.
In the subsequent stage of socialist revolution, the rich peasant economy
disappeared as the movement for agricultural co-operation deepened and the
rural economy developed.

7. That is to say, a rich peasant household owned on the
average more and better land than a poor peasant household. Taking the country
as a whole, the quantity of the means of production owned by China's rich
peasants and the volume of their farm produce were both very small. The rich
peasant economy did not occupy an important place in China's rural economy.

8. This refers to the movement for rectifying the style
of work conducted by the Communist Party of China in 1942-43 throughout the
Party; its content was the combating of subjectivism, sectarianism and
stereotyped writing. Under the leadership of Comrade Mao Tse-tung, this
rectification movement adopted the principles of "learning from past mistakes
to avoid their repetition, curing the sickness to save the patient" and "clearing
up wrong thinking while uniting with comrades". Through the method of criticism
and self-criticism, the movement corrected the "Left" and Right errors which
had occurred on various occasions in the history of the Party by getting
down to their ideological roots, greatly raised the ideological level of
the broad ranks of Party cadres, helped immensely to unify thinking within
the Party on the basis of Marxism-Leninism and thus brought about a high
degree of unity in the whole Party.

9. In the early stage of the People's War of Liberation
some democratic personages fancied that they could find a so-called third
road, apart from the Kuomintang dictatorship of big landlords and big bourgeoisie
and apart from the people's democratic dictatorship led by the Communist
Party of China. This third road was in fact the road of a dictatorship of
the bourgeoisie on the British and U.S. pattern.

10. The Information Bureau of the Communist and Workers'
Parties was founded at a meeting held in Warsaw, Poland, in September 1947
by representatives of the Communist and Workers' Parties of Bulgaria, Rumania,
Hungary, Poland, the Soviet Union, France, Czechoslovakia, Italy and Yugoslavia.
Later, at a meeting in Rumania in June 1948, the Bureau announced the expulsion
of the Yugoslav Communist Party because the latter persisted in its
anti-Marxist-Leninist stand and adopted an attitude opposed to the Soviet
Union and the socialist camp. The Information Bureau's call to the people
of the world to rise against the imperialist plan of enslavement, mentioned
here by Comrade Mao Tse-tung, was the "Declaration on the International
Situation" adopted at the September 1947 meeting of the Information Bureau.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Setting Up a System of Reports







ON SETTING UP A SYSTEM OF REPORTS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON SETTING UP A SYSTEM OF REPORTS


January 7, 1948

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China. The system of reports instituted
in the directive was a development under new conditions in the long struggle
of the Central Committee firmly to uphold democratic centralism and combat
tendencies of indiscipline and anarchy. The problem was especially important
at that time because there had been tremendous progress in the revolutionary
situation. Many Liberated Areas had been linked together, many cities had
been or were about to be liberated, the People's Liberation Army had become
much more of a regular army, the People's War of Liberation had become much
more of a regular war, and countrywide victory was in sight. This situation
demanded that the Party should speedily overcome any conditions of indiscipline
or anarchy existing in the Party and the army and should concentrate in the
Central Committee all the powers that had to be and could be centralized.
The setting up of a strict system of reports was an important step taken
by the Party for this purpose. On this question, see also "The Work of Land
Reform and of Party Consolidation in 1948", Section 6, p. 258 and "On the
September Meeting -- Circular of the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of China", Point 4, pp. 273-74, of this volume. ] 
  

In order to provide the Central Committee with timely information so that
it can help all areas, either before or after the event, to avoid mistakes
or commit fewer mistakes and win even greater victories in the revolutionary
war, the following system of reports is instituted, beginning with this year.

1. For each bureau or sub-bureau of the Central Committee, the secretary
is responsible for submitting to the Central Committee and its chairman a
comprehensive bi-monthly report (written by himself, not by his assistants).
The report should cover military, political, land reform, Party consolidation,
economic, propaganda and cultural activities, the problems and tendencies
that have arisen in these activities and the methods of dealing with them.
Each report should be limited to about a thousand words and, except in special
cases, should not exceed two thousand words. When all questions cannot be
covered in one report, write two. Or the first report may concentrate on
certain questions and deal briefly with the rest, and the next report may
concentrate on the latter and deal briefly with the former. The comprehensive
report should be concise in content and succinct in wording and point out
the problems or controversial issues. It should be written and telegraphed
early in every odd month. This is to be the regular report and request for
instructions which the secretary of each bureau or sub-bureau is personally
responsible for submitting to the Central Committee and its chairman. When
the secretary is at the front directing military operations, he should, in
addition to submitting his own reports, authorize the acting secretary or
deputy secretary to report on rear-area activities. The above does not include
occasional reports and requests for instructions which the bureaus or sub-bureaus
should continue to submit to the Central Committee.

We are instituting this system of regular comprehensive policy reports and
requests for instructions because, after the Seventh National Congress of
our Party, some (not all) comrades in the bureaus or sub-bureaus still do
not realize the necessity and importance of submitting reports to the Central
Committee and asking for instructions before or after the event, or they
send reports and requests for instructions only on technical points; and,
as a result, the Central Committee is not clear or is not sufficiently clear
about their major activities and policies (not those of secondary importance
or of a technical nature), and therefore certain things have occurred that
cannot be remedied or are hard to remedy, or can be remedied but have already
caused losses. Those bureaus and sub-bureaus that have asked for prior
instructions and submitted reports afterwards have avoided or reduced such
losses. Beginning with this year, the Party's leading bodies at all levels
must correct the bad habit of neither asking the higher level for prior
instructions nor submitting reports afterwards. The bureaus and sub-bureaus,
being organs appointed by the Central Committee to carry out on its behalf
the tasks entrusted to them, must keep in the closest possible contact with
the Central Committee. Also, the provincial or area Party committees must
keep in close contact with the bureaus and sub-bureaus of the Central Committee.
At a time when the revolution has entered a period of new high tide, it is
imperative to strengthen these contacts.

2. Leaders of field armies and military areas, apart from their obligation
to submit reports and requests for instructions on matters of strategy when
necessary and their obligation to submit, as previously required, monthly
reports on combat gains, on losses and munitions consumed and on the actual
strength of their forces, must also submit comprehensive policy reports and
requests for instructions every two months, beginning this year. These should
cover the discipline of the troops, their living conditions, the morale of
commanders and fighters, any deviations that have arisen among commanders
and fighters and the methods for overcoming them, the progress or retrogression
in technique and tactics, the strong and weak points of the enemy forces
and whether their morale is high or low, the political work of our army,
its implementation of land policy, urban policy and policy concerning captives
and the methods of overcoming deviations from these policies, the relations
between the army and the people and the trends among different strata of
the people. The length, method of writing and time of dispatch of these reports
should be the same as those laid down for reports by the bureaus and sub-bureaus
of the Central Committee. If intense fighting is going on when a report is
due (that is, early in every odd month), its submission may be advanced or
postponed a few days, but the reasons must be given. The section dealing
with political work should be drafted by the director of the army's political
department, examined and corrected by the commander and political commissar
and then jointly signed by all three. These reports should be telegraphed
to the Chairman of the Party's Military Commission. We require these
comprehensive policy reports for the same reasons as we require such reports
from the bureaus and sub-bureaus. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Some Important Problems of the Party's Present Policy







ON SOME IMPORTANT PROBLEMS OF THE PARTY'S PRESENT POLICY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON SOME IMPORTANT PROBLEMS OF THE PARTY'S PRESENT POLICY


January 18, 1948

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China. See the introductory note to
"The Present Situation and Our Tasks", pp. 158-59
of this volume.] 
  

I. THE PROBLEM OF COMBATING ERRONEOUS TENDENCIES WITHIN THE PARTY


Oppose overestimation of the enemy's strength. For example: fear of U.S.
imperialism; fear of carrying the battle into the Kuomintang areas; fear
of wiping out the comprador-feudal system, of distributing the land of the
landlords and of confiscating bureaucrat-capital; fear of a long-drawn-out
war; and so on. All these are incorrect. Imperialism throughout the world
and the rule of the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek clique in China are already
rotten and have no future. We have reason to despise them and we are confident
and certain that we shall defeat all the domestic and foreign enemies of
the Chinese people. But with regard to each part, each specific struggle
(military, political, economic or ideological), we must never take the enemy
lightly; on the contrary, we should take the enemy seriously and concentrate
all our strength for battle in order to win victory. While we correctly point
out that, strategically, with regard to the whole, we should take the enemy
lightly, we must never take the enemy lightly in any part, in any specific
struggle. If, with regard to the whole, we overestimate the strength of our
enemy and hence do not dare to overthrow him and do not dare to win victory,
we shall be committing a Right opportunist error. If, with regard to each
part, each specific problem, we are not prudent, do not carefully study and
perfect the art of struggle, do not concentrate all our strength for battle
and do not pay attention to winning over all the allies that should be won
over (middle peasants, small independent craftsmen and traders, the middle
bourgeoisie, students, teachers, professors and ordinary intellectuals, ordinary
government employees, professionals and enlightened gentry), we shall be
committing a "Left" opportunist error.

In combating "Left" and Right deviations within the Party, we must decide
on our policy according to specific circumstances. For example, the army
must guard against "Left" deviations in times of victory and guard against
Right deviations in times of defeat or when we are unable to win many battles.
In land reform, Right deviations must be combated where the masses have not
yet been aroused in earnest and the struggle has not yet unfolded, and "Left"
deviations must be guarded against where the masses have been aroused in
earnest and the struggle has already unfolded. 

II. SOME CONCRETE PROBLEMS OF POLICY IN THE LAND REFORM AND MASS
MOVEMENTS

1. The interests of the poor peasants and farm labourers and the forward
role of the poor peasant leagues must be our first concern. Our Party must
launch the land reform through the poor peasants and farm labourers and must
enable them to play the forward role in the peasant associations and in the
government organs of the rural districts. This forward role consists in forging
unity with the middle peasants for common action and not in casting aside
the middle peasants and monopolizing the work. The position of the middle
peasants is especially important in the old Liberated Areas where the middle
peasants are the majority and the poor peasants and farm labourers a minority.
The slogan, "the poor peasants and farm labourers conquer the country and
should rule the country", is wrong. In the villages, it is the farm labourers,
poor peasants, middle peasants and other working people, united together
under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party, who conquer the country
and should rule the country, and it is not the poor peasants and farm labourers
alone who conquer the country and should rule the country. In the country
as a whole, it is the workers, peasants (including the new rich peasants),
small independent craftsmen and traders, middle and small capitalists oppressed
and injured by the reactionary forces, the students, teachers, professors
and ordinary intellectuals, professionals, enlightened gentry, ordinary
government employees, oppressed minority nationalities and overseas Chinese,
all united together under the leadership of the working class (through the
Communist Party), who conquer the country and should rule the country, and
it is not merely some of the people who conquer the country and should rule
the country.

2. We must avoid adopting any adventurist policies towards the middle peasants.
In the cases of middle peasants and persons of other strata whose class status
has been wrongly determined, correction should be made without fail, and
any of their belongings that have been distributed should be returned, as
far as that is possible. The tendency to exclude middle peasants from the
ranks of the peasants' representatives and from the peasants' committees
and the tendency to counterpose them to the poor peasants and farm labourers
in the land reform struggle must be corrected. Peasants with an income from
exploitation should be classified as middle peasants if such income is less
than 25 per cent of their total income, and classified as rich peasants if
it is more.[1] The land of well-to-do middle peasants
must not be distributed without the owner's consent.

3. We must avoid adopting any adventurist policies towards middle and small
industrialists and merchants. The policy, adopted in the past in the Liberated
Areas, of protecting and encouraging the development of all private industry
and commerce beneficial to the national economy was correct and should be
continued in the future. The policy of encouraging landlords and rich peasants
to switch to industry and commerce, adopted during the period of rent and
interest reduction, was also correct; it is wrong to regard such switching
as a "disguise" and therefore to oppose it and confiscate and distribute
the property so switched. The industrial and commercial holdings of landlords
and rich peasants should in general be protected; the only industrial and
commercial holdings that may be confiscated are those of bureaucrat-capitalists
and of real counter-revolutionary local tyrants. Among the industrial and
commercial enterprises which should be confiscated, those beneficial to the
national economy must continue to operate after they have been taken over
by the state and the people and must not be allowed to break up or close
down. The transactions tax on the industry and commerce which are beneficial
to the national economy should be levied only to the extent that it does
not hamper their development. In each public enterprise, the administration
and the trade union must set up a joint management committee to strengthen
the work of management in order to reduce costs, increase output and see
that both public and individual interests are benefited. Private capitalist
enterprises should also try out this method in order to reduce costs, increase
output and benefit both labour and capital. The workers' livelihood must
be appropriately improved, but unduly high wages and benefits must be avoided.

4. We must avoid adopting any adventurist policies towards students, teachers,
professors, scientific workers, art workers and ordinary intellectuals. The
experience of China's student movements and revolutionary struggles has proved
that the overwhelming majority of these people can take part in the revolution
or remain neutral; the die-hard counter-revolutionaries are a tiny minority.
Our Party should, therefore, adopt a careful attitude towards students, teachers,
professors, scientific workers, art workers and ordinary intellectuals. We
should unite with them, educate them and give them posts according to the
merits of each case, and only a tiny number of die-hard counter-revolutionaries
among them will have to be appropriately dealt with through the mass line.

5. On the question of the enlightened gentry. Our Party's co-operation with
the enlightened gentry in government bodies (consultative councils and
governments) in the Liberated Areas during the War of Resistance Against
Japan was entirely necessary and also successful. Those enlightened gentry
who went through hardships and tribulations together with our Party and actually
made some contribution should be given consideration according to the merits
of each case, provided that this does not interfere with land reform. Those
who are fairly good politically and are competent should remain in the higher
government bodies and be given appropriate work. Those who are fairly good
politically but are not competent should have their livelihood assured. As
for those who are of landlord or rich peasant origin but who have not incurred
the people's deep resentment, their feudal landholdings and feudal property
should be distributed according to the Land Law, but it should be seen to
that they do not become targets of mass struggles. Those who have sneaked
into our government bodies, who have in reality always been evil, who can
be of no use to the people and who have incurred the extreme hatred of the
broad masses, are to be handed over to the people's courts to be tried and
punished like local tyrants.

6. We must distinguish between the new rich peasants and the old rich
peasants.[2] The encouragement given to new rich
peasants and well-to-do middle peasants during the period of rent and interest
reduction proved effective in reassuring the middle peasants and in developing
agricultural production in the Liberated Areas. After the equal distribution
of land, we must call on the peasants to develop production so that they
will be well-fed and well-clothed, and advise them to set up organizations
for mutual aid and co-operation in agriculture, such as labour-exchange teams,
mutual-aid teams and work-exchange groups.[3] In
the equal distribution of land the new rich peasants in the old Liberated
Areas should be treated like well-to-do middle peasants, and their land should
not be distributed without the owner's consent.

7. Among those landlords and rich peasants in the old Liberated Areas who
changed their mode of living during the period of rent and interest reduction,
the landlords who have engaged in physical labour for five years or more
and the rich peasants whose condition has been reduced to that of middle
or poor peasants for three years or more may now have their class status
changed in accordance with their present condition, provided their behaviour
has been good. Those who still possess a large amount of surplus property
(not a small amount) should hand over the surplus in accordance with the
peasants' demands.

8. The heart of land reform is the equal distribution of the land of the
feudal classes and of their property in grain, animals and farm implements
(rich peasants hand over only their surplus property); we should not
overemphasize the struggle to unearth hidden wealth[4]
and in particular should not spend too much time on this matter lest it should
interfere with the main work.

9. In dealing with landlords and rich peasants we should distinguish between
them in accordance with the Outline Land Law.

10. Within the framework of the principle of equal distribution of land,
we should also distinguish among the big, middle and small landlords, as
well as between those landlords and rich peasants who are local tyrants and
those who are not.

11. After the people's courts have given the handful of arch-criminals who
are really guilty of the most heinous crimes a serious trial and sentenced
them and the sentences have been approved by appropriate government organizations
(committees organized by local governments at county or sub-regional level),
it is entirely necessary for the sake of revolutionary order to shoot them
and announce their execution. That is one side of the matter. The other side
is that we must insist on killing less and must strictly forbid killing without
discrimination. To advocate killing more or killing without discrimination
is entirely wrong; this would only cause our Party to forfeit sympathy, become
alienated from the masses and fall into isolation. Trial and sentence by
the people's courts, a form of struggle provided in the Outline Land Law,
must be carried out in earnest; it is a powerful weapon of the peasant masses
for striking at the worst elements among the landlords and rich peasants;
it also avoids the mistake of beating and killing without discrimination.
At the proper time (after the land struggle has reached its height), we should
teach the masses to understand their own long-term interests -- to regard
those landlords and rich peasants who do not persist in wrecking the war
effort or the land reform and who number tens of millions in the country
as a whole (as many as 36 million out of a rural population of about 360
million) as a labour force for the country and to save and remould them.
Our task is to abolish the feudal system, to wipe out the landlords as a
class, not as individuals. In accordance with the Land Law we must give them
means of production and means of livelihood, but not more than to the peasants.

12. We must criticize and struggle with certain cadres and Party members
who have committed serious mistakes and certain bad elements among the masses
of workers and peasants. In such criticism and struggle we should persuade
the masses to adopt correct methods and forms and to refrain from rough actions.
This is one side of the matter. The other side is that these cadres, Party
members and bad elements should be made to pledge that they will not retaliate
against the masses. It should be announced that the masses not only have
the right to criticize them freely but also have the right to dismiss them
from their posts when necessary or to propose their dismissal, or to propose
their expulsion from the Party and even to hand the worst elements over to
the people's courts for trial and punishment. 

III. ON THE PROBLEM OF STATE POWER

1. The new-democratic state power is the anti-imperialist and anti-feudal
state power of the masses of the people led by the working class. Here, the
masses of the people include the working class, the peasantry, the urban
petty bourgeoisie and the national bourgeoisie who are oppressed and injured
by imperialism and by the reactionary Kuomintang regime and the classes it
represents, namely, the bureaucrat-capitalist class (the big bourgeoisie)
and the landlord class. The main body of the masses consists of the workers,
peasants (soldiers being chiefly peasants in uniform) and other working people.
The masses of the people form their own state (the People's Republic of China)
and establish a government (the Central Government of the People's Republic
of China) to represent this state. The working class through its vanguard,
the Communist Party of China, exercises the leadership in this state belonging
to the masses of the people and in its government. The enemies this People's
Republic and its government oppose are foreign imperialism and the Kuomintang
reactionaries at home and the classes they represent -- the bureaucrat-capitalist
class and landlord class.

2. The organs of state power of the People's Republic of China are the people's
congresses at different levels and the governments at different levels which
these congresses elect.

3. In the rural areas in the present period, we can and should, in accordance
with the demands of the peasants, convene village peasant meetings to elect
the village governments, and convene district peasant congresses to elect
the district governments. Since the governments at or above county or municipal
level represent not only the peasants in the countryside but also the people
of all strata and occupations in the towns, county seats, provincial capitals
and big industrial and commercial cities, we should convene people's congresses
at county, municipal, provincial or border region levels to elect the governments
at corresponding levels. In the future after the revolution triumphs throughout
the whole country, the central government and the local governments at all
levels should be elected by the people's congresses at corresponding levels.

IV. THE PROBLEM OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THOSE WHO LEAD AND THOSE WHO
ARE LED IN THE REVOLUTIONARY UNITED FRONT 

The leading class and the leading party must fulfil two conditions in order
to exercise their leadership of the classes, strata, political parties and
people's organizations which are being led: 

(a) Lead those who are led (allies) to wage resolute struggles against the
common enemy and achieve victories;

(b) Bring material benefits to those who are led or at least not damage their
interests and at the same time give them political education.

Without both these conditions, or with only one, leadership cannot be realized.
As an example, the Communist Party, in order to lead the middle peasants,
must lead them to struggle resolutely together with us against the feudal
classes and achieve victories (destroying the landlords' armed force and
dividing up their land). If there is no resolute struggle or if there is
struggle but no victory, the middle peasants will vacillate. Furthermore,
we must allot part of the land and other property of the landlords to those
middle peasants who are relatively poor and must not damage the interests
of the well-to-do middle peasants. In the peasant associations and the village
and district governments we must draw the activists among the middle peasants
into the work and must provide suitable quotas for them (for instance, one-third
of the committee members). Do not make mistakes in determining the class
status of middle peasants and be fair to them in regard to the land tax and
civilian war service. At the same time, give the middle peasants political
education. If we do not do all these things, we will lose the support of
the middle peasants. In the cities, the same holds true for the working class
and the Communist Party in exercising their leadership of the middle bourgeoisie,
democratic parties and people's organizations oppressed and injured by the
reactionary forces. 

NOTES


1. For the criteria for class identification in the rural
areas, see "How to Analyse the Classes in the Rural Areas", Selected
Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. I, and "The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese
Communist Party", Chapter 2, Section 4, Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung,
Vol. II.

2. .The new rich peasants were those who had developed
from middle peasants or poor peasants in the revolutionary base areas. The
old rich peasants were those who had already been rich peasants before the
revolutionary base areas were established. The old rich peasants generally
and to a great degree had the character of feudal and semi-feudal exploiters.
See "The Present Situation and Our Tasks", Note 6, p. 175 of this volume.

3. Labour-exchange teams and work-exchange groups were
organizations for mutual aid and co-operation in agriculture, "Labour-exchange"
or "work-exchange" was a means by which the peasants adjusted labour-power
among themselves and took such forms as the exchange of man-workdays for
man-workdays, ox-workdays for ox-workdays and man-workdays for ox-workdays.
Peasants who joined labour-exchange teams contributed their labour-power
or animal-power to cultivate the land of each member-family in rotation or
collectively. In settling accounts the workday was taken as the unit of exchange;
those who contributed more man-workdays or animal-workdays were paid for
the difference by those who contributed less.

4. This refers to the valuables buried by the landlords.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Democratic Movement in the Army 








THE DEMOCRATIC MOVEMENT IN THE ARMY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE DEMOCRATIC MOVEMENT IN THE ARMY


January 30, 1948

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the
Revolutionary Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China. ] 
  

The policy for political work in our army units is fully to arouse the masses
of soldiers, the commanders and all working personnel in order to achieve,
through a democratic movement under centralized leadership, three major
objectives, namely, a high degree of political unity, an improvement in living
conditions and a higher level of military technique and tactics. The Three
Check-ups and Three Improvements [1] now being
enthusiastically carried out in our army units are intended to attain the
first two of these objectives through the methods of political and economic
democracy.

With regard to economic democracy, the representatives elected by the soldiers
must be ensured the right to assist (but not to bypass) the company leadership
in managing the company's supplies and mess.

With regard to military democracy, in periods of training there must be mutual
instruction as between officers and soldiers and among the soldiers themselves;
and in periods of fighting the companies at the front must hold big and small
meetings of various kinds. Under the direction of the company leadership,
the masses of soldiers should be roused to discuss how to attack and capture
enemy positions and how to fulfil other combat tasks. When the fighting lasts
several days, several such meetings should be held. This kind of military
democracy was practiced with great success in the battle of Panlung
[2] in northern Shensi and in the battle of
Shihchiachuang [3] in the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei area.
It has been proved that the practice can only do good and can do no harm
whatsoever.

The masses of soldiers should have the right to expose the errors and misdeeds
of bad elements among the cadres. We should be confident that the soldiers
will cherish all the good and comparatively good cadres. Moreover, the soldiers
should have the right, when necessary, to nominate those whom they trust
from their own ranks for lower-level cadre posts, subject to appointment
by the higher level. When there is an acute shortage of lower-level cadres,
this kind of nomination is very useful. It is not to be the rule, however,
but is to be done only when necessary. 

NOTES


1. The "Three Check-ups" and "Three Improvements" constituted
an important movement for Party consolidation and for ideological education
in the army which was carried out by our Party in conjunction with the land
reform during the People's War of Liberation. In the localities, the "Three
Check-ups" meant checking on class origin, ideology and style of work; in
the armed units, the check-ups were on class origin, performance of duty
and will to fight. The "Three Improvements" meant organizational consolidation,
ideological education and rectification of style of work.

2. Panlung, northeast of Yenan, was a town where the Northwest
People's Liberation Army surrounded and wiped out over 6,700 Kuomintang troops
under the command of Hu Tsung-nan in May 1947.

3. Shihchiachuang was liberated by units of the People's
Liberation Army of the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Border Region on November 12,
1947. Its enemy garrison of more than 24,000 men was totally destroyed. It
was the first important city liberated by the People's Liberation Army in
northern China. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Different Tactics for Carrying Out the land Law in Different Areas







DIFFERENT TACTICS FOR CARRYING OUT THE LAND LAW IN DIFFERENT AREAS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

DIFFERENT TACTICS FOR CARRYING OUT THE LAND LAW IN DIFFERENT
  AREAS


February 3, 1948


In carrying out the Land Law, it is necessary to distinguish three kinds
of areas and to adopt different tactics for each.

1. Old Liberated Areas established before the Japanese surrender. In general,
land in these areas has long been distributed, and only a part of the
distribution needs to be readjusted. Our work here should centre on educating
and consolidating the ranks of the Party and solving the contradictions between
the Party and the masses by combining the efforts of Party and non-Party
people according to the experience gained in Pingshan
County.[1] In these old Liberated Areas what should
be done is not to distribute the land a second time under the Land Law, or
artificially and arbitrarily to organize poor peasant leagues to lead the
peasant associations, but to organize poor peasant groups within the peasant
associations. Activists in these groups can hold leading posts in the peasant
associations and in the organs of political power in the rural areas, but
it should not be made the rule that such posts go to the poor peasants to
the exclusion of the middle peasants. In these areas the leading posts in
the peasant associations and the organs of political power should be assumed
by those activists among the poor and middle peasants who are correct in
their thinking and fair and just in running affairs. The great majority of
former poor peasants in these areas have developed into middle peasants,
and the middle peasants now form the bulk of the rural population; therefore
we must draw in the activists among the middle peasants to participate in
the leadership of these rural areas.

2. Areas liberated between the Japanese surrender and the time of the general
counter-offensive, that is, in the two years between September 1945 and August
1947. These now form the largest part of the Liberated Areas and can be called
the semi-old Liberated Areas.

In these areas, through the struggle to settle accounts during the last two
years and through the carrying out of the "May 4th
Directive",[2] the level of political consciousness
and the degree of organization of the masses have been raised considerably,
and there has been a preliminary solution of the land problem. But the political
consciousness and the organization of the masses have not yet reached a high
level, and the land problem is not yet thoroughly solved. In these areas
the Land Law is entirely applicable, the distribution of land should be universal
and thorough, and if it is not done well the first time, we should be prepared
for a second distribution with one or two check-ups afterwards. In these
areas the middle peasants are a minority and are taking a wait-and-see attitude.
The poor peasants are the majority and are eagerly demanding land. Poor peasant
leagues must therefore be organized and their leading position established
in the peasant associations and the organs of political power in the rural
areas.

3. Areas newly liberated since the general counter-offensive. In these areas
the masses have not yet been aroused, the Kuomintang, the landlords and the
rich peasants still have great influence, and all our work has not yet taken
root. Therefore, we should not try to enforce the Land Law all at once but
should do it in two stages. The first stage is to neutralize the rich peasants
and strike blows exclusively at the landlords. This stage should be further
sub-divided into several steps, namely, propaganda, preliminary organization,
distribution of the movable property[3] of the
big landlords, distribution of the land of the big and middle landlords with
some consideration being given to the small landlords, and finally the
distribution of the land of the landlord class. During this stage, poor peasant
leagues should be organized as the backbone of leadership, and peasant
associations may also be organized with the poor peasants as the main body.
The second stage is to distribute the land rented out by the rich peasants,
their surplus land[4] and part of their other property,
and to distribute that portion of the land of the landlords which was not
thoroughly distributed in the first stage. The first stage should take about
two years and the second a year. Haste will certainly do no good. Land reform
and Party consolidation in the old and semi-old Liberated Areas should also
take three years (counting from this January); here haste will do no good
either. 

NOTES


1. Pingshan County situated in western Hopei Province,
was then part of the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Liberated Area. The experience of
Pingshan here referred to consisted in inviting non-Party people to attend
Party meetings so as to help the consolidation of the Party's primary
organizations in the rural areas during the land reform.

2. This refers to the "Directive on the Land Question"
issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on May 4,
1946. See "A Three Months Summary", Note 4, p. 118 of this volume.

3. "Movable property" refers to grain, money, clothing,
etc.

4. See "The Present Situation and Our Tasks", Note 6, p.
175 of this volume. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Correct the "Left" Errors in Land Reform Propaganda







CORRECT THE "LEFT" ERRORS IN LAND REFORM PROPAGANDA



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

CORRECT THE "LEFT" ERRORS IN LAND REFORM PROPAGANDA


February 11, 1948

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China. ] 
  

In the past few months our news agency and newspapers in many places have
publicized without discrimination or analysis many unsound reports and articles
containing "Left" deviationist errors. Here are some examples.

1.They did not propagate the line of relying on the poor peasants
and farm labourers and firmly uniting with the middle peasants in order to
abolish the feudal system, but one-sidedly propagated a poor peasant-farm
labourer line. They did not propagate the view that the proletariat should
unite with all working people and others who are oppressed, the national
bourgeoisie, the intellectuals and other patriots (including the enlightened
gentry who do not oppose land reform) in order to overthrow the rule of
imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism and establish a People's
Republic of China and a people's democratic government, but one-sidedly
propagated the view that the poor peasants and farm labourers conquer the
country and should rule the country, or that the democratic government should
be a government of the peasants only, or that the democratic government should
listen only to the workers, poor peasants and farm labourers, while no mention
at all was made of the middle peasants, the independent craftsmen, the national
bourgeoisie and the intellectuals. This is a serious error of principle.
Yet reports of this kind have been circulated by our news agency, newspapers
and radio stations. And the propaganda departments of the Party committees
in various places have failed to report these errors to the higher levels.
In the past few months such propaganda, though not widespread, has been fairly
frequent and has created an atmosphere in which people have been misled into
believing that it might represent the correct leading ideas. Because the
Northern Shensi Radio Station broadcast some incorrect items, people even
mistakenly believed that these were views approved by the Central Committee.

2. On the question of Party consolidation, there has not been sufficiently
vigorous propaganda in some areas either against taking no account of class
origin or against taking account of class origin alone; and there has even
been erroneous propaganda which advocates taking account of class origin
alone.

3. On the question of land reform, in some areas propaganda against both
hesitation and rashness has been taken well in hand; but in many areas rashness
has been encouraged and articles praising it have even been published. On
the question of the relationship between the leadership and the masses, attention
has been given in some areas to conducting propaganda against both commandism
and tailism, but in many areas there has been an erroneous emphasis on "doing
everything as the masses want it done" and an accommodation to wrong views
existing among the masses. Even wrong views held not by the masses but only
by a few individuals have been uncritically accepted. This negates the leading
role of the Party and encourages tailism.

4. With regard to policies concerning industry and commerce and the working-class
movement, serious "Left" deviations existing in certain Liberated Areas have
been either praised or ignored.

To sum up, in the past few months our propaganda work has correctly reflected
and guided the great struggles -- the war, the land reform, Party consolidation,
production and support for the front -- and contributed to their great
achievements; this is the major aspect of our propaganda work, and it must
be affirmed first of all. But some errors and shortcomings must also be noted.
They are of an ultra-Left character. A few run completely counter to the
principles and standpoint of Marxism-Leninism and depart completely from
the line of the Central Committee. It is expected that the bureaus and
sub-bureaus of the Central Committee, their propaganda departments, the central
and regional head offices of the Hsinhua News Agency and the comrades working
on all the newspapers will check up on the propaganda work of the last few
months on the basis of Marxist-Leninist principles and the line of the Central
Committee, extend their achievements, correct their errors and see to it
that their work helps to ensure victory in these great struggles -- the war,
the land reform, Party consolidation, the working-class movement -- and to
ensure victory in the whole anti-imperialist and anti-feudal revolution.
The propaganda departments of the Party committees in all areas and the central
office of the Hsinhua News Agency should assume the main responsibility for
this check-up and should submit, in their own names, policy reports on its
results to the Propaganda Department of the Central Committee. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Essential Points in Land Reform in the New Liberated Areas







ESSENTIAL POINTS IN LAND REFORM IN THE NEW LIBERATED AREAS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ESSENTIAL POINTS IN LAND REFORM IN THE NEW LIBERATED AREAS


February 15, 1948

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China. ] 
  

1. Do not be impetuous. The speed of land reform should be determined
according to the circumstances, the level of political consciousness of the
masses and the strength of leading cadres. Do not attempt to complete the
land reform in a few months, but prepare to complete it in each area in two
or three years. This also applies to the old or semi-old Liberated Areas.

2. Land reform in a new Liberated Area should be divided into two
stages. In the first stage strike blows at the landlords and neutralize the
rich peasants. This stage is to be sub-divided into several steps; strike
blows at the big landlords first, and then at the other landlords. Treatment
must be different for those who are local tyrants and those who are not,
and different also for big, middle and small landlords. The second stage
is the equal distribution of land, including the land rented out by the rich
peasants and their surplus land. However, the treatment of rich peasants
should differ from that of landlords. The total scope of attack should generally
not exceed 8 per cent of the households or 10 per cent of the
population. In the semi-old Liberated Areas the differences in treatment
and the total scope of attack should be the same. These questions do not
arise in the old Liberated Areas, where in general only minor adjustments
in the distribution of lands are needed.

3. Organize poor peasant leagues first and then, after a few months, peasant
associations. Strictly prohibit landlords and rich peasants from sneaking
into the peasant associations and poor peasant leagues. Activists in the
poor peasant leagues should become the backbone of leadership in peasant
associations, but a section of the activists among the middle peasants must
also be drawn into the committees of peasant associations. In the land reform
struggle, the middle peasants must be drawn in to participate, and their
interests should be given consideration.

4. Do not start the work in all places at the same time, but choose strong
cadres to carry it out first in certain places to gain experience, then spread
the experience step by step and expand the work in waves. This applies to
a whole strategic area as well as to a single county. It also applies to
the old and the semi-old Liberated Areas.

5. Distinguish between consolidated Liberated Areas and guerrilla zones.
In the former, land reform can proceed step by step. In the latter, we should
confine ourselves to propaganda, covert organizational work and the distribution
of a certain amount of movable property. Mass organizations should not be
openly set up and land reform should not be carried out, lest the enemy should
persecute the masses.

6. The reactionary armed bands of the landlords and the reactionary secret
police must be destroyed and must not be utilized.

7. Reactionaries must be suppressed, but killing without discrimination is
strictly forbidden; the fewer killings, the better. Death sentences should
be reviewed and approved by a committee formed at the county level. The power
to try and to deal with the cases of political suspects is vested in committees
at the district Party committee level. This applies in the old as well as
the semi-old Liberated Areas.

8. Local revolutionary intellectuals and semi-intellectuals who come from
landlord or rich peasant families but support land reform should be utilized
and drawn into the work of building the base areas. But we must intensify
our educational work among them and prevent them from entrenching themselves
in power and hindering land reform. In general we should not let them work
in their native districts or townships. Emphasis should be placed on employing
intellectuals or semi-intellectuals from peasant families.

9. Pay strict attention to the protection of industry and commerce. Take
a long-term view in the planning and management of economic and financial
affairs. The armed forces and district and township governments should all
guard against waste. 

NOTES


1. See "Greet the New High Tide of the Chinese Revolution",
Note 14, p. 127 of this volume. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Policy Concerning Industry and Commerce 








ON THE POLICY CONCERNING INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON THE POLICY CONCERNING INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE


February 27, 1948

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China.] 
  

1. Party organizations in certain places have violated the policy of the
Central Committee of the Party concerning industry and commerce and seriously
damaged both. These mistakes must be speedily corrected. In correcting them
the Party committees in these places must make a careful check-up from the
two aspects of guiding policies and methods of leadership.

2. Guiding policies. Precautions should be taken against the mistake of applying
in the cities the measures used in rural areas for struggling against landlords
and rich peasants and for destroying the feudal forces. A sharp distinction
should be made between the feudal exploitation practiced by landlords and
rich peasants, which must be abolished, and the industrial and commercial
enterprises run by landlords and rich peasants, which must be protected.
A sharp distinction should also be made between the correct policy of developing
production, promoting economic prosperity, giving consideration to both public
and private interests and benefiting both labour and capital, and the one-sided
and narrow-minded policy of "relief", which purports to uphold the workers'
welfare but in fact damages industry and commerce and impairs the cause of
the people's revolution. Education should be conducted among comrades in
the trade unions and among the masses of workers to enable them to understand
that they should not see merely the immediate and partial interests of the
working class while forgetting its broad, long-range interests. Under the
local government's leadership, workers and capitalists should be led to organize
joint committees for the management of production and to do everything possible
to reduce costs, increase output and stimulate sales so as to attain the
objectives of giving consideration to both public and private interests,
benefiting both labour and capital and supporting the war. The mistakes committed
in many places are due to the failure to grasp all, most or some of the above
policies. The bureaus and sub-bureaus of the Central Committee should raise
this question clearly, analyse, check up, formulate correct policies and
issue inner-Party directives and government decrees.

3. Methods of leadership. After policies have been fixed and directives issued,
a bureau or sub-bureau of the Central Committee should keep in close contact
with its area and prefectural Party
committees[1] or with its own working teams by
telegraph or telephone, by couriers on vehicles or on horseback, or by personal
interviews; it should use the newspaper as an important instrument of
organization and leadership. It should constantly have a grip on the progress
of the work, exchange experience and correct mistakes; it should not wait
several months, half a year or a year before holding summing-up meetings
for a general check-up and a general correction of mistakes. Waiting leads
to great loss, while correcting mistakes as soon as they occur reduces loss.
In ordinary circumstances a bureau of the Central Committee should strive
to keep in close contact with its subordinate organizations, always take
care to draw a sharp line between what should and what should not be done,
and constantly remind its subordinate organizations of this so that they
may make as few mistakes as possible. All these are questions of methods
of leadership.

4. All comrades in the Party should understand that the enemy is now completely
isolated. But his isolation is not tantamount to our victory. If we make
mistakes in policy, we shall still be unable to win victory. To put it
concretely, we shall fail if we make, and do not correct, mistakes of principle
with regard to any of the five policies -- on the war, Party consolidation,
land reform, industry and commerce, and the suppression of counter-revolution.
Policy is the starting-point of all the practical actions of a revolutionary
party and manifests itself in the process and the end-result of that party's
actions. A revolutionary party is carrying out a policy whenever it takes
any action. If it is not carrying out a correct policy, it is carrying out
a wrong policy; if it is not carrying out a given policy consciously, it
is doing so blindly. What we call experience is the process and the end-result
of carrying out a policy. Only through the practice of the people, that is,
through experience, can we verify whether a policy is correct or wrong and
determine to what extent it is correct or wrong. But people's practice,
especially the practice of a revolutionary party and the revolutionary masses,
cannot but be related to one policy or another. Therefore, before any action
is taken, we must explain the policy, which we have formulated in the light
of the given circumstances, to Party members and to the masses. Otherwise,
Party members and the masses will depart from the guidance of our policy,
act blindly and carry out a wrong policy. 

NOTES


1. The prefectural Party committee was a leading body lower
than the provincial Party committee or Border Region Party committee but
higher than the county Party committee. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



==========

## On the Question of the National Bourgeoisie and the Enlightened Gentry







ON THE QUESTION OF THE NATIONAL BOURGEOISIE AND THE ENLIGHTENED GENTRY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON THE QUESTION OF THE NATIONAL BOURGEOISIE AND THE ENLIGHTENED
  GENTRY


March 1, 1948

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China.] 
  

The Chinese revolution at the present stage is in its character a revolution
against imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism waged by the broad
masses of the people under the leadership of the proletariat. By the broad
masses of the people is meant all those who are oppressed, injured or fettered
by imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism, namely, workers, peasants,
soldiers, intellectuals, businessmen and other patriots, as clearly stated
in the Manifesto of the Chinese People's Liberation Army of October
1947.[1] In the manifesto "intellectuals" means
all intellectuals who are persecuted and fettered. "Businessmen" means all
the national bourgeois who are persecuted and fettered, that is, the middle
and petty bourgeois. "Other patriots" refers primarily to the enlightened
gentry. The Chinese revolution at the present stage is a revolution in which
all these people form a united front against imperialism, feudalism and
bureaucrat-capitalism and in which the working people are the main body.
By working people are meant all those engaged in manual labour (such as workers,
peasants, handicraftsmen, etc.) as well as those engaged in mental labour
who are close to those engaged in manual labour and are not exploiters but
are exploited. The aim of the Chinese revolution at the present stage is
to overthrow the rule of imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism
and to establish a new-democratic republic of the broad masses of the people
with the working people as the main force; its aim is not to abolish capitalism
in general.

We should not abandon the enlightened gentry who co-operated with us in the
past and continue to co-operate with us at present, who approve of the struggle
against the United States and Chiang Kai-shek and who approve of the land
reform. Take, for instance, people like Liu Shao-pai of the Shansi-Suiyuan
Border Region and Li Ting-ming of the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border
Region.[2]Since they gave us considerable help
in the hard times during and after the War of Resistance Against Japan and
did not obstruct or oppose the land reform when we were carrying it out,
we should continue the policy of uniting with them. But uniting with them
does not mean treating them as a force that determines the character of the
Chinese revolution. The forces that determine the character of a revolution
are the chief enemies on the one side and the chief revolutionaries on the
other. At present our chief enemies are imperialism, feudalism and
bureaucrat-capitalism, while the main forces in our struggle against these
enemies are the people engaged in manual and mental labour, who make up 90
per cent of the country's population. And this determines that our revolution
at the present stage is a new-democratic, a people's democratic revolution
in character and is different from a socialist revolution such as the October
Revolution.

The few right-wingers among the national bourgeoisie who attach themselves
to imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism and oppose the people's
democratic revolution are also enemies of the revolution, while the left-wingers
among the national bourgeoisie who attach themselves to the working people
and oppose the reactionaries are also revolutionaries, as are the few enlightened
gentry who have broken away from the feudal class. But the former are not
the main body of the enemy any more than the latter are the main body among
the revolutionaries; neither is a force that determines the character of
the revolution. The national bourgeoisie is a class which is politically
very weak and vacillating. But the majority of its members may either join
the people's democratic revolution or take a neutral stand, because they
too are persecuted and fettered by imperialism, feudalism and
bureaucrat-capitalism. They are part of the broad masses of the people but
not the main body, nor are they a force that determines the character of
the revolution. However, because they are important economically and may
either join in the struggle against the United States and Chiang Kai-shek
or remain neutral in that struggle, it is possible and necessary for us to
unite with them. Before the birth of the Communist Party of China, the Kuomintang
headed by Sun Yat-sen represented the national bourgeoisie and acted as the
leader of the Chinese revolution of that time (a non-thorough democratic
revolution of the old type). But after the Communist Party of China was born
and demonstrated its ability, the Kuomintang could no longer be the leader
of the Chinese revolution (a new-democratic revolution). The national bourgeoisie
joined the 1924-27 revolutionary movement[3] and during
the years 1927-31 (before the September 18th Incident of 1931) quite a few
of them sided with the reaction under Chiang Kai-shek. But one must not on
this account think that we should not have tried during that period to win
over the national bourgeoisie politically or to protect it economically,
or that our ultra-Left policy towards the national bourgeoisie was not
adventurist. On the contrary, in that period our policy should still have
been to protect the national bourgeoisie and win it over so as to enable
us to concentrate our efforts on fighting the chief enemies. In the period
of the War of Resistance the national bourgeoisie was a participant in the
war, wavering between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. At the present
stage the majority of the national bourgeoisie has a growing hatred of the
United States and Chiang Kai-shek; its left-wingers attach themselves to
the Communist Party and its right-wingers to the Kuomintang, while its middle
elements take a hesitant, wait-and-see attitude between the two parties.
These circumstances make it necessary and possible for us to win over the
majority of the national bourgeoisie and isolate the minority. To achieve
this aim, we should be prudent in dealing with the economic position of this
class and in principle should adopt a blanket policy of protection. Otherwise
we shall commit political errors.

The enlightened gentry are individual landlords and rich peasants with democratic
leanings. Such people have contradictions with bureaucrat-capitalism and
imperialism and to a certain extent also with the feudal landlords and rich
peasants. We unite with them not because they are a political force to be
reckoned with nor because they are of any economic importance (their feudal
landholdings should be handed over with their consent to the peasants for
distribution) but because they gave us considerable help politically during
the War of Resistance and during the struggle against the United States and
Chiang Kai-shek. During the period of land reform, it will help the land
reform throughout the country if some of the enlightened gentry favour it.
In particular, it will help win over the intellectuals (most of whom come
from landlord or rich peasant families), the national bourgeoisie (most of
whom have ties with the land) and the enlightened gentry throughout the country
(who number several hundred thousand) and help isolate the chief enemy of
the Chinese revolution, the Chiang Kai-shek reactionaries. It is precisely
because they have this role that the enlightened gentry also constitute an
element in the revolutionary united front against imperialism, feudalism
and bureaucrat-capitalism; therefore, attention must also be paid to the
question of uniting with them. During the period of the War of Resistance,
what we required of the enlightened gentry was that they should favour resistance
against Japan, favour democracy (not be anti-Communist) and favour reduction
of rent and interest; at the present stage, what we require of them is that
they favour the struggle against the United States and Chiang Kai-shek, favour
democracy (not be anti-Communist) and favour the land reform. If they can
meet these requirements, we should unite with them without exception and
while uniting with them educate them. 


NOTES


1. See the first of the eight policies listed in "Manifesto
of the Chinese People's Liberation Army", p. 150 of this volume.

2. Liu Shao-pai, an enlightened landlord of the Shansi-Suiyuan
Border Region, had been elected Vice-Chairman of the Provisional Council
of the Shansi-Suiyuan Border Region. Li Ting-ming, an enlightened landlord
of northern Shensi Province had been elected Vice-Chairman of the
Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region Government.

3. See "The Situation and Our Policy After the Victory
in the War of Resistance Against Japan", Note 10, p. 25 of this volume. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Great Victory in the Northwest and on the New Type of Ideological Education Movement in the Liberation Army 







ON THE GREAT VICTORY IN THE NORTHWEST AND ON THE NEW TYPE OF IDEOLOGICAL
  EDUCATION MOVEMENT IN THE LIBERATION ARMY 



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON THE GREAT VICTORY IN THE NORTHWEST AND ON THE NEW TYPE OF IDEOLOGICAL
  EDUCATION MOVEMENT IN THE LIBERATION ARMY


March 7, 1948

[This commentary was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the spokesman of
the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army. At that
time the enemy offensive in the Northwest theatre of war had been smashed,
and our army had gone over to its own offensive. This commentary analysed
the situation in the Northwest theatre and also outlined conditions in the
other theatres of war. More important, it stressed the great significance
of the new type of ideological education movement in the army, carried out
by the methods of "pouring out grievances" and of the "three check-ups".
This new type of movement was an important development of the political work
and the democratic movement in the People's Liberation Army. It was the
reflection in the army of the movements for land reform and Party consolidation
then vigorously proceeding in all the Liberated Areas. This movement greatly
enhanced the political consciousness, discipline and combat effectiveness
of all officers and soldiers. At the same time it most effectively speeded
the process of reforming large numbers of captured Kuomintang soldiers into
Liberation Army fighters. Thus it played an important role in consolidating
and expanding the People's Liberation Army and in ensuring victories in the
field. For the significance of this movement, see also "The Democratic Movement
in the Army" pp. 191-92, "Speech at a Conference of Cadres in the Shansi-Suiyuan
Liberated Area" pp. 227-39, and "On the September Meeting -- Circular of
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China", pp. 269-77, of this
volume. ] 
  

Commenting on the recent great victory of the Northwest People's Liberation
Army, a spokesman for the General Headquarters of the People's Liberation
Army said: This victory has changed the situation in the Northwest and will
affect the situation in the Central Plains. It has proved that through the
new type of ideological education movement in the army by the methods of
"pouring out grievances" and of the "three check-ups" the People's Liberation
Army will make itself invincible.

The spokesman said: On this occasion, the Northwest People's Liberation Army
suddenly encircled an enemy brigade at Yichuan, and Hu Tsung-nan ordered
Liu Kan, Commander of his 29th Corps, to rush 4 brigades of 2 reorganized
divisions from the Lochuan-Yichun line to the relief of Yichuan. They were
the 31st and 47th Brigades of the Reorganized 27th Division and the 53rd
and 61st Brigades of the Reorganized 90th Division, totalling more than 24,000
men; they reached the area southwest of Yichuan on February 28. The Northwest
People's Liberation Army started a battle of annihilation and in thirty hours
of fighting on February 29 and March 1 completely wiped out these reinforcements,
letting none escape from the net. More than 18,000 men were captured, and
more than 5,000 were killed and wounded; Liu Kan himself, Yen Ming, Commander
of the 90th Division, and other officers were killed. Then on March 3 we
captured Yichuan and here again wiped out over 5,000 men of the 24th Brigade
of the enemy's Reorganized 76th Division which was defending the city. In
this campaign we wiped out, all told, 1 corps headquarters, 2 division
headquarters and 5 brigades of the enemy, a total of 30,000 men. This is
our first great victory in the Northwest theatre.

Analysing the situation in the Northwest theatre, the spokesman said: Of
the 28 brigades of the so-called "Central Army" directly commanded by Hu
Tsung-nan, 8 belonged to his 3 crack divisions, the Reorganized 1st, 36th
and 90th Divisions. Of these divisions, the 1st Brigade of the Reorganized
1st Division had been wiped out[1] by us once before
at Fushan, southern Shansi, in September 1946 and the main force of the same
division's 167th Brigade had been wiped out once at Panlung town, northern
Shensi, in May last year; the 123rd and 165th Brigades of the Reorganized
36th Division had been wiped out once at Shachiatien in Michih County, northern
Shensi, in August last year; and this time the Reorganized 90th Division
was also completely wiped out. Of the remainder of Hu Tsung-nan's main force,
only the 78th Brigade of the Reorganized 1st Division and the 28th Brigade
of the Reorganized 36th Division have not yet been wiped out. Hu Tsung-nan's
whole army can therefore be said to have practically no more crack units.
As a result of the Yichuan battle of annihilation, of the 28 regular brigades
formerly under Hu Tsung-nan's direct command, only 23 are left. These 23
brigades are distributed in the following areas: 1 brigade at Linfen in southern
Shansi is immobilized and doomed, 9 brigades are on the Shensi-Honan border
and along the Loyang-Tungkuan line to cope with our field army under Chen
Keng and Hsieh Fu-chih, and another brigade in southern Shensi is guarding
the Hanchung area. The remaining 12 brigades are distributed along the T-shaped
communication lines from Tungkuan to Paoki and from Hsienyang to Yenan. Of
these, 3 are "reserve brigades" composed entirely of recruits, 2 have been
completely wiped out by our army and replenished recently, another 2 have
received crushing blows from us and 5 have received relatively few blows.
It can be seen that not only are these forces very weak but also they are
mostly on garrison duty. In addition to Hu Tsung-nan's army, there are 2
brigades under Teng Pao-shan defending Yulin, while 9 brigades under Ma Hung-kuei
of Ningsia Province and Ma Pu-fang of Chinghai Province are distributed in
the Sanpien and Lungtung areas.[2] All the regular
troops under Hu Tsung-nan, Teng Pao-shan and the two Mas now total 34 brigades,
including the units replenished after having been wiped out once or twice.

That is how things stand with the enemy in the Northwest. To return to the
T-shaped communication lines, of those 5 brigades which have received relatively
few blows, 2 are hemmed in at Yenan and 3 are in the Greater Kuanchung
Area.[3] As for the other brigades there, most
of them have been recently replenished, and a few have received crushing
blows. In other words, the enemy's forces in the whole Greater Kuanchung
Area and especially in Kansu Province are very sparse and weak and cannot
possibly stop the offensive of the People's Liberation Army. This situation
is bound to affect some of the dispositions of Chiang Kai-shek's forces on
the southern front and, first of all, his dispositions vis-à-vis our
field army under Chen Keng and Hsieh Fu-chih on the Honan-Shensi border.
In its present southward drive the Northwest People's Liberation Army has
won victory as soon as its banner was displayed, gained resounding fame and
changed the relation of forces between the enemy and ourselves in the Northwest;
from now on it will be able to fight even more effectively in co-ordination
with the forces of the People's Liberation Army on the southern fronts.

The spokesman said: Since last summer and autumn our three field armies,
commanded respectively by Liu Po-cheng and Teng Hsiao-ping, Chen Yi and Su
Yu, and Chen Keng and Hsieh Fu-chih, have advanced south across the Yellow
River, swept through the length and breadth of the territory enclosed by
the Yangtse, Huai, Yellow and Han Rivers, wiped out large numbers of enemy
troops, manipulated and drawn towards themselves some 90 out of the 160 odd
brigades which Chiang Kai-shek has on the southern front, forced his armies
into a passive position, played a decisive strategic role and won the acclaim
of the people all over the country.[4] In its winter
offensive our Northeast Field Army braved bitter cold of 30 degrees below
zero, annihilated most of the enemy troops, captured one well-known city
after another and won resounding fame throughout the
country.[5] After wiping out large numbers of enemy
troops in heroic battles last year,[6] our field
armies in the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei area, Shantung, northern Kiangsu and the
Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan area completed their training and consolidation
last winter, and they will soon unfold their spring
offensive.[7] A review of the whole situation proves
one truth. Provided we firmly oppose conservatism, fear of the enemy and
fear of difficulties, and provided we follow the general strategy of the
Central Committee of the Party and its directive on the ten major principles
of operation,[8] we can unfold our offensives,
wipe out vast numbers of enemy troops and strike such blows at the forces
of the Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang that they can only parry them for a time
without being able to hit back, or that they cannot even parry our blows
and will be completely wiped out, one after another.

The spokesman emphatically pointed out: The combat effectiveness of our Northwest
Field Army is far higher than at any time last
year.[9] In last year's fighting the Northwest
Field Army could destroy at most two enemy brigades at a time; now in the
Yichuan campaign it has been able to wipe out five enemy brigades at one
time. The reasons for this outstanding victory were many, among which we
should point out the firm yet flexible command of the leading comrades at
the front, the energetic support given by the leading comrades and the broad
masses in the rear, the relative isolation of the enemy troops and a terrain
favourable to us. What is most noteworthy, however, is the new type of
ideological education movement in the army, which was carried out for more
than two months last winter by the methods of pouring out grievances and
the three check-ups. The correct unfolding of the movement for pouring out
grievances (the wrongs done to the labouring people by the old society and
by the reactionaries) and the three check-ups (on class origin, performance
of duty and will to fight) greatly heightened the political consciousness
of commanders and fighters throughout the army in the fight for the emancipation
of the exploited working masses, for nation-wide land reform and for the
destruction of the common enemy of the people, the Chiang Kai-shek bandit
gang. It also greatly strengthened the firm unity of all commanders and fighters
under the leadership of the Communist Party. On this basis, the army achieved
greater purity in its ranks, strengthened discipline, unfolded a mass movement
for training and further developed its political, economic and military democracy
in a completely well-led and orderly way. Thus the army has become united
as one man, with everybody contributing his ideas and his strength, fearless
of sacrifice and capable of overcoming material difficulties, an army which
displays mass heroism and daring in destroying the enemy. Such an army will
be invincible.

The spokesman said: It is not only in the Northwest that this new
type of ideological education movement in the army has been carried out;
it has been, or is being, carried on in the People's Liberation Army throughout
the country. Conducted between battles, the movement does not interfere with
fighting. Taking in conjunction with the movement for Party consolidation
and the land reform movement now being correctly carried out by our Party,
taking in co-ordination with our Party's correct policy of narrowing the
scope of attack by opposing only imperialism, feudalism and
bureaucrat-capitalism, by strictly forbidding beating and killing without
discrimination (the fewer killings, the better) and by firmly uniting the
masses of the people who make up over 90 per cent of the country's population,
and taking in co-ordination with the application of our Party's correct urban
policy and its policy of firmly protecting and developing the industry and
commerce of the national bourgeoisie, this ideological education movement
is bound to make the People's Liberation Army invincible. However desperate
the exertions of the Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang and its master, U.S.
imperialism, against the great struggle of the Chinese people's democratic
revolution, victory will certainly be ours. 

NOTES


1. See "Concentrate a Superior Force to Destroy the Enemy
Forces One by One", Note 1, p. 106 of this volume.

2. Sanpien is an area in northwestern Shensi Province.
Lungtung is the eastern part of Kansu Province. Both Sanpien and Lungtung
were then prefectures in the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Liberated Area.

3. This refers to central Shensi and northwestern Kansu
taken together.

4. Starting from June 30, 1947, 7 columns of the
Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Field Army led by Liu Po-cheng, Teng Hsiao-ping
and other comrades forced the Yellow River and pushed towards the Tapieh
Mountains, thus ushering in the strategic offensive of the People's Liberation
Army. By the end of March 1948, more than 100,000 enemy troops had been wiped
out, and new base areas had been built on the Hupeh-Honan border, in western
Anhwei, in the Tungpai mountain area on the Hupeh-Honan border, the plains
between the Yangtse and Han Rivers and other places. Eight columns of the
Eastern China Field Army led by Chen Yi, Su Yu and other comrades, having
smashed the enemy's concentrated attacks on Shantung Province in August 1947,
swept into southwestern Shantung and the Honan-Anhwei-Kiangsu Border Region,
wiped out over 100,000 enemy troops, built the Honan-Anhwei-Kiangsu Liberated
Area and isolated the enemy's strategic centres of Kaifeng and Chengchow.
Two columns and one corps of the Taiyueh Army of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan
area, commanded by Chen Keng, Hsieh Fu-chih and other comrades, forced the
Yellow River in southern Shansi in August 1947, advanced into western Honan,
wiped out more than 40,000 enemy troops and built base areas on the
Honan-Shensi-Hupeh border and in southern Shensi, completely isolating Loyang,
the enemy's strategic centre in western Honan Province, and threatening Tungkuan.

6. Fighting continuously for ninety days from December
15, 1947 to March 15, 1948, 10 columns and 12 independent divisions of the
Northeast Field Army led by Lin Piao, Lo Jung-huan and other comrades waged
a winter offensive on an unprecedented scale along the Szepingkai-Tashihchiao
section of the Chinese Changchun Railway and the Shanhaikuan-Shenyang section
of the Peiping-Liaoning Railway; they wiped out more than 156,000 enemy troops
and captured the enemy's heavily-fortified strategic centre of Szepingkai
and eighteen other cities. One enemy division garrisoning Yingkow revolted
and came over to our side. The enemy force defending the city of Kirin fled
towards Changchun. After this, the area under enemy control in the Northeast
shrank to only 1 per cent of the whole, and the enemy lairs in the cities
along the Changchun-Shenyang-Chinchow line were isolated.

5. From early September to mid-November 1947, 5 columns
of the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Field Army led by Nieh Jung-chen and other comrades
fought successive battles in the area north of the Taching River and in the
Chingfengtien area and the battle for the liberation of Shihchiachuang, wiping
out a total of nearly 50,000 enemy troops and linking up the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei
and Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Liberated Areas into one contiguous territory.
From September to December 1947, 3 columns of the Shantung Army belonging
to the Eastern China Field Army and regional armed forces fought the Eastern
Shantung campaign under the command of Hsu Shih-yu, Tan Chen-lin and other
comrades, wiping out more than 63,000 of the enemy and recovering more than
ten county towns; this changed the whole situation in Shantung Province.
From August to December 1947, units of the Eastern China Field Army in northern
Kiangsu, in successive battles at Yencheng, Lipao and other points, annihilated
more than 24,000 enemy troops and recovered a wide area in northern Kiangsu.
In December 1947, units of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Field Army led
by Hsu Hsiang-chien and other comrades fought in co-ordination with units
of the Northwest Field Army and captured Yuncheng, destroying more than 13,000
enemy troops; they wiped out all the enemy forces in southwestern Shansi
and isolated the enemy at Linfen.

7. In the spring of 1948, following a period of training
and consolidation in the previous winter, the field armies of the People's
Liberation Army launched successive offensives. Between March and May, the
Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Field Army and units of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan
and Shansi-Suiyuan Field Armies campaigned in southern Chahar, eastern Suiyuan
and the Linfen area of Shansi, wiping out more than 43,000 enemy troops and
recovering much territory. Between March 7 and May 29, units of the Central
Plains and Eastern China Field Armies fought successive battles at Loyang
and Sungho and in the sectors west and east of Nanyang, wiped out more than
56,000 enemy troops and thus crushed the enemy's defence system on the Central
Plains and expanded and consolidated the Liberated Area there. Between March
11 and May 8, the Shantung Army of the Eastern China Field Army fought battles
first on the western section of the Tsingtao-Tsinan Railway and then at Weihsien,
wiping out more than 84,000 enemy troops. Thus, except for a few strong-points,
such as Tsinan, Tsingtao, Linyi and Yenchow, which were held by the Kuomintang,
Shantung Province was liberated. In March the Northern Kiangsu Army fought
a successful battle at Yilin.

8. For the ten major principles of operation, see "The
Present Situation and Our Tasks", Section 3, pp. 160-63 of this volume.

9. The Northwest Field Army led by Peng Teh-huai, Ho Lung,
Hsi Chung-hsun and other comrades employed a main force of 2 columns and
2 brigades, totalling more than 25,000 men, in the fighting in northern Shensi
in the summer of 1947. By the spring of 1948 the main force had increased
to 5 columns, totalling more than 75,000 men. After having been steeled by
a year's fighting and by the new type of ideological education movement in
the army in the winter of 1947, the political consciousness of the broad
masses of officers and soldiers and the combat effectiveness of the military
units rose to unprecedented heights. This created the necessary conditions
for the Northwest Field Army to turn to fighting on exterior lines in March
1948. On April 12, following its major victory at Yichuan, the Northwest
Field Army launched a campaign in Hsifu (the area west of Sian and between
the Chingshui and Weishui Rivers) and eastern Kansu, pushed forward into
the broad area between the Chingshui and Weishui Rivers, cut the Sian-Lanchow
highway, and on April 22 recovered Yenan. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## A Circular on the Situation





A CIRCULAR ON THE SITUATION





Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

A CIRCULAR ON THE SITUATION


March 20, 1948

[This inner-Party circular was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China. Subsequently, the Central Committee
moved from the Shensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region to the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei
Liberated Area by way of the Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area and in May 1948
reached Hsipaipo Village, Pingshan County, in western Hopei Province.]

  

1. In recent months the Central Committee has concentrated on solving,
in the new conditions, problems concerning specific policies and tactics
for land reform, industry and commerce, the united front, Party consolidation
and the work in the new Liberated Areas; it has also combated Right and "Left"
deviations within the Party, mainly "Left" deviations. The history of our
Party shows that Right deviations are likely to occur in periods when our
Party has formed a united front with the Kuomintang and that "Left" deviations
are likely to occur in periods when our Party has broken with the Kuomintang.
At present the "Left" deviations consist chiefly in encroaching on the interests
of the middle peasants and the national bourgeoisie; laying one-sided stress
in the labour movement on the immediate interests of the workers; making
no distinctions in the treatment of landlords and rich peasants; making no
distinctions in the treatment of big, middle and small landlords, or of landlords
who are local tyrants and those who are not; not leaving the landlords the
necessary means of livelihood as required by the principle of equal distribution;
overstepping certain demarcation lines of policy in the struggle to suppress
counter-revolution; not wanting political parties which represent the national
bourgeoisie; not wanting the enlightened gentry; neglecting the tactical
importance of narrowing the scope of attack in the new Liberated Areas (that
is, neglecting to neutralize the rich peasants and small landlords); and
lacking the patience to work step by step. During the past two years or so,
these "Left" deviations have occurred to a greater or lesser extent in all
the Liberated Areas and in some cases have developed into serious adventurist
tendencies. Fortunately, they are not very difficult to correct; in the main
they have been corrected in the past few months, or are being corrected now.
But leaders at all levels must make strenuous efforts before deviations of
this kind can be thoroughly corrected. The Right deviations consist chiefly
in overestimating the strength of the enemy, being afraid of large-scale
U.S. aid to Chiang Kai-shek, being somewhat weary of the long war, having
certain doubts about the strength of the world democratic forces, not daring
to arouse the masses fully in order to abolish feudalism, and being indifferent
to impurities in the Party's class composition and style of work. Such Right
deviations, however, are not the main ones at present; they too are not difficult
to correct. In recent months our Party has made achievements in the war,
in land reform, in Party consolidation, in ideological education in the army,
in building new Liberated Areas and in winning over the democratic parties;
and it has emphatically corrected, or is correcting, deviations that occurred
in these fields of work. This will enable the entire revolutionary movement
in China to advance along the path of sound development. Only when all the
policies and tactics of the Party are on the correct path will it be possible
for the Chinese revolution to win victory. Policy and tactics are the life
of the Party; leading comrades at all levels must give them full attention
and must never on any account be negligent.

2. Certain democratic personages, who had believed that a so-called "third
road"[1] was still possible and had placed themselves
midway between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party because of certain
illusions about the United States and Chiang Kai-shek and because of their
scepticism as to whether our Party and the people had the strength to defeat
all enemies at home and abroad, found themselves in a passive position in
the face of the sudden Kuomintang offensive; eventually, in January 1948,
they accepted our Party's slogans and declared themselves against Chiang
Kai-shek and the United States and for unity with the Communist Party and
the Soviet Union.[2] We should pursue a policy
of uniting with these persons, while suitably criticizing their erroneous
views. In the future, when the Central People's Government is formed, it
will be necessary and beneficial to invite some of them to take part in the
work of the government. It is characteristic of these persons that they have
always been unwilling to have contact with the working people, are accustomed
to life in the big cities and hesitate to come to the Liberated Areas. Even
so, the social base they represent, the national bourgeoisie, has its importance
and should not be ignored. Therefore it is necessary to win them over. Our
estimate is that, after we achieve bigger victories and capture a number
of cities like Shenyang, Peiping and Tientsin and after it becomes perfectly
obvious that the Communist Party will win and that the Kuomintang will lose,
these persons may be willing to come to the Liberated Areas to work with
us if they are invited to take part in the Central People's Government.

3. We do not contemplate setting up the Central People's Government this
year, because the time is not yet ripe. After the bogus National Assembly
elects Chiang Kai-shek president[3] later in the
year and he is even more thoroughly discredited, after we score bigger victories
and expand our territories, preferably after the capture of one or two of
the country's largest cities, and after northeastern China, northern China,
Shantung, northern Kiangsu, Honan, Hupeh and Anhwei are all linked together
in one contiguous area, it will be entirely necessary to establish the Central
People's Government. The time will probably be in 1949. At present, we are
merging the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei area, the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan area
and the Pohai area in Shantung under the direction of a single Party committee
(the Northern China Bureau), a single government and a single military
command[4] (the inclusion of the Pohai area may
be delayed for a while). These three areas comprise the broad expanse north
of the Lunghai Railway, west of the Tientsin-Pukow Railway and the Pohai
Gulf, east of the Tatung-Puchow Railway and south of the Peiping-Suiynan
Railway. They are already linked together in one contiguous area with a total
population of fifty million, and their merger will probably be completed
soon. This will enable us to give strong support to the war on the southern
front and transfer large numbers of cadres to the new Liberated Areas. The
leading centre of the merged area will be at
Shihchiachuang.[5] The Central Committee is also
preparing to move to northern China, and its Working Committee will merge
with it.

4. Our troops on the southern front have all had rest and consolidation from
December to February; these troops comprise the 9 brigades of the Shantung
Army, 7 brigades of the Northern Kiangsu Army, 21 brigades of the army in
the area between the Yellow and Huai Rivers, 10 brigades of the army in the
Honan-Hupoh-Shensi area, 19 brigades of the army in the area between the
Yangtse, Huai and Han Rivers, 12 brigades of the army in northwestern China
and 12 brigades of the army in southern Shansi and northern Honan. The only
exception was the main force of the army under Liu Po-cheng and Teng Hsiao-ping
in the area between the Yangtse, Huai and Han Rivers, which had had no rest
and consolidation because Pai Chunghsi concentrated his troops to attack
the Tapieh Mountains;[6] it was not until the end
of February that this force was able to send some of its units north of the
Huai River for rest and consolidation. That was our first period of rest
and consolidation on a large scale in the past twenty months of fighting.
During that period the methods we adopted were: pouring out grievances by
the masses (the wrongs done to the labouring people by the old society and
by the reactionaries), the three check-ups (on class origin, performance
of duty and will to fight) and mass training (officers teaching soldiers,
soldiers teaching officers and soldiers teaching each other). By these methods
we developed high revolutionary enthusiasm among the commanders and fighters
of the whole army; reformed or weeded out the landlords, rich peasants and
bad elements found in some army units; heightened discipline; clearly explained
various policies in the land reform and the policies concerning industry
and commerce and the intellectuals; developed the democratic style of work
in the army; and raised the level of our military technique and tactics.
As a result, our army has greatly enhanced its combat effectiveness. Except
for that part of the army under Liu Po-cheng and Teng Hsiao-ping, which is
still having rest and consolidation, all our armies in succession have started
new military operations since late February or early March and in two weeks
have wiped out 9 enemy brigades. Of our troops on the northern front, comprising
the 46 brigades of the army in the Northeast, 18 brigades of the army in
the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei area and 2 brigades of the army in the Shansi-Suiyuan
area, the greater part fought through the winter, while a part was having
rest and consolidation. Taking advantage of the freezing of the Liaoho River,
our army in the Northeast fought for three months, wiped out 8 brigades and
won over 1 brigade, occupied Changwu, Faku, Hsinlitun, Liaoyang, Anshan,
Yingkow and Szepingkai, and recaptured Kirin. This army has now begun its
rest and consolidation. Afterwards, it is to attack either Changchun or the
enemy along the Peiping-Lianning Railway. The army in the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei
area has had more than a month of rest and consolidation and is moving towards
the Peiping-Suiyuan Railway. The army in the Shansi-Suiyuan area is comparatively
small, and its main task is to tie down Yen Hsi-shan's troops. To sum up,
we now have two fronts, the northern and the southern, with 10 armies, large
and small, comprising 50 columns of regular troops (each equivalent to a
Kuomintang reorganized division), or 156 brigades (each equivalent to a
Kuomintang reorganized brigade), each brigade (3 regiments) averaging about
8,000 men -- making a total of more than 1,322,000 men. In addition, there
are more than 1,168,000 irregulars (of whom 800,000 are combat troops), including
regional formations, regional troops, guerrilla detachments, rear-area military
organizations and military academies. Our entire army thus totals more than
2,491,000 men. But before July 1946 we had only 28 columns of regular troops,
or 118 brigades, each brigade (3 regiments) averaging less than 5,000 men
-- a total of 612,000 with the addition of more than 665,000 irregulars,
the grand total was 1,278,000. It can be seen that our army has grown. The
number of brigades has not increased much, but the number of men in each
brigade has increased very much. After twenty months of war, our combat
effectiveness has also increased greatly.

5. From July 1946 to the summer of 1947, the regular army of the Kuomintang
was composed of 93 divisions with 248 brigades; now it has designations for
104 divisions with 279 brigades. Its dispositions are as follows. On the
northern front there are 29 divisions with 93 brigades, totalling about 550,000
men (13 divisions with 45 brigades under Wei Li-huang in Shenyang, 11 divisions
with 33 brigades under Fu Tso-yi in Peiping, 5 divisions with 15 brigades
under Yen Hsi-shan in Taiyuan). On the southern front there are 66 divisions
with 158 brigades, totalling about 1,060,000 men (38 divisions with 86 brigades
under Ku Chu-tung in Chengchow, 14 divisions with 33 brigades under Pai Chung-hsi
in Kiukiang, and 14 divisions with 39 brigades under Hu Tsung-nan in Sian).
On the second line there are 9 divisions with 28 brigades, totalling about
196,000 men (4 divisions with 8 brigades in the northwestern area, i.e.,
the region west of Lanchow; 4 divisions with 10 brigades in the southwestern
area, i.e., Szechuan, Sikang, Yunnan and Kweichow Provinces; 8 brigades
in the southeastern area, i.e., the provinces south of the Yangtse
River; and 1 division with 2 brigades in Taiwan). The reason the number of
unit designations of the Kuomintang regular army has increased is that after
large numbers of its troops had been wiped out by our army and after they
had turned from the strategic offensive to the strategic defensive, the
Kuomintang felt its shortage of troops acutely and therefore upgraded or
reorganized many local armed units and puppet troops into its regular army.
Thus, on the northern front, 3 divisions with 14 brigades were added to Wei
Li-huang's command and 2 divisions with 6 brigades to Fu Tso-yi's command;
on the southern front, 6 divisions with 9 brigades were added to Ku Chu-tung's
command and 2 brigades to Hu Tsung-nan's. The total increase was 11 divisions,
or 31 brigades. As a result, the Kuomintang army now has 104 divisions instead
of 93, and 279 brigades instead of 248. But, in the first place, the 6 divisions
with 29 brigades which we wiped out in recent months (up to March 20) now
exist only in name; there has been no time to rebuild or replenish them,
and probably some can never be rebuilt or replenished. So, in fact, the
Kuomintang army now has only 98 divisions with 250 brigades, an increase
of only 5 divisional designations and 2 actual brigades since last summer.
In the second place, of the 250 brigades which actually exist, only 118 have
not received crushing blows from our army. All the remaining 132 brigades
have been wiped out by our army once, twice or even thrice and then been
replenished; or they have received one, two or even three crushing blows
from our army (in the case of a brigade, to wipe it out means to destroy
it completely or destroy the greater part, while to deal it a crushing blow
means to destroy one or more of its regiments but not its main strength);
and their morale and combat effectiveness are very low. Of the 118 brigades
which have not yet received crushing blows, some are composed of recruits
being trained at the second line and some are local armed units and puppet
troops which have been upgraded or reorganized; their combat effectiveness
is very low. In the third place, the Kuomintang armed forces have declined
in numbers also. Before July 1946 they had 2,000,000 regulars, 738,000
irregulars, 367,000 men in the special arms, 190,000 men in the navy and
air force and 1,010,000 men in rear-service establishments and military academies
-- a total of 4,305,000. In February 1948 they had 1,810,000 regulars, 560,000
irregulars, 280,000 men in the special arms, 190,000 men in the navy and
air force and 810,000 men in rear-service establishments and military academies
-- a total of 3,650,000. That means a decrease of 655,000 men. In the nineteen
months from July 1946 to January 1948, our army wiped out altogether 1,977,000
Kuomintang troops (the statistics for February and the first half of March
have not been compiled, but the number is roughly 180,000). In other words,
the Kuomintang has lost not only the more than 1,000,000 men it recruited
in the course of the war but also a large number of its original troops.
Under these circumstances, the Kuomintang has adopted a policy opposite to
ours, a policy not of bringing its brigades to full strength but of cutting
down the number of men in each brigade and increasing the number of brigade
designations. While in 1946 the average strength of a Kuomintang brigade
was approximately 8,000 men, at present it is only about 6,500. From now
on, the area taken by our army will daily expand, and the Kuomintang's sources
of troops and food supplies will daily contract; we estimate that by next
spring, after another full year's fighting, our army and the Kuomintang army
will be roughly equal in numbers. Our policy is to go ahead steadily and
strike sure blows, not to seek quick results; all we are trying to do is
to wipe out, on the average, about 8 brigades of the Kuomintang regular army
each month, or about 100 brigades a year. Actually, since last autumn this
number has been exceeded, and from now on it can be still further exceeded.
It should be possible to wipe out the entire Kuomintang army in about five
years (counting from July 1946).[7]

6. At present, there are two sectors on the southern and northern fronts
where the enemy still has a fairly large striking force and can wage offensive
campaigns, temporarily placing our troops there in a difficult position.
The first sector is in the Tapieh Mountains, where the enemy has approximately
14 brigades which can be used as a striking force. The second is north of
the Huai River, where the enemy has about 12 such brigades. In these two
sectors the Kuomintang troops still hold the initiative (they hold the initiative
in the sector north of the Huai River because we have moved 9 of our crack
brigades to the north of the Yellow River for rest and consolidation, in
preparation for use on other sectors). The enemy troops in all other theatres
of war are in a passive position and are taking a beating. The theatres of
war where the situation is particularly favourable to us are the Northeast,
Shantung, the Northwest, northern Kiangsu, the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei area,
the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan area and the vast area west of the
Chengchow-Hankow Railway, north of the Yangtse and south of the Yellow River.

NOTES


1. See "The Present Situation and Our Tasks", Note 9, p.
176 of this volume.

2. In October 1947 the reactionary Kuomintang government
ordered the dissolution of the Democratic League. Under pressure from the
Kuomintang reactionaries, some wavering members of the Democratic League
dissolved it and ceased activities.

Other democratic parties, also being persecuted by the Kuomintang reactionaries,
were then unable to function openly in the Kuomintang areas. In January 1948
Shen Chun-ju and other leaders of the Democratic League at a meeting in Hongkong
decided to re-establish the League's leading body and resume the League's
activities. In the same month Li Chi-shen and other members of the democratic
wing of the Kuomintang established the Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang
in Hongkong. Both these bodies agreed with the position of the Communist
Party of China about the current situation and issued declarations calling
for unity with the Communist Party and other democratic parties, the overthrow
of the Chiang Kai-shek dictatorship and opposition to U.S. armed intervention
in China's internal affairs. The wavering members of the Democratic League
also accepted these slogans at that time.

3. The Kuomintang reactionaries held a bogus "National
Assembly" in Nanking from March 29 to May 1, 1948, at which Chiang Kai-shek
and Li Tsung-jen were "elected" "president" and "vice-president".

4. In May 1948 the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei Liberated Area and
the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Liberated Area were merged, and the Northern
China Joint Administrative Council and the Northern China Military Area were
established. In August of the same year the Northern China Joint Administrative
Council was renamed the Northern China People's Government.

5. Shihchiachuang in western Hopei Province was the first
major city in northern China liberated by the People's Liberation Army.

6. In December 1947 Pai Chung-hsi began attacking the Tapieh
mountain area with 33 brigades.

7. At that time the estimate was that the entire Kuomintang
army would be wiped out in about five years. The estimated time was later
reduced to about three and a half years. See "The Momentous Change in China's
Military Situation", pp. 287-88 of this volume. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Speech at a Conference of Cadres in the Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area 







SPEECH AT A CONFERENCE OF CADRES IN THE SHANSI-SUIYUAN LIBERATED AREA



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

SPEECH AT A CONFERENCE OF CADRES IN THE SHANSI-SUIYUAN LIBERATED
  AREA


April 1, 1948


Comrades! Today I wish to speak chiefly on some problems relating to our
work in the Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area and also on some problems relating
to our work in the country as a whole.
I

In my opinion, the work of land reform and of Party consolidation carried
out during the past year in the area led by the Shansi-Suiyuan Sub-Bureau
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China has been successful.

This can be viewed from two aspects. On the one hand, the Shansi-Suiyuan
Party organization has combated Right deviations, initiated mass struggles
and has completed, or is completing, the land reform and the Party consolidation
among two million several hundred thousand people out of the area's total
population of over three million. On the other hand, it has also corrected
several "Left" deviations which occurred in these campaigns and has thereby
put its entire work on the path of sound development. It is from these two
aspects that I consider the work of land reform and of Party consolidation
in the Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area to have been successful.

"From now on," the people of the Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area are saying,
"no one will ever again dare to be feudalist, to bully others or indulge
in corruption." That is their conclusion about our work of land reform and
Party consolidation. When they say, "No one will ever again dare to be
feudalist," they mean that we have led them in initiating struggles through
which the system of feudal exploitation in the new Liberated Areas and its
remnants in the old and semi-old Liberated Areas have been or are being
destroyed. When they say, "No one will ever again dare to bully others or
indulge in corruption," they refer to the serious phenomenon of a certain
degree of impurity in the class composition and style of work in our Party
and government organizations that existed in the past. A number of bad elements
had sneaked into the Party and government organizations; a number of individuals
had developed a bureaucratic style of work, abused their power and bullied
the people, employed methods of coercion and commandism to get things done,
thereby arousing discontent among the masses, or had indulged in corruption
or encroached upon the interests of the masses. However, after a year's work
of land reform and Party consolidation, these conditions have been fundamentally
changed.

One of the comrades present told me, "We have rid ourselves of what would
have proved fatal to us. We have acquired things we never had before." By
"fatal" he meant the serious phenomenon of impurity in the class composition
and style of work in Party and government organizations and the resultant
discontent among the masses. This phenomenon has now been fundamentally
eliminated. By "things we never had before but have now acquired" he meant
the poor peasant leagues, the new peasant associations, the district and
village people's representative conferences and the new atmosphere that prevails
in the countryside as a result of the work of land reform and Party
consolidation.

These comments, I think, give a true picture of how matters stand.

Such is the great success of the work of land reform and Party consolidation
in the Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area. This is the first aspect of the success.
It was on this basis that during the past year the Shansi-Suiyuan Party
organization was able to perform war services on an immense scale in support
of the great People's War of Liberation. Without our successful work in land
reform and Party consolidation, it would have been difficult to fulfil such
immense military tasks.

On the other hand, the Shansi-Suiyuan Party organization has corrected several
"Left" deviations which occurred in the course of its work. There were three
main deviations of this kind. First, in a number of places, in the process
of identifying class status a number of working people were wrongly classified
as landlords or rich peasants, although they engaged in no feudal exploitation
or in only a little exploitation; the scope of attack was thus mistakenly
broadened; and a most important strategic principle was forgotten, namely,
that in the land reform we can and must unite about 92 per cent of the households
or about 90 per cent of the population in the villages, in other words, unite
all the rural working people to establish a united front against the feudal
system. Now this deviation has been corrected. Consequently, people are very
much reassured and the revolutionary united front has been consolidated.
Secondly, in the land reform work, the industrial and commercial enterprises
of landlords and rich peasants were encroached upon; in the struggle to uncover
counter-revolution in the economic field, the prescribed scope of investigation
was overstepped; and in tax policy, industry and commerce were harmed. These
were the "Left" deviations in dealing with industry and commerce. Now they,
too, have been corrected, and so industry and commerce can recover and develop.
Thirdly, in the fierce struggles in the land reform of the past year, the
Shansi-Suiyuan Party organization failed to adhere unequivocally to the Party's
policy of strictly forbidding beating and killing without discrimination.
As a result, in certain places some landlords and rich peasants were needlessly
put to death, and the bad elements in the rural areas were able to exploit
the situation to take revenge and foully murdered a number of working people.
We consider it absolutely necessary and proper to sentence to death, through
the people's courts and the democratic governments, those major criminals
who have actively and desperately opposed the people's democratic revolution
and sabotaged the land reform, that is, the most heinous counter-revolutionaries
and local tyrants. If this were not done, democratic order could not be
established. We must, however, forbid the killing without discrimination
of ordinary personnel on the Kuomintang side, the common run of landlords
and rich peasants and lesser offenders. Moreover, in trying criminals, a
people's court or democratic government must not use physical violence.
Deviations of this kind which occurred in the past year in the Shansi-Suiyuan
area have likewise been corrected.

Now that all these deviations have been corrected in earnest, we can say
on good evidence that the entire work under the leadership of the Shansi-Suiyuan
Sub-Bureau of the Central Committee is on the path of sound development.

The most fundamental method of work which all Communists must firmly bear
in mind is to determine our working policies according to actual conditions.
When we study the causes of the mistakes we have made, we find that they
all arose because we departed from the actual situation at a given time and
place and were subjective in our working policies. This should be a lesson
for all comrades.

As for the consolidation of Party organizations at the primary level, you
have drawn upon the experience of Pingshan County in the Shansi-Chahar-Hopei
Liberated Area in accordance with the Central Committee's directive on the
work of land reform and Party consolidation in the old and semi-old Liberated
Areas;[1] that is, you have invited activists from
the non-Party masses to participate in Party branch meetings, unfolded criticism
and self-criticism in order to remove the impurities in the class composition
and style of work in Party organizations and enabled the Party to forge closer
ties with the masses. This will enable you to accomplish the whole job of
consolidating Party organizations in a sound way.

Those Party members and cadres who have made mistakes but can still be educated
and are different from the incorrigibles should all be educated and not
abandoned, whatever their class origin. It is likewise correct that you have
carried out, or are carrying out, this policy.

In the struggle against the feudal system, the experience of setting up people's
representative conferences at district and village (or township) levels on
the basis of the poor peasant leagues and peasant associations is extremely
valuable. The only true people's representative conference is one based on
the will of really broad masses of the people. It is now possible for such
people's representative conferences to emerge in all the Liberated Areas.
Such a conference, once set up, should become the local organ of people's
power, and all due authority must be vested in it and in the government council
it elects. The poor peasant league and the peasant association will then
become its helping hands. At one time we thought of setting up people's
representative conferences in the rural districts only after the land reform
had been completed in the main. Now that your own experience and that of
other Liberated Areas have proved that it is possible and necessary to set
up these people's representative conferences and their elected government
councils at the district and village levels in the midst of the struggle
for the land reform, that is the way you should continue to do it. All the
Liberated Areas should do likewise. After the conferences have been generally
set up at district and village levels, they can be established at the county
level. When people's representative conferences are established up to the
county level, it will be easy to set them up at higher levels. In people's
representative conferences at various levels we must, wherever possible,
include representatives of all democratic strata -- workers, peasants,
independent craftsmen, professionals, intellectuals, national bourgeois
industrialists and merchants and enlightened gentry. Of course, it should
not be done mechanically; we should distinguish between rural areas with
towns and rural areas without towns, among towns of different sizes and between
cities and rural areas, so as to fulfil naturally, and not mechanically,
the task of uniting all democratic strata.

The great mass struggles for land reform and Party consolidation have taught
and brought to the fore tens of thousands of activists and cadres. They are
linked with the masses and will be a most precious asset of the People's
Republic of China. Henceforth, we should strengthen their education so that
they will make constant progress in their work. Meanwhile they should be
warned not to let success and commendation make them conceited and
self-satisfied.

In view of all this, in view of the successes in these various respects,
we can say that the Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area is now more consolidated
than ever before. Other Liberated Areas which have worked along the same
lines have likewise become consolidated.

II

As far as leadership is concerned, the successes of the Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated
Area are due mainly to the following causes:

  1. Helped by the work done by Comrade Kang Sheng in the administrative village
  of Hochiapo in Linhsien County last spring and summer, the Shansi-Suiyuan
  Sub-Bureau held a conference of secretaries of prefectural Party committees
  last June. The conference criticized Right deviations which had existed in
  past work, thoroughly exposed the serious phenomenon of various departures
  from the Party line and decided on the policy of starting the land reform
  and Party consolidation in earnest. In the main, the conference was a success.
  Without it, land reform and Party consolidation on such a scale could not
  have been successful. The shortcomings of the conference were that it failed
  to decide on working policies varying with the different conditions in the
  old, semi-old and new Liberated Areas; that on the question of identifying
  class status it adopted an ultra-Left policy; that on the question of how
  to destroy the feudal system it laid too much stress on unearthing the landlords'
  hidden property; and that on the question of dealing with the demands of
  the masses it failed to make a sober analysis and raised the sweeping slogan,
  "Do everything as the masses want it done". With respect to the latter point,
  which is a question of the Party's relationship with the masses, the Party
  must lead the masses to carry out all their correct ideas in the light of
  the circumstances and educate them to correct any wrong ideas they may entertain.
  The conference only emphasized that the Party should carry out the ideas
  of the masses but neglected to point out that the Party should also educate
  and lead the masses, and thus eventually exerted a wrong influence on the
  comrades in some districts and aggravated their mistakes of tailism.


  2. In January this year the Shansi-Suiyuan Sub-Bureau took proper measures
  to correct the "Left" deviations. These measures were carried out after the
  comrades of the Sub-Bureau returned from the December meeting of the Central
  Committee.[2] For this purpose the Sub-Bureau issued
  a five-point directive.[3] These corrective measures
  were so well adapted to the wishes of the masses and were carried out with
  such speed and thoroughness that almost all the "Left" deviations were rectified
  within a short time.

III

The line of leadership of the Shansi-Suiyuan Party organization during the
War of Resistance Against Japan was basically correct. This was shown in
the reduction of rent and interest; in the substantial restoration and
development of agricultural production, home spinning and weaving, war industries
and some light industries; in the laying of the foundation of Party
organizations; and in the establishment of a democratic government and of
people's armed forces numbering nearly a hundred thousand men. All this work
formed the basis on which we victoriously fought the War of Resistance and
repelled the attacks of Yen Hsi-shan and other reactionaries. Of course,
the Party and the government during that period had their shortcomings; as
is now entirely clear to us all, these consisted in a certain degree of impurity
in class composition and style of work, which had undesirable effects on
our work. But, taken as a whole, the work during the War of Resistance was
fruitful. We were thus provided with favourable conditions for defeating
Chiang Kai-shek's counter-revolutionary attacks after the Japanese surrender.
The shortcomings or mistakes of the leadership of the Shansi-Suiyuan Party
organization during the War of Resistance consisted mainly in the failure
to rely on the broadest masses to overcome a certain degree of impurity in
class composition and style of work in Party and government organizations
and the undesirable effect it had on the work. That task is left for you
to fulfil now. One reason for that situation was that certain leading comrades
in Shansi and Suiyuan then lacked understanding of a number of the actual
conditions concerning the Party and the masses. This should also be a lesson
to the comrades.
IV

The task before the Shansi-Suiyuan Party organization is to make the greatest
effort to complete the land reform and Party consolidation, to continue and
support the People's War of Liberation, to refrain from any further increase
in the people's burden but appropriately to lighten it, and to restore and
develop production. You are now holding a conference on production. For the
next few years the aim of restoring and developing production will be to
improve the people's livelihood on the one hand and to support the People's
War of Liberation on the other. You have a widespread agriculture and handicraft
industry as well as some light and heavy industries using machinery. I hope
you will do a good job in leading these productive enterprises, otherwise
you cannot be called good Marxists. In agriculture, those labour-exchange
teams and co-operatives, [4] which were in the
grip of bureaucrats and which harmed the people instead of benefiting them,
have all collapsed. This is entirely understandable and should occasion no
regret. Your task is carefully to preserve and develop those labour-exchange
teams, co-operatives and other necessary economic organizations that have
won mass support and to spread them everywhere.
V

The national situation is a matter of concern for our comrades. Following
the Party's National Land Conference last year, which resolved to adopt a
new policy and unfold land reform and Party consolidation, large conferences
of cadres were held in practically all the Liberated Areas on Party consolidation
and land reform. At these conferences, Rightist ideas existing in the Party
were criticized, and the serious phenomenon of a certain degree of impurity
in the Party's class composition and style of work was exposed. Afterwards,
appropriate measures were taken in many areas, and the "Left" deviations
have been or are being corrected. Thus, confronted with the new political
situation and new political tasks, our Party has been able to set its work
in the whole country on the path of sound development. In the last few months
almost all the People's Liberation Army has made use of the intervals between
battles for large-scale training and consolidation. This has been carried
out in a fully guided, orderly and democratic way. It has therefore aroused
the revolutionary fervour of the great masses of commanders and fighters,
enabled them clearly to comprehend the aim of the war, eliminated certain
incorrect ideological tendencies and undesirable manifestations in the army,
educated the cadres and fighters and greatly enhanced the combat effectiveness
of the army. From now on, we must continue to carry on this new type of
ideological education movement in the army, a movement which has a democratic
and mass character. You can see clearly that neither the Party consolidation,
nor the ideological education in the army, nor the land reform, all of which
we have accomplished and all of which have great historic significance, could
be undertaken by our enemy, the Kuomintang. On our part, we have been very
earnest in correcting our own shortcomings; we have united the Party and
army virtually as one man and forged close ties between them and the masses
of the people; we are effectively carrying out all the policies and tactics
formulated by the Central Committee of our Party and are successfully waging
the People's War of Liberation. With our enemy, everything is just the opposite.
They are so corrupt, so torn by ever-increasing and irreconcilable internal
quarrels, so spurned by the people and utterly isolated and so frequently
defeated in battle that their doom is inevitable. This is the whole situation
of revolution versus counter-revolution in China.

In this situation, all comrades must firmly grasp the general line of the
Party, that is, the line of the new-democratic revolution. The new-democratic
revolution is not any other revolution, but can only be and must be a revolution
against imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism waged by the broad
masses of the people under the leadership of the proletariat. This means
that leadership in this revolution can and must be assumed by no class and
party other than the proletariat and the Communist Party of China. This means
that the united front of those joining this revolution is very broad, embracing
the workers, peasants, independent craftsmen, professionals, intellectuals,
the national bourgeoisie and the section of the enlightened gentry which
has broken away from the landlord class. All these are what we refer to as
the broad masses of the people. The state and the government to be founded
by the broad masses of the people will be the People's Republic of China
and the democratic coalition government of the alliance of all democratic
classes under the leadership of the proletariat. The enemies to be overthrown
in this revolution can only be and must be imperialism, feudalism and
bureaucrat-capitalism. The concentrated expression of all these enemies is
the reactionary regime of Chiang Kai-shek's Kuomintang.

Feudalism is the ally of imperialism and bureaucrat-capitalism and the foundation
of their rule. Therefore, the reform of the land system is the main content
of China's new-democratic revolution. The general line in the land reform
is to rely on the poor peasants, unite with the middle peasants, abolish
the system of feudal exploitation step by step and in a discriminating way,
and develop agricultural production. The basic force to be relied upon in
the land reform can only be and must be the poor peasants. Together with
the farm labourers, they make up about 70 per cent of China's rural population.
The main and immediate task of the land reform is to satisfy the demands
of the masses of poor peasants and farm labourers. In the land reform it
is necessary to unite with the middle peasants; the poor peasants and the
farm labourers must form a solid united front with the middle peasants, who
account for about 20 per cent of the rural population. Otherwise, the poor
peasants and farm labourers will find themselves isolated and the land reform
will fail. One of the tasks in the land reform is to satisfy the demands
of certain middle peasants. A section of the middle peasants must be allowed
to keep some land over and above the average obtained by the poor peasants.
We support the peasants' demand for equal distribution of land in order to
help arouse the broad masses of peasants speedily to abolish the system of
landownership by the feudal landlord class, but we do not advocate absolute
equalitarianism. Whoever advocates absolute equalitarianism is wrong. There
is a kind of thinking now current in the countryside which undermines industry
and commerce and advocates absolute equalitarianism in land distribution.
Such thinking is reactionary, backward and retrogressive in nature. We must
criticize it. The target of the land reform is only and must be the system
of feudal exploitation by the landlord class and by the old-type rich peasants,
and there should be no encroachment either upon the national bourgeoisie
or upon the industrial and commercial enterprises run by the landlords and
rich peasants. In particular, care must be taken not to encroach upon the
interests of the middle peasants, independent craftsmen, professionals and
new rich peasants, all of whom engage in little or no exploitation. The aim
of the land reform is to abolish the system of feudal exploitation, that
is, to eliminate the feudal landlords as a class, not as individuals. Therefore
a landlord must receive the same allotment of land and property as does a
peasant and must be made to learn productive labour and join the ranks of
the nation's economic life. Except for the most heinous counter-revolutionaries
and local tyrants, who have incurred the bitter hatred of the broad masses,
who have been proved guilty and who therefore may and ought to be punished,
a policy of leniency must be applied to all, and any beating or killing without
discrimination must be forbidden. The system of feudal exploitation should
be abolished step by step, that is, in a tactical way. In launching the struggle
we must determine our tactics according to the circumstances and the degree
to which the peasant masses are awakened and organized. We must not attempt
to wipe out overnight the whole system of feudal exploitation. In accordance
with the actual conditions of the system of feudal exploitation in China's
villages, the total scope of attack in the land reform should generally not
exceed about 8 per cent of the rural households or about 10 per cent of the
rural population. In the old and semi-old Liberated Areas the percentage
should be even smaller. It is dangerous to depart from actual conditions
and mistakenly enlarge the scope of attack. In the new Liberated Areas, moreover,
it is necessary to distinguish between different places and different stages.
By distinguishing between places we mean that in those places which we can
hold securely we should concentrate our efforts on carrying out appropriate
land reform work that accords with the wishes of the local masses, while
in those places which for the time being are difficult to hold securely,
until there is a change in the situation we should not be in a hurry to start
the land reform but should confine ourselves to activities which are feasible
and beneficial to the masses in the present circumstances. By distinguishing
between stages we mean that in places recently occupied by the People's
Liberation Army we should put forward and carry out the tactics of neutralizing
the rich peasants, of neutralizing the middle and small landlords, and thus
narrow the scope of the attack so as to destroy only the reactionary Kuomintang
armed forces and deal blows at the bad gentry and local tyrants. We should
concentrate all our efforts on accomplishing this task as the first stage
of work in the new Liberated Areas. We should then advance step by step to
the stage of total abolition of the feudal system, in accordance with the
rising level of political consciousness and organization of the masses. In
the new Liberated Areas we should distribute movable property and land only
when conditions are relatively secure and the overwhelming majority of the
masses have been fully roused to action; to act otherwise would be adventurist
and undependable and would do harm rather than good. In the new Liberated
Areas the experience gained during the War of Resistance must be fully utilized.
By abolishing feudalism in a discriminating way we mean that we should
distinguish between landlords and rich peasants, among big, middle and small
landlords and between those landlords and rich peasants who are local tyrants
and those who are not, and that, subject to the major premise of the equal
distribution of land and the abolition of the feudal system, we should not
decide on and give the same treatment to them all, but should differentiate
and vary the treatment according to varying conditions. When we do this,
people will see that our work is completely reasonable. The development of
agricultural production is the immediate aim of the land reform. Only by
abolishing the feudal system can the conditions for such development be created.
In every area, as soon as feudalism is wiped out and the land reform is
completed, the Party and the democratic government must put forward the task
of restoring and developing agricultural production, transfer all available
forces in the countryside to this task, organize cooperation and mutual aid,
improve agricultural technique, promote seed selection and build irrigation
works -- all to ensure increased production. Party organizations in the rural
areas must devote the greatest energy to restoring and developing agricultural
production and also industrial production in small towns. In order to speed
up this restoration and development, we must do our utmost, in the course
of our struggle for the abolition of the feudal system, to preserve all useful
means of production and of livelihood, take resolute measures against anyone's
destroying or wasting them, oppose extravagant eating and drinking and pay
attention to thrift and economy. In order to develop agricultural production,
we must advise the peasants to organize, voluntarily and step by step, the
various types of producers' and consumers' co-operatives based on private
ownership, which are permissible under present economic conditions. The abolition
of the feudal system and the development of agricultural production will
lay the foundation for the development of industrial production and the
transformation of an agricultural country into an industrial one. This is
the ultimate goal of the new-democratic revolution.

You comrades know that our Party has laid down the general line and general
policy of the Chinese revolution as well as various specific lines for work
and specific policies. However, while many comrades remember our Party's
specific lines for work and specific policies, they often forget its general
line and general policy. If we actually forget the Party's general line and
general policy, then we shall be blind, half-baked, muddle-headed
revolutionaries, and when we carry out a specific line for work and a specific
policy, we shall lose our bearings and vacillate now to the left and now
to the right, and the work will suffer.

Let me repeat: 

The revolution against imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism waged
by the broad masses of the people under the leadership of the proletariat
-- this is China's new-democratic revolution, and this is the general line
and general policy of the Communist Party of China at the present stage of
history.

To rely on the poor peasants, unite with the middle peasants, abolish the
system of feudal exploitation step by step and in a discriminating way, and
develop agricultural production -- this is the general line and general policy
of the Communist Party of China in the work of land reform during the period
of the new-democratic revolution.

NOTES

1. Issued on February 1948, this directive of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China summed up the experience of work
in the land reform and Party consolidation in various Liberated Areas, laid
down a series of policies and methods for the land reform and Party consolidation
and stressed the correction of "Left" deviations which had occurred during
the execution of these two tasks in certain areas.

2. See the introductory note to "The Present Situation
and Our Tasks", pp. 158-59 of this volume.

3. This refers to the "Directive on Correcting Mistakes
in the Determination of Class Status and on Uniting with the Middle Peasants"
issued by the Shansi-Suiyuan Sub-Bureau of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China on January 13, 1948. The directive is divided into five sections.
The following are its main points: 

  (1) Because the criteria for class identification had not been well-defined,
  quite a few persons were wrongly classified as bankrupt landlords or rich
  peasants on the spontaneous demands of the peasants, and in particular,
  well-to-do middle peasants were wrongly classified as rich peasants. This
  had an adverse effect on the effort to unite with the middle peasants and
  was wrong.


  (2) Proper measures were to be taken resolutely to persuade the peasants
  to correct these mistakes. Suitable restitution was to be made of property
  that had been taken.


  (3) It was to be explained to the peasants and the cadres that the only criterion
  in class identification should be the relationship of exploitation. Mistakes
  in determining class status were to be corrected.


  (4) The principle of relying on poor peasants and farm labourers and uniting
  with middle peasants had to be grasped. The middle peasants were to be enabled
  to have one-third of the members of the peasant representative conferences
  and of the leading bodies of the peasant associations, and consideration
  was to be given to their interests in taxation and in the land reform.


  (5) Responsible cadres were to make a serious study of the Party's class
  policy for the rural areas. Mistakes that departed from the Party's policies
  concerning the middle peasants had to be corrected, they had to be corrected
  through the masses.


Simultaneously with the issuance of this five-point directive, the Shansi-Suiyuan
Sub-Bureau issued the "Directive on the Protection of Industry and Commerce"
to correct the deviations of encroaching on industry and commerce during
the land reform) .

4. This refers to the supply and marketing co-operatives.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## A Talk to the Editorial Staff of the Shansi-Suiyuan Daily







A TALK TO THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE SHANSI-SUIYUAN DAILY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

A TALK TO THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE SHANSI-SUIYUAN
  DAILY


April 2, 1948


Our policy must be made known not only to the leaders and to the cadres but
also to the broad masses. Questions concerning policy should as a rule be
given publicity in the Party papers or periodicals. We are now carrying out
the reform of the land system. The policies on land reform should be published
in the papers and broadcast on the radio so that the broad masses all know
them. Once the masses know the truth and have a common aim, they will work
together with one heart. This is like fighting a battle; to win a battle
the fighters as well as the officers must be of one heart. After the troops
in northern Shensi went through training and consolidation and poured out
their grievances against the old social order, the fighters heightened their
political consciousness and became clear on why they were fighting and how
they should fight; every one of them rolled up his sleeves for battle, their
morale was very high and as soon as they went into action they won a victory.
When the masses are of one heart, everything becomes easy. A basic principle
of Marxism-Leninism is to enable the masses to know their own interests and
unite to fight for their own interests. The role and power of the newspapers
consists in their ability to bring the Party programme, the Party line, the
Party's general and specific policies, its tasks and methods of work before
the masses in the quickest and most extensive way.

There are people in our leading organs in some places who think that it is
enough for the leaders alone to know the Party's policies and that there
is no need to let the masses know them. This is one of the basic reasons
why some of our work cannot be done well. For over twenty years our Party
has carried on mass work every day, and for the past dozen years it has talked
about the mass line every day. We have always maintained that the revolution
must rely on the masses of the people, on everybody's taking a hand, and
have opposed relying merely on a few persons issuing orders. The mass line,
however, is still not being thoroughly carried out in the work of some comrades;
they still rely solely on a handful of people working coolly and quietly
by themselves. One reason is that, whatever they do, they are always reluctant
to explain it to the people they lead and that they do not understand why
or how to give play to the initiative and creative energy of those they lead.
Subjectively, they too want everyone to take a hand in the work, but they
do not let other people know what is to be done or how to do it. That being
the case, how can everyone be expected to get moving and how can anything
be done well? To solve this problem the basic thing is, of course, to carry
out ideological education on the mass line, but at the same time we must
teach these comrades many concrete methods of work. One such method is to
make full use of the newspapers. To run a newspaper well, to make it interesting
and absorbing, to give correct publicity in the newspapers to the Party's
general and specific policies and to strengthen the Party's ties with the
masses through the newspapers -- this is an important question of principle
in our Party's work which is not to be taken lightly.

You comrades are newspapermen. Your job is to educate the masses, to enable
the masses to know their own interests, their own tasks and the Party's general
and specific policies. Running a newspaper is like all other work, it must
be done conscientiously if it is to be done well, if it is to be lively.
With our newspapers, too, we must rely on everybody, on the masses of the
people, on the whole Party to run them, not merely on a few persons working
behind closed doors. Our papers talk about the mass line every day, yet
frequently the mass line is not carried out in the work of the newspaper
office itself. For instance, misprints often crop up in the papers simply
because their elimination has not been tackled as a serious job. If we apply
the method of the mass line, then when misprints appear, we should assemble
the entire staff of the paper to discuss nothing but this matter, tell them
clearly what the mistakes are, explain why they occur and how they can be
got rid of and ask everyone to give the matter serious attention. After this
has been done three times, or five times, such mistakes can certainly be
overcome. This is true of small matters, and of big matters, too.

To be good at translating the Party's policy into action of the masses, to
be good at getting not only the leading cadres but also the broad masses
to understand and master every movement and every struggle we launch -- this
is an art of Marxist-Leninist leadership. It is also the dividing line that
determines whether or not we make mistakes in our work. If we tried to go
on the offensive when the masses are not yet awakened, that would be adventurism.
If we insisted on leading the masses to do anything against their will, we
would certainly fail. If we did not advance when the masses demand advance,
that would be Right opportunism. Chen Tu-hsiu's opportunist error consisted
precisely in lagging behind the awakening of the masses, being unable to
lead the masses forward and even opposing their forward march. There are
many comrades who still don't understand these questions. Our papers should
propagate these ideas well so that everyone can understand them.

To teach the masses, newspaper workers should first of all learn from the
masses. You comrades are all intellectuals. Intellectuals are often ignorant
and often have little or no experience in practical matters. You can't quite
understand the pamphlet "How to Analyse the Classes in the Rural Areas"
[1] issued in 1933; on this point, the peasants
are more than a match for you, for they understand it fully as soon as they
are told about it. Over 180 peasants in two districts of Kuohsien County
met for five days and settled many problems concerning the distribution of
land. If your editorial department were to discuss those problems, I am afraid
you would discuss them for two weeks without settling them. The reason is
quite simple; you do not understand those problems. To change from lack of
understanding to understanding, one must do things and see things; that is
learning. Comrades working on the newspapers should go out by turns to take
part in mass work, in land reform work for a time; that is very necessary.
When not going out to participate in mass work, you should hear a great deal
and read a great deal about the mass movements and devote time and effort
to the study of such material. Our slogan in training troops is, "Officers
teach soldiers, soldiers teach officers and soldiers teach each other". The
fighters have a lot of practical combat experience. The officers should learn
from the fighters, and when they have made other people's experience their
own, they will become more capable. Comrades working on the newspapers, too,
should constantly study the material coming from below, gradually enrich
their practical knowledge and become experienced. Only thus will you be able
to do your work well, will you be able to shoulder your task of educating
the masses.

The Shansi-Suiyuan Daily made very great progress following the
conference of secretaries of prefectural Party committees last June. Then
the paper was rich in content, sharp, pungent and vigorous; it reflected
the great mass struggles, it spoke for the masses. I liked reading it very
much. But since January this year, when we began to correct "Left" deviations,
your paper seems to have lost some of its spirit; it is not clear-cut enough,
not pungent enough, has become less informative and does not have much appeal
for the reader. Now you are examining your work and summing up your experience;
this is very good. When you have summed up your experience in combating Right
and "Left" deviations and become more clear-headed, your work will improve.

The struggle against Right deviations waged by the Shansi-Suiyuan Daily
from last June on was completely correct. In that struggle you did a
very conscientious job and fully reflected the actual situation in the mass
movement. You made comments, in the form of editorial notes, on the viewpoints
and materials which you regarded as wrong. There were shortcomings too in
some of your later comments, but the conscientious spirit was good. Your
shortcomings lay chiefly in drawing the bow-string much too tight. If a
bow-string is too taut, it will snap. The ancients said, "The principle of
Kings Wen and Wu was to alternate tension with
relaxation."[2] Now "relax" a bit and the comrades
will become more clear-headed. You achieved successes in your work, but there
were also shortcomings, mainly "Left" deviations. Now you are making an over-all
summing-up and, after correcting the "Left" deviations, you will achieve
greater successes.

When we are correcting deviations, some people look on the work of the past
as utterly fruitless and all wrong. That is not right. These people fail
to see that the Party has led a huge number of peasants to obtain land,
overthrown feudalism, consolidated the Party organizations and improved the
cadres' style of work, and that now it has also corrected the "Left" deviations
and educated the cadres and masses. Are all these not great achievements?
We should be analytical with regard to our work and the undertakings of the
masses, and should not negate everything. In the past "Left" deviations arose
because people had no experience. Without experience it is hard to avoid
mistakes. From inexperience to experience, one must go through a process.
Through the struggles against the Right and "Left" deviations in the short
period since June last year, people have come to understand what struggle
against Right deviations means and what struggle against "Left" deviations
means. Without this process, people would not understand.

After you have examined your work and summed up your experience, I am sure
that your paper will be run even better. You must retain the former merits
of your paper -- it should be sharp, pungent and clear-cut, and it should
be run conscientiously. We must firmly uphold the truth, and truth requires
a clear-cut stand. We Communists have always disdained to conceal our views.
Newspapers run by our Party and all the propaganda work of our Party should
be vivid, clear-cut and sharp and should never mutter and mumble. That is
the militant style proper to us, the revolutionary proletariat. Since we
want to teach the people to know the truth and arouse them to fight for their
own emancipation, we need this militant style. A blunt knife draws no blood.

NOTES


1. See "How to Analyse the Classes in the Rural Areas",
Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. I.

2. From the Book of Rites, "Miscellaneous Records",
Part II. "Kings Wen and Wu could not keep a bow in permanent tension without
relaxation. Nor would they leave it in a permanent state of relaxation without
tension. The principle of Kings Wen and Wu was to alternate tension with
relaxation." Wen and Wu were the first two kings of the Chou Dynasty (12th-
3rd century B.C.). 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Telegram to the Headquarters of the Loyang Front After the Recapture of the City







TELEGRAM TO THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE LOYANG FRONT AFTER THE RECAPTURE
  OF THE CITY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

TELEGRAM TO THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE LOYANG FRONT AFTER THE RECAPTURE OF
  THE CITY


April 8, 1948

[This telegram was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China. Since its contents were applicable not only
to Loyang but, in the main, to all newly liberated cities, it was sent
concurrently to the leading comrades on other fronts and in other
areas.]
  

Loyang is now recaptured [1] and can probably be
securely held. In our urban policy, pay attention to the following points:


1. Be very prudent in the liquidation of the organs of Kuomintang rule, arrest
only the chief reactionaries and do not involve too many persons.

2. Set a clear line of demarcation in defining bureaucrat-capital;
do not designate as bureaucrat-capital and do not confiscate all the industrial
and commercial enterprises run by Kuomintang members. The principle should
be laid down that the democratic government should take over and operate
all industrial and commercial enterprises which are definitely verified as
having been run by the Kuomintang's central, provincial, county or municipal
governments, that is, enterprises operated wholly by official bodies. But
if, for the time being, the democratic government is not yet ready to take
them over or is unable to do so, the individuals previously in charge should
be temporarily entrusted with the responsibility of management so that these
enterprises can function as usual until the democratic government appoints
people to take over. The workers and technicians in these industrial and
commercial enterprises should be organized to participate in management,
and their competence should be trusted. If the Kuomintang personnel have
fled and the enterprise has suspended operations, a management committee
of representatives elected by the workers and technicians should be set up,
pending the appointment by the democratic government of managers and directors
who will manage it together with the workers. Enterprises run by notorious
big bureaucrats of the Kuomintang should be dealt with in conformity with
the principles and measures stated above. Industrial and commercial enterprises
run by small bureaucrats or by landlords, however, are not subject to
confiscation. Encroachment on any enterprise run by the national bourgeoisie
is strictly prohibited.

3. Forbid peasant organizations to enter the city to seize landlords and
settle scores with them. Landlords whose land is in the villages but who
live in the city should be dealt with by the democratic municipal government
according to law. Upon the request of the village peasant organizations those
who have committed the most heinous crimes may be sent back to the villages
to be dealt with.

4. On entering the city, do not lightly advance slogans of raising wages
and reducing working hours. In war time it is good enough if production can
continue and existing working hours and original wage levels can be maintained.
Whether or not suitable reductions in working hours and increases in wages
are to be made later will depend on economic conditions, that is, on whether
the enterprises thrive.

5. Do not be in a hurry to organize the people of the city to struggle for
democratic reforms and improvements in livelihood. These matters can be properly
handled in the light of local conditions only when the municipal administration
is in good working order, public feeling has become calm, careful surveys
have been made, a clear idea of the situation has been gained and appropriate
measures have been worked out.

6. In the big cities, food and fuel are now the central problems; they must
be handled in a planned way. Once a city comes under our administration,
the problem of the livelihood of the city poor must be solved step by step
and in a planned way. Do not raise the slogan, "Open the granaries to relieve
the poor". Do not foster among them the psychology of depending on the government
for relief.

7. Members of the Kuomintang and its Three People's Principles Youth League
must be properly screened and registered.

8. Plan everything on a long-term basis. It is strictly forbidden to destroy
any means of production, whether publicly or privately owned, and to waste
consumer goods. Extravagant eating and drinking are forbidden, and attention
should be paid to thrift and economy.

9. Appoint as secretaries of the Party's municipal committee and as mayor
and deputy mayors only persons who have a grasp of policy and are capable.
They should train all their personnel and explain urban policies and tactics
to them. Now that the city belongs to the people, everything should proceed
in the spirit that the people themselves are responsible for managing the
city. It would be entirely wrong to apply our policies and tactics for cities
under Kuomintang administration to a city under the people's own administration.

NOTES


1. Loyang was an important stronghold of the Kuomintang
troops in the western part of Honan Province. The People's Liberation Army
first took Loyang on March 14, 1948, subsequently evacuated the city on its
own initiative to facilitate the wiping out of the enemy's effective strength
and recaptured Loyang on April 5, 1948. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Tactical Problems of Rural Work in the New Liberated Areas







TACTICAL PROBLEMS OF RURAL WORK IN THE NEW LIBERATED AREAS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

TACTICAL PROBLEMS OF RURAL WORK IN THE NEW LIBERATED AREAS


May 24, 1948


It is necessary to give over-all consideration to the tactical problems of
rural work in the new Liberated Areas. In these areas we must make full use
of the experience gained in the period of the War of Resistance Against Japan;
for a considerable period after their liberation we should apply the social
policy of reducing rent and interest and properly adjusting the supplies
of seed and food grains and the financial policy of reasonable distribution
of burdens; we should aim our main blows only at the important
counter-revolutionaries who side politically with the Kuomintang and stubbornly
oppose our Party and our army, just as we only arrested the traitors and
confiscated their property during the period of the War of Resistance, and
we should not immediately apply the social reform policy of distributing
movable property and land. The reason is that only a few bolder elements
would welcome the premature distribution of movable property and that the
basic masses would not get anything and would therefore be dissatisfied.
Moreover, hasty dispersal of social wealth is to the disadvantage of the
army. Premature distribution of land would prematurely place the entire burden
of military requirements on the peasants instead of on the landlords and
rich peasants. In the sphere of social reform, it is better not to distribute
movable property and land but instead to reduce rent and interest universally
so that the peasants will receive tangible benefits, and in financial policy
we should effect a reasonable distribution of burdens so that the landlords
and rich peasants will pay more. In this way, social wealth will not be dispersed
and public order will be comparatively stable, and this will help us concentrate
all our forces on destroying the Kuomintang reactionaries. After one, two
or even three years, when the Kuomintang reactionaries have been wiped out
in extensive base areas, when conditions have become stable, when the masses
have awakened and organized themselves and when the war has moved far away,
we can enter the stage of land reform -- the distribution of movable property
and land as in northern China. The stage of rent and interest reduction cannot
be skipped in any new Liberated Area, and we shall make mistakes if we skip
it. The above tactics must also be carried out in those parts of the large
Liberated Areas in northern, northeastern and northwestern China which border
on enemy territory. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Work of Land Reform and of party Consolidation in 1948







THE WORK OF LAND REFORM AND OF PARTY CONSOLIDATION IN 1948



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE WORK OF LAND REFORM AND OF PARTY CONSOLIDATION IN 1948


May 25, 1948

[This inner-Party directive was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China.] 
  
I 

It is necessary to pay attention to the seasons. In areas designated by the
bureaus or sub-bureaus of the Central Committee, the whole of next autumn
and winter, that is, the seven months from this September to next March,
must be devoted to carrying out the following tasks in the proper order:

  1. Make an investigation of rural conditions.


  2. Carry out the initial work for Party consolidation in accordance with
  correct policy. A working corps or working team sent by a higher organ to
  a rural district must first of all unite with all the activists and better
  members in the local Party branch and together with them lead the work of
  land reform.


  3. Organize or reorganize or strengthen the poor peasant leagues and the
  peasant associations and launch the land reform struggle.


  4. Identify class status according to correct criteria.


  5. Distribute feudal land and property in accordance with correct policy.
  The final result of the distribution must be such that it is considered fair
  and reasonable by all the main strata and that the landlords too feel that
  there is a way for them to make a living and that this is assured.


  6. Form people's representative conferences and elect government councils
  at the township (or village), district and county levels.


  7. Issue land certificates taxing the ownership of land.


  8. Adjust or revise the rates of the agricultural tax (i.e., public grain).
  These rates must conform to the principle of giving consideration to both
  public and private interests; in other words, they must on the one hand help
  support the war and on the other get the peasants interested in restoring
  and developing production, which will help improve their livelihood.


  9. Complete the work of the organizational consolidation of the Party branches
  in accordance with correct policy.


  10. Shift our work from land reform to rallying all the rural working people
  and to organizing the labour power of the landlords and rich peasants in
  a general struggle to restore and develop agricultural production. Start
  organizing small-scale work-exchange groups and other co-operative units
  according to the principles of voluntary participation and exchange of equal
  values; prepare seed, fertilizer and fuel; work out production plans; issue
  agricultural credits (chiefly loans for means of production, to be definitely
  repaid and to be strictly distinguished from relief grants) when necessary
  and possible; draw up plans, where possible, for building water conservancy
  works.


This is the whole process of work from land reform to production, a process
which all comrades directly engaged in land reform must be brought to understand
so that they can avoid one-sidedness in their work and, without missing the
seasons, accomplish all the above tasks in the coming autumn and winter.

II

To achieve these aims, it is necessary to get the following work done in
the next three months -- from June through August:

  1. Designate the areas for land reform. Each such area must meet the following
  three conditions:


  a. All the enemy armed forces must have been wiped out and conditions must
  have become stable; it must not be an unstable guerrilla zone.


  b. The overwhelming majority of the basic masses (the farm labourers, poor
  peasants and middle peasants), not just a minority, must already be demanding
  the distribution of land.


  c. Party cadres must be adequate both in numbers and in quality to grasp
  the work of land reform and must not leave it to the spontaneous activity
  of the masses.


  An area where any one of these three conditions is lacking should not be
  designated for land reform in 1948. For instance, since they do not meet
  the first condition, we should not include in this year's plan for land reform
  those parts of the Liberated Areas in northern and eastern China, the Northeast
  and the Northwest, which border on enemy territory, nor most of the area
  enclosed by the Yangtse, Huai, Yellow and Han Rivers, which is under the
  jurisdiction of the Central Plains Bureau of the Central Committee. Whether
  they are to be included in next year's plan will depend on circumstances.
  In these areas we should make full use of the experience acquired during
  the period of the War of Resistance Against Japan and put into effect the
  social policy of reducing rent and interest and of properly adjusting supplies
  of seed and food grains, as well as the financial policy of reasonable
  distribution of burdens, so as to unite with or neutralize all social forces
  that can be united with or can be neutralized, help the People's Liberation
  Army to wipe out all the Kuomintang armed forces and strike blows at the
  local tyrants who are politically the most reactionary. Neither land nor
  movable property should be distributed in these areas, because they are newly
  liberated and border on enemy territory, and distribution there would not
  be of advantage to uniting with or neutralizing all social forces that can
  be united with or neutralized for the accomplishment of the basic task of
  wiping out the Kuomintang forces of reaction.


  2. Make cadres' conferences a success. At cadres' conferences concerned with
  the work of land reform and Party consolidation, all the correct policies
  relating to these two tasks must be fully explained and a clear line must
  be drawn between what is and what is not permitted. All cadres working on
  land reform and Party consolidation are required to study seriously and
  understand fully the important documents issued by the Central Committee;
  cadres must be enjoined to adhere to them all and must not make any unauthorized
  change. In case parts of the documents do not suit local conditions, cadres
  may and should propose amendments, but they must secure the approval of the
  Central Committee before actually making any change. The higher leading organs
  of the various areas must make adequate and proper preparations beforehand
  for the cadres' conferences which are to be held at different levels this
  year. That is to say, before a conference is convened, there should be
  discussions among a few persons (with one of them taking the main
  responsibility), in the course of which questions are raised and analysed
  and an outline is written; this outline must be carefully worked out in content
  and wording (be sure to make it clear and concise and avoid long-windedness).
  Then a report should be made at the conference, discussion should be unfolded,
  the outline should be supplemented, revised and finalized in the light of
  the views expressed in the discussion, and the final document should be
  circulated in the whole Party and published, as far as possible, in the
  newspapers. It is necessary to oppose holding meetings in an empiricist way,
  that is, with no advance preparations, no problems raised or analysed and
  no report, carefully prepared and well-weighed in content and wording, submitted
  to the cadres' conference, but with the participants allowed to indulge in
  pointless, random talk so that the sessions drag on without reaching any
  clear, well-considered conclusion. Pay attention to eliminating this harmful
  empiricist way if it is found in the leadership work of any bureau or sub-bureau
  of the Central Committee, or in any area, provincial or prefectural Party
  committee. Conferences to discuss policy should not be attended by too many
  people and can be shortened if there is enough preparation. Generally it
  is proper for a dozen or so people, or twenty to thirty, or forty to fifty
  -- the number varying according to circumstances -- to meet for about a week.
  Meetings for transmitting policy may have a larger attendance but must not
  last too long either. The only conferences which may have a larger attendance
  and may last longer are those for Party consolidation among senior and
  middle-rank cadres.


  3. By the first half or at the latest the second half of September, all cadres
  who are to take a direct part in the land reform must arrive in the villages
  and start work. Otherwise, it will be impossible to utilize the whole of
  the coming autumn and winter to complete the land reform, the Party consolidation
  and the formation of organs of political power and to prepare for spring
  ploughing.

III

At cadres' conferences as well as in their work, cadres must be taught how
to analyse concrete situations and how, proceeding from the concrete situations
in different areas with different historical conditions, to decide on their
tasks and methods of work in a given place and time. Distinctions must be
drawn between the cities and the rural areas and among the old Liberated
Areas, semi-old Liberated Areas, areas bordering on enemy territory and new
Liberated Areas; otherwise mistakes will be made.
IV

The land problem should be considered solved and the question of land reform
should not be raised again in areas where the feudal system has been
fundamentally abolished, where the poor peasants and farm labourers have
all acquired roughly the average amount of land and where there is still
a difference (which is permissible) between their holdings and those of the
middle peasants, but where the difference is not great. In these areas the
central tasks are to restore and develop production, to complete the Party
consolidation and the formation of organs of political power and to support
the front. If, in certain villages in these areas, some land is still to
be distributed or readjusted, the class status of some individuals still
needs to be revised and some land certificates still have to be issued, these
tasks should of course be completed in accordance with the actual circumstances.
V

In all the Liberated Areas, whether or not the land reform has been completed,
we must direct the peasants to cultivate the wheat fields and to plough part
of the land this autumn. In the winter, the peasants should be called upon
to collect fertilizer. All this is vitally important to agricultural production
and the 1949 harvests in the Liberated Areas and must be accomplished through
administrative measures co-ordinated with mass work.
VI

It is necessary resolutely to overcome certain manifestations of indiscipline
or anarchy existing in many places. There are people who, without authorization,
modify the policies and tactics adopted by the Central Committee or other
higher Party committees and apply extremely harmful policies and tactics,
which go against the united will and discipline but which they opinionatedly
believe to be correct. There are also people who, on the pretext of pressure
of work, adopt the wrong attitude of neither asking for instructions before
an action is taken nor submitting a report afterwards and who regard the
area they administer as an independent realm. All this is extremely harmful
to the interests of the revolution. Party committees at every level must
discuss this matter again and again and work earnestly to overcome such
indiscipline and anarchy so that all the powers that can and must be centralized
will be concentrated in the hands of the Central Committee and its agencies.
[1]
VII

The Central Committee, its bureaus (or sub-bureaus), the area (or provincial)
Party committees and the prefectural, county and district Party committees
down to the level of Party branches must establish close contact with each
other in order to have a good grasp of trends in the various movements,
constantly exchange information and experience, and promptly correct mistakes
and spread successes. For these purposes, they should make full use of such
means of communication as the radio, telegraph, telephone, posts and couriers;
of such methods of consultation as small meetings (of four or five persons),
joint local conferences (of a few counties) and personal talks; of such
inspection tours as may be made by small groups (of three to five persons)
or by individual committee members with prestige; and of the news agency
and newspapers. There should be no waiting for several months, half a year
or even longer before a lower organization submits its summary report to
the one above, or before a higher organization issues general directives
to those below. For such reports and directives often become out of date,
losing all or part of their usefulness. And mistakes are made and cannot
be corrected in time, causing serious damage. What the whole Party urgently
needs is reports and directives that are timely, lively and concrete.
VIII

In exercising their leadership, the bureaus and sub-bureaus of the Central
Committee and the area, provincial, prefectural and municipal Party committees
must give proper attention to both urban and rural work, to the tasks of
both industrial and agricultural production. That is to say, they should
not, on account of directing the land reform and agricultural production,
neglect to give leadership to urban work and industrial production or slacken
their efforts in this regard. Since we now have many big, medium and small
cities and a vast network of industries, mines and communications, we shall
make mistakes if any of the leading organizations concerned becomes negligent
or slackens its efforts in this respect.
NOTES

1. The agencies of the Central Committee, as referred to
here, were its bureaus and sub-bureaus. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Concept of Operations for the Liaoshi-Shenyang Campaign







THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE LIAOHSI-SHENYANG CAMPAIGN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE LIAOHSI-SHENYANG CAMPAIGN
  [1]


September and October 1948

[These telegrams addressed to Lin Piao, Lo Jung-huan and other comrades were
drawn up by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Revolutionary Military Commission
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. The concept of
operations he set forth here for the Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign was fully
carried out later. The results of the campaign were as follows:

  (1) The destruction of 470,000 enemy troops, plus the victories in other
  theatres during that period, made the qualitatively superior People's Liberation
  Army superior to the Kuomintang army in numbers as well.


  (2) The entire territory of northeastern China was liberated, and the conditions
  were created for the liberation of Peiping, Tientsin and all northern China.


  (3) Our army gained experience in fighting large-scale campaigns of annihilation.


  (4) As a result of the liberation of northeastern China, a strategically
  secure rear area with a fair industrial base was won for the War of Liberation,
  and the Party and the people obtained favourable conditions for gradually
  turning to economic rehabilitation.


The Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign was the first of the three greatest campaigns
of decisive significance in the Chinese People's War of Liberation. The other
two were the Huai-Hai and the Peiping-Tientsin campaigns. In these three
great campaigns, which lasted four months and nineteen days, 144 divisions
(brigades) of the enemy's regular troops and 29 divisions of its irregular
troops, or more than 1,540,000 men in all, were wiped out. During this period
the People's Liberation Army also launched offensives on other fronts, destroying
large numbers of the enemy. In the first two years of the war, the People's
Liberation Army had wiped out an average of about 8 enemy brigades per month.
Now the number of enemy troops destroyed by the People's Liberation Army
no longer averaged 8 brigades per month but 38 brigades. These three major
campaigns virtually annihilated the crack troops on which the Kuomintang
relied for waging the counter-revolutionary civil war and greatly speeded
victory in the War of Liberation all over the country. For the Huai-Hai and
Peiping-Tientsin campaigns, see "The Concept of Operations for the Huai-Hai
Campaign", pp. 279-82 and "The Concept of Operations for the Peiping-Tientsin
Campaign", pp. 289-93, of this volume. ]
  
I. THE TELEGRAM OF SEPTEMBER 7

We are prepared to bring about the fundamental overthrow of the Kuomintang
in about five years, counting from July 1946.[2] This
is possible. Our objective can be attained provided we destroy about 100
brigades of Kuomintang regular troops every year, or some 500 brigades over
the five years. In the past two years our army has annihilated a total of
191 brigades of enemy regulars, an average of 95 brigades a year,
or nearly 8 brigades a month. In the next three years it is required that
our army should wipe out 300 or more brigades of enemy regulars. Between
July this year and June next year we expect to destroy some 115 brigades
of enemy regulars. This total is apportioned among our various field armies
and armies.[3] The Eastern China Field Army is required
to wipe out about 40 brigades (including the 7 already wiped out in July)
and capture Tsinan and a number of large, medium and small cities in northern
Kiangsu, eastern Honan and northern Anhwei. The Central Plains Field Army
is required to wipe out about 14 brigades (including the 1 1/2 brigades wiped
out in July) and capture a number of cities in the provinces of Hupeh, Honan
and Anhwei. The Northwest Field Army is required to wipe out about 12
brigades (including the 1 brigades wiped out in August). The army in
northern China commanded by Hsu Hsiang-chien and Chou Shih-ti is required
to wipe out about 14 brigades under Yen Hsi-shan (including the 8 brigades
annihilated in July) and capture Taiyuan. You are required, in co-ordination
with the 2 armies commanded by Lo Jui-ching and Yang Cheng-wu, to wipe out
about 35 brigades of the 2 army groups under Wei Li-huang and Fu Tso-yi
(including 1 brigade wiped out by Yang Cheng-wu in July) and capture all
the cities along the Peiping-Liaoning, Peiping-Suiyuan, Peiping-Chengteh
and Peiping-Paoting Railways, except Peiping, Tientsin and Shenyang. The
decisive factors for the achievement of this objective are the proper disposition
and command of troops in campaigns and a proper balance between fighting
and rest. If in the two months of September and October, or a little longer,
you can wipe out the enemy along the line from Chinchow to Tangshan and take
Chinchow, Shanhaikuan and Tangshan, you will have achieved the task of wiping
out some 18 enemy brigades. In order to wipe them out, you must now prepare
to employ your main force on this line, leaving the enemy forces at Changchun
and Shenyang alone. When you are attacking Chinchow, be prepared also to
wipe out the enemy forces that may come to its rescue from Changchun and
Shenyang. Because the enemy forces In and near Chinchow, Shanhaikuan and
Tangshan are isolated from each other, success in attacking and wiping them
out is pretty certain, and there is also a fair hope of success in capturing
Chinchow and in attacking enemy reinforcements. If, however, you were to
dispose your main force at Hsinmin and its northern environs in preparation
for attacking the enemy forces which might come out from Changchun and Shenyang,
then the enemy might not dare come out at all because you would be too great
a menace. On the one hand, the enemy at Changchun and Shenyang might not
come out. And, on the other hand, because the forces you dispatch towards
Chinchow, Shanhaikuan and Tangshan would be too small, the enemy in and near
these three cities (comprising 18 brigades) would probably fall back on Chinchow
and Tangshan, and you would find it rather difficult and yet necessary to
attack them, wasting time and energy and thus perhaps landing yourselves
in a passive position. For these reasons, it will be better to leave the
enemy at Changchun and Shenyang alone and focus your attention on the enemy
at Chinchow, Shanhaikuan and Tangshan. Another point: you must prepare to
fight three big campaigns in the ten months from September to next June and
to spend about two months on each campaign, making a total of about six months
and leaving four months for rest. During the Chinchow-Shanhaiknan-Tangshan
campaign (the first big campaign), if the enemy at Changchun and Shenyang
sallies forth in full strength to rescue Chinchow (because your main force
will be disposed not at Hsinmin but around Chinchow, Wei Li-huang will be
emboldened to come to the rescue), then, without leaving the
Chinchow-Shanhaikuan-Tangshan line, you can follow up immediately with
large-scale annihilating attacks on the enemy reinforcements and strive to
wipe out all Wei Li-huang's troops on the spot. This would be the ideal
situation. Hence, you should pay attention to the following:

  (1) Be firmly determined to attack and capture Chinchow, Shanhaikuan and
  Tangshan and to take control of the entire line.


  (2) Be firmly determined to fight a battle of annihilation on a scale larger
  than you have ever fought before, that is, dare to fight all Wei Li-huang's
  army when it comes to the rescue.


  (3) In keeping with these two resolves, reconsider your plan of operations,
  make arrangements to meet the military requirements of your whole force (food,
  ammunition, recruits, and so on) and to handle captives.


Please consider the above and telegraph your reply.
II. THE TELEGRAM OF OCTOBER 10

1. From the day you start attacking Chinchow, there will be a period when
the tactical situation will be very tense. We hope that you will inform us
by radio every two or three days of the enemy's situation (the strength of
the resistance by his forces defending Chinchow, the progress of his
reinforcements from Hulutao and Chinhsi and from Shenyang and the probable
course of action of his troops in Changchun) and of our own situation (the
progress of our attack on the city and the casualties sustained in attacking
the city and holding off enemy reinforcements).

2. It is highly possible that, as you have said, the tactical situation during
this period will develop most favourably, that is, that you will be able
to wipe out not only the enemy's forces defending Chinchow but also a part
of his reinforcements from Hulutao and Chinhsi and some or most of his forces
fleeing from Changchun. If the enemy's reinforcements from Shenyang advance
to the area north of the Taling River just after you have taken Chinchow
and when you are thus able to shift your forces to encircle them, then it
will be possible to wipe out these reinforcements as well. The key to all
this lies in striving to capture Chinchow in about a week.

3. Decide on the disposition of your troops for checking the enemy reinforcements
according to your progress in attacking Chinchow and their progress in advancing
both from the east and from the west. In case the enemy reinforcements from
Shenyang advance rather slowly (as may happen if, during your attack on Chinchow,
the enemy besieged in Changchun breaks out but is caught and crushed by our
12th Column and other forces, in which case the enemy reinforcements from
Shenyang may be so bewildered as to advance rather slowly or halt or turn
back to rescue the Changchun forces) while the enemy reinforcements from
Hulutao and Chinhsi advance rather quickly, you should be ready to throw
in your general reserves to help the 4th and 11th Columns wipe out part of
the latter reinforcements and, first of all, to check their advance. If the
enemy reinforcements from Hulutao and Chinhsi are being tied down and checked
by our 4th and 11th Columns and other forces and therefore advance rather
slowly or halt, if the enemy forces in Changchun do not break out, if the
enemy reinforcements from Shenyang advance rather quickly, and if most of
the Chinchow enemy forces have been wiped out and the capture of the city
is imminent, then you should let the enemy forces from Shenyang advance deep
into the area north of the Taling River, so that you can make a timely shift
of your forces to encircle them and wipe them out at your convenience.

4. You must centre your attention on the operations in Chinchow and strive
to capture this city as quickly as possible. Even if none of the other objectives
is attained and Chinchow alone is captured, you will have won the initiative,
which in itself will be a great victory. It is hoped that you will give due
attention to all the above points. Especially during the first few days of
the battle for Chinchow, the enemy reinforcements from both the east and
the west will not make any major moves, and you should concentrate all your
energies on the operations on the Chinchow front.
NOTES

1. The Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign was a gigantic campaign
fought by the Northeast People's Liberation Army in the western part of Liaoning
Province and in the Shenyang-Changchun area between September 12 and November
2, 1948. On the eve of the campaign, the total strength of the Kuomintang
forces in northeastern China consisted of 4 armies, made up of 14 corps,
or 44 divisions. These forces had shortened their lines and dug themselves
in at three sectors isolated from each other, Changchun, Shenyang and Chinchow.
With the aim of completely wiping out the enemy troops in the Northeast and
quickly liberating the whole of the Northeast, the People's Liberation Army
in this region, supported by the broad masses of the local people, began
the Liaobsi-Shenyang campaign in September 1948 with a main force of 12 columns,
1 artillery column and regional armed forces, altogether totalling 53 divisions
or over 700,000 men. Chinchow, on the Peiping-Liaoning Railway, was the strategic
link between northeastern and northern China. The enemy forces garrisoning
the Chinchow sector consisted of 8 divisions, with more than 100,000 men
under Fan Han-chieh, Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Kuomintang's Northeast
"Bandit Suppression" Headquarters. The capture of Chinchow was the key to
the success of the Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign. Acting on the directives of
Comrade Mao Tse-tung, the Northeast People's Liberation Army used 1 column
and 7 independent divisions to continue the siege operations against Changchun;
6 columns, 1 artillery column and 1 tank battalion to surround and attack
Chinchow and 2 columns, placed in the Tashan-Kaochiao sector southwest of
Chinchow, along with 3 columns in the Heishan-Tahushan-Changwu sector to
intercept any reinforcements the enemy might send from Chinhsi and Hulutao
and from Shenyang to relieve Chinchow. The fighting in the Chinchow area
started on September 12. Just as our army was mopping up the enemy in the
outskirts of Chinchow after taking Ihsien, Chiang Kai-shek hurriedly flew
to the Northeast to take personal charge of the operations and urgently summoned
5 enemy divisions from the Northern China "Bandit Suppression" Headquarters
on the Peiping Liaoning Railway and 2 divisions from Shantung Province to
join the 4 divisions in Chinhsi; all these 11 divisions began a furious attack
on our positions at Tashan on October 10 but could not break through. Meanwhile,
the Kuomintang 9th Army under Liao Yao-hsiang, with 11 divisions and 3 cavalry
brigades, which had sallied out from Shenyang to rescue Chinchow, was intercepted
by our army northeast of Heishan and Tahushan. Our army began the assault
on Chinchow on October 14 and, after thirty-one hours of fierce fighting,
completely wiped out the defending enemy forces, capturing Fan Han-chieh,
Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Northeast "Bandit Suppression" Headquarters,
Lu Chun-chuan, Commander of the 6th Army, and more than 100,000 men under
their command. The liberation of Chinchow impelled part of the enemy forces
at Changchun to revolt against the Kuomintang and the rest to surrender.
The complete collapse of the Kuomintang troops in the Northeast then became
a foregone conclusion. But Chiang Kai-shek, still dreaming of recapturing
Chinchow and of reopening the line of communications between northeastern
and northern China, gave strict orders to the army under Liao Yao-hsiang
to continue its advance towards Chinchow. After taking Chinchow, the People's
Liberation Army immediately swung back to the northeast and closed in on
Liao's army from the north and south of Heishan and Tahushan. On October
26 the People's Liberation Army succeeded in surrounding the enemy in the
Heishan-Tahushan-Hsinmin sector and, after stiff fighting lasting two days
and one night, completely wiped them out, capturing army commander Liao
Yao-hsiang, corps commanders Li Tao, Pai Feng-wu and Cheng Ting-chi, and
more than 100,000 men. Our army vigorously followed up this victory and liberated
Shenyang and Yingkow on November 2, wiping out over 149,000 enemy troops.
The whole of the Northeast was thus liberated. A total of more than 470,000
enemy troops were wiped out in the campaign.

2. See "A Circular on the Situation", Note 7, p. 226 of
this volume.

3. On November 1, 1948, the Revolutionary Military Commission
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China classified all troops
in the big strategic areas into field, regional and guerrilla forces in
accordance with decisions made at the September meeting of the Political
Bureau of the Central Committee. The field forces were organized into field
armies. A field army was composed of armies, an army of corps (originally
called columns), a corps of divisions, and a division of regiments. In accordance
with their locations, the field armies were designated the Northwest Field
Army, Central Plains Field Army, Eastern China Field Army, Northeast field
Army and Northern China Field Army of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.
The number of armies, corps and divisions in each field army differed according
to the concrete conditions in each big strategic area. Later, the Northwest
Field Army was renamed the First Field Army, comprising 2 armies; the Central
Plains Field Army was renamed the Second Field Army, comprising 3 armies;
the Eastern China Field Army was renamed the Third Field Army, comprising
4 armies; and the Northeast Field Army was renamed the Fourth Field Army,
comprising 4 armies. The 3 armies making up the Northern China Field Army
were placed under the direct command of the General Headquarters of the Chinese
People's Liberation Army. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Strengthening the Party Committee System 








ON STRENGTHENING THE PARTY COMMITTEE SYSTEM



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON STRENGTHENING THE PARTY COMMITTEE SYSTEM


September 20, 1948

This decision was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. In his "Report on the Amendments to the Party Constitution" delivered at the Party's Eighth National Congress on September 6, 1956, Comrade Teng Hsiao-ping described the significance of this document as follows:


For a long time the tradition in our Party has been that decisions of important questions are made by a collective of the Party, and not by any individual. Although violations of the principle of collective leadership occurred in our Party from time to time, yet once discovered they were criticized and corrected by the Central Committee of the Party. The decision by the Central Committee in September 1948 on strengthening the Party committee system played an especially great role in strengthening collective leadership the Party.... This decision was put into practice throughout the Party an is still in force.... The significance of this decision is that it summed up the Party's successful experience in the conscientious practice of collective leadership, urged those organizations which had made collective leadership merely nominal to correct their mistake and extended the scope of the application of collective leadership.



The Party committee system is an important Party institution for ensuring
collective leadership and preventing any individual from monopolizing the
conduct of affairs. It has recently been found that in some (of course not
all) leading bodies it is the habitual practice for one individual to monopolize
the conduct of affairs and decide important problems. Solutions to important
problems are decided not by Party committee meetings but by one individual,
and membership in the Party committee has become nominal. Differences of
opinion among committee members cannot be resolved and are left unresolved
for a long time. Members of the Party committee maintain only formal, not
real, unity among themselves. This situation must be changed. From now on,
a sound system of Party committee meetings must be instituted in all leading
bodies, from the bureaus of the Central Committee to the prefectural Party
committees; from the Party committees of the fronts to the Party committees
of brigades and military areas (sub-commissions of the Revolutionary Military
Commission or leading groups); and the leading Party members' groups in
government bodies, people's organizations, the news agency and the newspaper
offices. All important problems (of course, not the unimportant, trivial
problems, or problems whose solutions have already been decided after discussion
at meetings and need only be carried out) must be submitted to the committee
for discussion, and the committee members present should express their views
fully and reach definite decisions which should then be carried out by the
members concerned. The same procedure should be followed by Party committees
below the prefectural and brigade levels. In the higher leading bodies there
should also be meetings of the leading cadres in the departments (for ample,
the propaganda department and the organizational department), commissions
(for example, the labour women's and youth commissions), schools (for example,
Party schools) and offices (for example, the research offices). Of course,
we must see to it that the meetings are not too long or too frequent and
they must not get bogged down in discussion of petty matters lest the work
be hindered. On important problems which are complicated and on which opinions
differ, there must, in addition, be personal consultations before the meeting
to enable the members to think things over lest decisions by the meeting
become a mere formality or no decision can be reached. Party committee meetings
must be divided into two categories, standing committee meetings and plenary
sessions, and the two should not be confused. Furthermore, we must take care
that neither collective leadership nor personal responsibility is overemphasized
to the neglect of the other. In the army, the person in command has the right
to make emergency decisions during battle and when circumstances require.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the September Meeting — Circular of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China







ON THE SEPTEMBER MEETING -- CIRCULAR OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE
  COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON THE SEPTEMBER MEETING -- CIRCULAR OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE COMMUNIST
  PARTY OF CHINA


October 10, 1948

[This inner-Party circular was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China. The September 1948 meeting was
held in Hsipaipo Village, Pingshan County, Hopei Province. This meeting convened
by the Central Committee had the largest attendance of any since the Japanese
surrender. Previously it had not been possible to hold such large meetings,
because the great majority of Central Committee members were in various Liberated
Areas directing the tense War of Liberation and communications were extremely
difficult.] 
  

1. In September 1948 the Central Committee convened a meeting of the Political
Bureau, attended by seven members of the Political Bureau, fourteen members
and alternate members of the Central Committee and ten important functionaries,
including principal leading comrades in the Party and army in northern China,
eastern China, the Central Plains and northwestern China. This meeting convened
by the Central Committee had the largest attendance of any since the Japanese
surrender. The meeting examined the work of the past period and set the tasks
for the period ahead.

2. Since the Party's Seventh National Congress in April 1945, the Central
Committee and the leading cadres of the whole Party have displayed even greater
unity than during the War of Resistance Against Japan. This unity has enabled
our Party to cope with many important events at home and abroad in the three
years since the Japanese surrender; and in the course of these events our
Party has pushed the Chinese revolution a big step forward, shattered the
political influence of U.S. imperialism among the broad masses of the Chinese
people, combated the new betrayal by the Kuomintang,
[1] repulsed its military attacks and enabled the
People's Liberation Army to shift from the defensive to the offensive.

In the last two years of fighting, from July 1946 to June 1948, the People's
Liberation Army has wiped out 2,640,000 enemy troops, including 1,630,000
captured. The main war booty of the two years amounts to nearly 900,000 rifles,
over 64,000 heavy and light machine-guns, 8,000 pieces of light artillery,
5,000 pieces of infantry artillery and 1,100 heavy mountain and field guns.
In these two years the People's Liberation Army has grown from 1,200,000
men to 2,800,000. Our regular troops have increased from 118 brigades to
176, that is, from 610,000 men to 1,490,000. The Liberated Areas now cover
2,350,000 square kilometres, or 24.5 per cent of China's total area of 9,597,000
square kilometres; their population is 168 million, or 35.3 per cent of China's
total of 475 million; and they have 586 large, medium and small cities, from
county towns up, or 29 per cent of China's total of 2,009 such cities.

Because our Party has firmly led the peasants in carrying out the reform
of the land system, the land problem has been thoroughly solved in areas
having about 100 million people, and the land of the landlord class and of
the old-type rich peasants has been more or less equally distributed among
the rural population and, first of all, among the poor peasants and farm
labourers.

Our Party membership has increased from 1,210,000 in May 1945 to 3,000,000
at present. (In 1927, before the Kuomintang betrayal of the revolution, it
was 50,000; after the Kuomintang betrayal of that year, it dropped to about
10,000; in 1934, as a result of the successful development of the agrarian
revolution, it rose to 300,000; in 1937, owing to the defeat of the revolution
in the south, [2] it dropped again to about 40,000;
in 1945, because of the successful development of the War of Resistance Against
Japan, it rose to 1,210,000; and now, because of the successful development
of the anti-Chiang Kai-shek war and the agrarian revolution, it has reached
3,000,000.) On the one hand, the Party has in the past year basically overcome,
and is continuing to overcome, some unhealthy phenomena which existed to
a certain degree in its ranks; these were impurities in class composition
(landlord and rich peasant elements), impurities in ideology (landlord and
rich peasant ideology) and impurities in style of work (bureaucracy and
commandism). On the other hand, the Party has in the past year overcome,
and is continuing to overcome, some "Left" mistakes which accompanied the
large-scale mobilization of the peasant masses in the struggles to solve
the land problem; these were the partial but fairly numerous encroachments
on the interests of the middle peasants, the damage done to some private
industrial and commercial enterprises and the overstepping in some places
of certain lines of demarcation in the policy for suppressing
counter-revolutionaries. Through the great, fierce revolutionary struggles
of the past three years, and especially of the past year, and the conscientious
correction of our own mistakes, the whole Party has made a big step forward
in political maturity.

The Party's work in the Kuomintang areas has been crowned with tremendous
success. This can be seen from the fact that in the big cities we have won
over to the side of our Party the broad masses of workers, students, teachers,
professors, cultural workers, ordinary residents and national capitalists
as well as all the democratic parties and people's organizations, and have
thus resisted Kuomintang oppression and completely isolated the Kuomintang.
In several large areas in the south (the Fukien-Kwangtung-Kiangsi, the
Hunan-Kwangtung-Kiangsi, the Kwangtung-Kwangsi and the Kwangsi-Yunnan border
areas, southern Yunnan, the Anhwei-Chekiang-Kiangsi border area and eastern
and southern Chekiang), bases for guerrilla warfare have been established,
and their guerrilla forces have grown to more than 30,000.

During the past two years and especially last year, we have carried out an
orderly, well-led democratic movement in the People's Liberation Army, with
all fighters and commanders taking part. In this movement we have unfolded
self-criticism, have overcome and are continuing to overcome bureaucracy
in the army and have restored the Party committee system at various levels
of the army and the soldiers' committee system in the companies, both of
which produced good results from 1927 to 1932 but were later abolished. All
this has greatly heightened the political enthusiasm and consciousness of
commanders and fighters, strengthened their combat effectiveness and discipline
and helped us to absorb some 800,000 captured Kuomintang soldiers and change
them into liberated fighters [3] who have turned
their guns against the Kuomintang. During the past two years, in the Liberated
Areas, we have mobilized some 1,600,000 of the peasants who obtained land
to join the People's Liberation Army.

We already have quite a number of railways, mines and industries, and our
Party is learning on a large scale how to manage industry and carry on trade.
In the past two years our war industries have grown considerably. But they
are not yet adequate to meet the needs of the war. We lack some important
raw materials and machines and, generally speaking, still cannot make steel.

In areas in northern China with a population of 44 million we have set up
a unified people's government in which our Party cooperates with non-Party
democrats. In order to facilitate support to the front, we have decided to
entrust this government with the task of unifying the work of leading and
administering the economy, finance, trade, banking, communications and war
industries in three regions northern China, eastern China (with a population
of 43 million) and the Northwest (with a population of 7 million), and we
are prepared in the near future to extend the unification of this work to
two additional regions, the Northeast and the Central Plains.

3. In the light of our successes in the past two years' fighting and of the
general situation as between the enemy and ourselves, the meeting convened
by the Central Committee considered it fully possible to build a People's
Liberation Army of five million in a period of about five years (beginning
from July 1946), to wipe out a total of some 500 brigades (divisions) of
the enemy's regular forces (an average of about 100 brigades a year), to
wipe out a total of some 7,500,000 men of his regular and irregular forces
and of the special arms (an average of about 1,500,000 men a year) and to
overthrow the reactionary rule of the Kuomintang completely.

The military strength of the Kuomintang was 4,300,000 men in July 1946. In
the past two years, 3,090,000 of its men have either been wiped out or have
deserted, and 2,440,000 have been recruited. Its present strength is 3,650,000
men. It is estimated that in the coming three years the Kuomintang may still
be able to recruit 3,000,000 men and that some 4,500,000 will probably be
wiped out or desert. Thus, as a result of five years' fighting, the remaining
military strength of the Kuomintang will probably be only some 2,000,000.
Our army now has 2,800,000 men. In the coming three years we plan to admit
into our forces 1,700,000 captured soldiers (estimated at 60 per cent of
the total we shall capture) and to mobilize 2,000,000 peasants to join the
army. Allowing for depletion, our army, as a result of five years' fighting,
will probably approach 5,000,000 men. If five years' fighting brings these
results, then it may be said that we have overthrown the reactionary rule
of the Kuomintang completely.

To fulfil this task, we must wipe out each year about 100 brigades (divisions)
of the enemy's regular forces, making a total of about 500 brigades (divisions)
in five years. This is the key to the solution of all problems. In view of
the fact that the enemy's regular forces we wiped out amounted to 97 brigades
(divisions) in the first year and to 94 brigades (divisions) in the second
year, our targets can be fulfilled and even overfulfilled. Of the Kuomintang's
existing military strength totalling 3,650,000 men, 70 per cent are at the
fronts (north of the line of the Yangtse River and the Pashan Mountains,
east of the line of Lanchow and the Holan Mountains and south of the
Chengteh-Changchun line); only about 30 per cent are in the rear (including
those south of the line of the Yangtse River and the Pashan Mountains and
those west of the line of Lanchow and the Holan Mountains). Of all the existing
Kuomintang regular forces, which consist of 285 brigades or 1,980,000 men,
249 brigades or 1,742,000 men are at the fronts (99 brigades or 694,000 men
on the northern front, and 150 brigades or 1,048,000 men on the southern
front). Only 36 brigades or 238,000 men are in the rear, and most of them
are newly formed troops of low combat effectiveness. Therefore, the Central
Committee has decided that during the third year the whole of the People's
Liberation Army will continue to operate north of the Yangtse River and in
northern China and the Northeast. To accomplish the task of wiping out the
enemy, it is necessary to utilize large numbers of captured soldiers in addition
to mobilizing people in the Liberated Areas, in a planned and prudent way,
to join the army.

4. Because our Party and our army were long in a position in which we were
cut apart by the enemy, were waging guerrilla warfare and were in the rural
areas, we allowed very considerable autonomy to the leading organs of the
Party and army in the different areas. This enabled the Party organizations
and armed forces to bring their initiative and enthusiasm into play and to
come through long periods of grave difficulties, but at the same time it
gave rise to certain phenomena of indiscipline and anarchy, localism and
guerrilla-ism, which were harmful to the cause of the revolution. The present
situation demands that our Party should do its utmost to overcome these phenomena
of indiscipline and anarchy, localism and guerrilla-ism and centralize all
the powers that can and must be concentrated in the hands of the Central
Committee and its agencies, so as to bring about the transition in the form
of the war from guerrilla to regular warfare. In the past two years both
the army and its operations have become more regular in character, but this
is not enough and in the third year another big step forward must be made.
For this purpose, we must do everything possible to repair and operate modern
means of communications, such as railways, highway transport and steamships,
to strengthen the administration of cities and industry and to shift the
centre of gravity of our Party work step by step from the rural areas to
the cities.

5. The task of seizing political power throughout the country demands that
our Party should quickly and systematically train large numbers of cadres
to administer military, political, economic, Party, cultural and educational
affairs. In the third year of the war, we must prepare thirty to forty thousand
cadres of lower, middle and higher ranks, so that in the fourth year when
the army advances they can march with it and bring orderly administration
to newly liberated areas with a population of some 50 to 100 million. China's
territory is very large, her population is very numerous, and the revolutionary
war is developing very rapidly; but our supply of cadres is very inadequate
-- this is a very great difficulty. In preparing cadres during the third
year, while we should rely on the old Liberated Areas to supply the greater
part, we must also pay attention to enrolling cadres from the big cities
controlled by the Kuomintang. In the big cities in Kuomintang areas there
are many workers and intellectuals who can take part in our work and who
have, generally speaking, a higher cultural level than the workers and peasants
in the old Liberated Areas. We should make use of large numbers of working
personnel from the Kuomintang's economic, financial, cultural and educational
institutions, excluding the reactionary elements. School education in the
Liberated Areas must be restored and developed.

6. The slogan of convening a political consultative conference
[4] has rallied around our Party all democratic
parties and people's organizations and all democrats without party affiliation
in the Kuomintang areas. We are arranging for representatives of these parties
and organizations to come to the Liberated Areas and are preparing to convene
a conference in 1949 of the representatives of all China's democratic parties,
people's organizations and democrats without party affiliation, in order
to establish the provisional central government of the People's Republic
of China.

7. The restoration and development of industrial and agricultural production
in the Liberated Areas is an important link in supporting the war and in
defeating the Kuomintang reactionaries. The meeting convened by the Central
Committee held that, on the one hand, the People's Liberation Army must develop
its victorious offensive into the Kuomintang areas and obtain from the Kuomintang
forces and areas the large supply of manpower and material resources needed
for the war; and that, on the other hand, in the old Liberated Areas every
effort must be made to restore and develop industrial and agricultural production
so as to raise their level to some extent. Only if these two tasks are fulfilled
will it be possible to ensure the overthrow of the reactionary rule of the
Kuomintang; otherwise, that will not be possible.

We will have many difficulties in carrying out these two tasks. When our
armies enter the Kuomintang areas in force to make war with no rear area
or with no adequate rear area, they will have to get all or most of their
military supplies themselves on the spot. The restoration and development
of industrial and agricultural production requires good organizational work,
good leadership of markets in the Liberated Areas, control of trade with
outside areas, the overcoming of shortages of certain machinery and raw materials
and, first of all, the solution of the problems of communications, transport
and the repair of railways, highways and waterways. At present there are
great difficulties in the economic and financial situation in the Liberated
Areas. Although our difficulties are much smaller than those of the Kuomintang,
they do exist. The main ones are that our material resources and manpower
are inadequate for the needs of the war and that inflation has developed
to a considerable degree. And one cause of these difficulties is the inadequacy
of our organizational work, especially in the financial and economic sphere.
We believe these difficulties can be overcome and must be overcome. In the
struggle to do so, we must fight waste and practice economy. At the front
we must see to it that everything captured is handed in, must cherish our
effective strength, take good care of weapons, use ammunition sparingly and
protect captured soldiers. In the rear we must reduce government expenses,
reduce the mobilization of manpower and draught animals not urgently needed,
reduce time taken by meetings, observe agricultural seasons so that farm
work is done on time, reduce costs in industrial production, raise labour
productivity, mobilize the whole Party to learn to manage industrial and
agricultural production and carry on trade, make the greatest possible efforts
to organize the economies of the Liberated Areas properly, overcome disorder
in the markets and wage the necessary struggles against all speculators and
manipulators. By getting down to all these jobs, we can certainly overcome
the difficulties facing us.

8. Raising the cadres' theoretical level and broadening inner-Party democracy
are important links in the fulfilment of the above tasks. The meeting convened
by the Central Committee adopted a special decision on broadening inner-Party
democracy.[5] It also discussed the problem of
raising the cadres' theoretical level and drew the attention of all comrades
present to the problem.

9. The Sixth National Labour Congress has been successfully held and the
All-China Federation of Trade Unions [6] has been
founded. In the first half of next year a National Women's Congress will
be convened to form the All-China Federation of Democratic
Women,[7] a National Youth Congress will be convened
to form the All-China Youth Federation,[8] and
the New Democratic Youth League will be
established.[9]

NOTES


1. The first betrayal by the Kuomintang was in 1927. The
betrayal here mentioned is the all-out counter-revolutionary civil war launched
by the Kuomintang after the conclusion of the War of Resistance Against Japan.

2. The defeat of the revolution in the south was the defeat
of the Chinese Red Army's fifth campaign against the Kuomintang's "encirclement
and suppression" and the withdrawal of our main force from the southern
revolutionary bases in 1934; this was the consequence of the third "Left"
deviationist line represented in the Party by Wang Ming.

3. This refers to Kuomintang soldiers who were liberated
through capture by the People's Liberation Army and joined its ranks after
having been educated.

4. The slogan of convening a political consultative conference
was put forward by Comrade Mao Tse-tung. At his suggestion, one of the "May
Day Slogans" for 1948 issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of China stated, "All democratic parties, people's organizations and public
personages should quickly call a political consultative conference to discuss
and carry out the convening of a people's congress and the formation of a
democratic coalition government." This slogan won an immediate warm response
from the democratic parties, people's organizations and democrats without
party affiliation in the Kuomintang areas. The political consultative conference
was later renamed the New Political Consultative Conference and finally the
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. See "Address to the
Preparatory Meeting of the New Political Consultative Conference", Note 1,
pp. 408-09 of this volume.

5. This refers to "The Resolution of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China on the Convening of Congresses and Conferences
of the Party at Various Levels". The resolution made the following provisions
for the broadening and building of regular democratic life within the Party:
Party committees at various levels should regularly convene Party congresses
and conferences at their respective levels, as required by the Party
Constitution. These congresses and conferences should be vested with all
the powers stipulated in the Party Constitution, and there must be no
infringement. Adequate preparations should be made before meetings. Inner-Party
controversies should be reported promptly and truthfully to the higher levels
and important controversies must be reported to the Central Committee. The
resolution also provided for strengthening the Party committee system and
required that the rule that important questions must be decided collectively
after discussion by the Party committee should be enforced by Party committees
at all levels, that no decisions on important matters should be made by an
individual and that neither collective leadership nor individual responsibility
should be overemphasized to the neglect of the other.

6. The Sixth National Labour Congress was held in Harbin
in August 1948. The All-China Federation of Trade Unions, the unified national
organization of the Chinese working class, was re-established at the congress.
The previous five National Labour Congresses were held in 1922, 1925, 1926,
1927 and 1929 respectively.

7. The First National Women's Congress was held in March
1949 in Peiping. The All-China Federation of Democratic Women, the leading
body for the organizations of the masses of women throughout the country,
was founded at this congress. It was later renamed the National Women's
Federation of the People's Republic of China.

8. .The first session of the National Youth Congress was
held in May 1949 in Peiping. The All-China Federation of Democratic Youth
was founded at this session. It was later renamed the All-China Youth Federation.

9. The New Democratic Youth League was founded in January
1949 in accordance with a decision by the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China. Its First National Congress was held in Peiping in April
1949. It was renamed the Communist Youth League at its Third National Congress
in May 1957. 
 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Concept of Operations for the Huai-hai Campaign







THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE HUAI-HAI CAMPAIGN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE HUAI-HAI CAMPAIGN


October 11, 1948

[This telegram, addressed to the Eastern China and Central Plains Field Armies
and the Bureaus of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
in those two areas, was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Revolutionary
Military Commission of the Party's Central Committee. The Huai-Hai campaign
was one of the three greatest campaigns of decisive significance in the Chinese
People's War of Liberation. The campaign was fought jointly by the Eastern
China and Central Plains Field Armies and the regional troops of the eastern
China and Central Plains areas. In this campaign over 555,000 Kuomintang
troops were wiped out. The concept of operations set forth by Comrade Mao
Tse-tung in this telegram led to complete success; in fact, the campaign
proceeded more smoothly than expected, and the victory was therefore quicker
and greater. After this campaign, Nanking, the capital of the reactionary
Kuomintang government, became subject to direct threat by the People's Liberation
Army. The Huai-Hai campaign was concluded on January 10, 1949, and on January
21 Chiang Kai-shek announced his "retirement"; after that, the reactionary
Kuomintang ruling clique in Nanking fell apart. ] 
  

Here are a few points for your consideration concerning the dispositions
for the Huai-Hai campaign. [1]

1. In the first stage of this campaign, the central task is to concentrate
forces to wipe out Huang Po-tao's army, effect a breakthrough in the centre
and capture Hsinanchen, the Grand Canal Railway Station, Tsaopachi, Yihsien,
Tsaochuang, Lincheng, Hanchuang, Shuyang, Pihsien, Tancheng, Taierhchuang
and Linyi. To achieve these objectives, you should use two columns to wipe
out each enemy division, that is to say, use six or seven columns to cut
up and wipe out the enemy's 25th, 63rd and 64th Divisions. Use five or six
columns to hold off and attack enemy reinforcements. Use one or two columns
to annihilate the one brigade under Li Mi at Lincheng and Hanchuang and strive
to capture those two towns in order to menace Hsuchow from the north so that
the two armies under Chiu Ching-chuan and Li Mi will not dare move east in
full strength as reinforcements. Use one column plus regional formation in
southwestern Shantung to make a flank attack on the Hsuchow-Shangchiu section
of the railway in order to tie down a portion of Chiu Ching-chuan's army
(as three enemy divisions under Sun Yuan-liang are about to move east, it
is hoped that Liu Po-cheng, Chen Yi and Teng Hsiao-ping will dispose their
troops at once to attack the Chengchow-Hsuchow line and so tie down Sun
Yuan-liang's army). Use one or two columns to operate in the
Suchien-Suining-Lingpi area to hold down Li Mi's army. These dispositions
mean that before the objective of annihilating the three divisions of Huang
Po-tao's army can be achieved, more than half our total force has to be employed
against the two armies under Chiu Ching-chuan and Li Mi to tie down, check
and destroy part of them. The dispositions should, by and large, be similar
to those of last September for capturing Tsinan and attacking the enemy's
reinforcements;[2]otherwise it will be impossible to achieve
the objective of annihilating the three divisions of Huang Po-tao's army.
You must strive to conclude the first stage two to three weeks after the
start of the campaign.

2. In the second stage, use about five columns to attack and wipe out the
enemy in Haichow, Hsinpu, Lienyunkang and Kuanyun and capture these towns.
It is calculated that by then the enemy's 54th and 32nd Divisions will very
likely have been transported by sea from Tsingtao to the
Haichow-Hsinpu-Lienyunkang area.[3] Altogether three enemy
divisions will be in that area, including the one division already there;
therefore we must use five columns to attack them and employ the remaining
forces (our main strength) to tie down the two armies under Chiu Ching-chuan
and Li Mi, again on the principle underlying the dispositions made in September
for capturing Tsinan and attacking the enemy's reinforcements. You must strive
to conclude this stage also in two to three weeks.

3. In the third stage, it may be assumed that the battle will be fought around
Huaiyin and Huai-an. By that time the enemy will have increased his strength
by about one division (the Reorganized 8th Division in Yentai is being shipped
south); therefore we must be prepared again to use about Eve columns as the
attacking force, while using the rest of our main force to strike at and
hold down the enemy's reinforcements. This stage will also take about two
to three weeks.

These three stages will take about a month and a half to two months.

4. You are to complete the Huai-Hai campaign in two months, November and
December. Rest and consolidate your forces next January. From March to July
you will be fighting in co-ordination with Liu Po-cheng and Teng Hsiao-ping
to drive the enemy to points along the Yangtse River, where he will dig in.
By autumn your main force will probably be fighting to cross the Yangtse.

NOTES


1. The Huai-Hai campaign was a campaign of decisive importance
fought by the People's Liberation Army over a large territory in Kiangsu,
Shantung, Anhwei and Honan Provinces, centering on Hsuchow, and extending
as far as Haichow in the east, Shangchiu in the west, Lincheng (now renamed
Hsuehcheng) in the north and the Huai River in the south. The Kuomintang
forces massed in this theatre of war consisted of 5 armies and the troops
of three Pacification Zones -- the 4 armies and the troops of three Pacification
Zones under Liu Chih and Tu Yu-ming (respectively Commander and Deputy Commander
of the Kuomintang's "Bandit Suppression" Headquarters at Hsuchow) and the
army under Huang Wei, which was later dispatched there from central China
as reinforcements. On the side of the People's Liberation Army, a force more
than 600,000 strong took part in the campaign -- it included 16 columns from
the Eastern China Field Army, 7 columns from the Central Plains Field Army
and regional armed forces from the Eastern China Military Area, the Central
Plains Military Area and the Hopei-Shantung-Honan Military Area (then a part
of the Northern China Military Area). The campaign lasted sixty-five days,
from November 6, 1948 to January 10, 1949; 22 corps, or 56 divisions, of
the Kuomintang's crack forces, comprising 555,000 men, were completely wiped
out (including 4 divisions which revolted and came over), and 2 armies under
Liu Ju-ming and Li Yen-nien (reinforcements from Nanking) were repulsed.
As a result of the campaign, those parts of the eastern China and Central
Plains areas north of the Yangtse River were almost entirely liberated. The
campaign took place in three stages. During the first stage, November 6-22,
the Eastern China Field Army, in co-ordination with the Central Plains Field
Army, surrounded and wiped out the army under Huang Po-tao in the
Hsinanchen-Nienchuang sector east of Hsuchow, killing Huang Po-tao and liberating
large territories on both sides of the Lunghai Railway east of Nienchuang,
on both sides of the Hsuchow-Pengpu section of the Tientsin-Pukow Railway
and to the west and north of Hsuchow. In the Taierhchuang-Tsaochuang sector,
3 divisions of the Kuomintang 3rd Pacification Zone, totalling over 23,000
men, revolted and came over to us. During the second stage, from November
23 to December 15, the Central Plains Field Army, in coordination with the
main force of the Eastern China Field Army, surrounded and wiped out the
army under Huang Wei at and around Shuangtuichi, southwest of Suhsien, capturing
Huang Wei and Wu Shao-chou, the commander and deputy commander of the army;
1 division of this army revolted and came over to us. At the same time, our
forces wiped out the army under Sun Yuan-liang which was fleeing west from
Hsuchow. Only Sun Yuan-liang managed to escape. During the third stage, from
January 6 to 10, 1949, the Eastern China Field Army, in co-ordination with
the Central Plains Field Army, surrounded and annihilated in the
Chinglungchi-Chenkuanchuang sector, northeast of Yungcheng, 2 Kuomintang
armies which were fleeing westward from Hsuchow and were commanded respectively
by Chiu Ching-chuan and Li Mi, under the personal command of Tu Yu-ming.
Tu Yu-ming was captured, Chiu Ching-chuan was killed and Li Mi barely escaped.
This marked the successful end of the great Huai-Hai campaign.

2. "Capturing Tsinan and attacking the enemy's reinforcements"
refers to the tactics employed by the People's Liberation Army during the
Tsinan campaign in the middle of September 1948. Tsinan, a strategic position
of the Kuomintang in Shantung Province, was garrisoned by over 110,000 men
of the Kuomintang 2nd Pacification Zone. In addition, 23 brigades of the
Kuomintang's main forces, with some 170,000 men, which were disposed in the
Hsuchow area, were ready to move north to relieve Tsinan. Our Eastern China
Field Army formed a group of 7 columns to assault the city and another group
of 8 columns to strike at the enemy's reinforcements. The onslaught against
Tsinan started on the evening of September 16, 1948. On September 24, after
eight days and nights of continuous fighting, the enemy garrison was completely
wiped out (1 corps revolted and came over to us), and Wang Yao-wu, Commander
of the Kuomintang 2nd Pacification Zone, was captured. Our forces took Tsinan
so rapidly that the enemy at Hsuchow did not dare to go north to its rescue.

3. In fact, these 2 enemy divisions did not dare to come.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Revolutionary Forces of the World Unite, Fight Against Imperialist Aggression! 







REVOLUTIONARY FORCES OF THE WORLD UNITE, FIGHT AGAINST IMPERIALIST
  AGGRESSION!



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  REVOLUTIONARY FORCES OF THE WORLD UNITE, FIGHT AGAINST IMPERIALIST
  AGGRESSION!


November 1948

[This article was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung in commemoration of the
thirty-first anniversary of the October Revolution for the organ of the
Information Bureau of the Communist and Workers' Parties of Europe, For
A Lasting Peace, For A People's Democracy. It appeared in the 21st issue
of the publication in 1948. ] 
  

At this time, when the awakened working class and all genuine revolutionaries
of the world are jubilantly celebrating the thirty-first anniversary of the
Great October Socialist Revolution of the Soviet Union, I recall a well-known
article by Stalin, written in 1918 on the first anniversary of that revolution.
In that article Stalin said:

  The great world-wide significance of the October Revolution chiefly consists
  in the fact that:


  1) It has widened the scope of the national question and converted it from
  the particular question of combating national oppression in Europe into the
  general question of emancipating the oppressed peoples, colonies and
  semi-colonies from imperialism;


  2) It has opened up wide possibilities for their emancipation and the right
  paths towards it, has thereby greatly facilitated the cause of the emancipation
  of the oppressed peoples of the West and the East, and has drawn them into
  the common current of the victorious struggle against imperialism;


  3) It has thereby erected a bridge between the socialist West and the
  enslaved East, having created a new front of revolutions against
  world imperialism, extending from the proletarians of the West, through
  the Russian revolution, to the oppressed peoples of the
  East.[1]


History has developed in the direction pointed out by Stalin. The October
Revolution has opened up wide possibilities for the emancipation of the peoples
of the world and opened up the realistic paths towards it; it has created
a new front of revolutions against world imperialism, extending from the
proletarians of the West, through the Russian revolution, to the oppressed
peoples of the East. This front of revolutions has been created and developed
under the brilliant guidance of Lenin and, after Lenin's death, of Stalin.



If there is to be revolution, there must be a revolutionary party. Without
a revolutionary party, without a party built on the Marxist-Leninist
revolutionary theory and in the Marxist-Leninist revolutionary style, it
is impossible to lead the working class and the broad masses of the people
to defeat imperialism and its running dogs. In the more than one hundred
years since the birth of Marxism, it was only through the example of the
Russian Bolsheviks in leading the October Revolution, in leading socialist
construction and in defeating fascist aggression that revolutionary parties
of a new type were formed and developed in the world. With the birth of
revolutionary parties of this type, the face of the world revolution has
changed. The change has been so great that transformations utterly inconceivable
to people of the older generation have come into being amid fire and thunder.
The Communist Party of China is a party built and developed on the model
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. With the birth of the Communist
Party of China, the face of the Chinese revolution took on an altogether
new aspect. Is this fact not clear enough?

The world revolutionary united front, with the Soviet Union at its head,
defeated fascist Germany, Italy and Japan. This was a result of the October
Revolution. If there had been no October Revolution, if there had been no
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, no Soviet Union and no anti-imperialist
revolutionary united front in the West and in the East led by the Soviet
Union, could one conceive of victory over fascist Germany, Italy, Japan and
their running dogs? If the October Revolution opened up wide possibilities
for the emancipation of the working class and the oppressed peoples of the
world and opened up realistic paths towards it, then the victory of the
anti-fascist Second World War has opened up still wider possibilities for
the emancipation of the working class and the oppressed peoples of the world
and has opened up still more realistic paths towards it. It will be a very
great mistake to underestimate the significance of the victory of World War
II.

Since the victory of World War II, U.S. imperialism and its running dogs
in various countries have taken the place of fascist Germany, Italy and Japan
and are frantically preparing a new world war and menacing the whole world;
this reflects the utter decay of the capitalist world and its fear of imminent
doom. This enemy still has strength; therefore, all the revolutionary forces
of each country must unite, and the revolutionary forces of all countries
must likewise unite, must form an anti-imperialist united front headed by
the Soviet Union and follow correct policies; otherwise, victory will be
impossible. This enemy has a weak and fragile foundation, he is disintegrating
internally, he is alienated from the people, he is confronted with inextricable
economic crises; therefore, he can be defeated. It will be a very great mistake
to overestimate the enemy's strength and underestimate the strength of the
revolutionary forces.

Under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, tremendous victories
have now been won in the great Chinese people's democratic revolution directed
against the frenzied aggression of U.S. imperialism in China and against
the traitorous, dictatorial and reactionary Kuomintang government that has
been slaughtering the Chinese people by civil war. During the two years from
July 1946 to June 1948, the People's Liberation Army led by the Communist
Party of China beat back the attacks of 4,300,000 troops of the reactionary
Kuomintang government and went over from the defensive to the offensive.
During those two years of fighting (not including developments since July
1948), the People's Liberation Army captured and wiped out 2,640,000 Kuomintang
troops. China's Liberated Areas now cover 2,350,000 square kilometres, or
24.5 per cent of the country's 9,597,000 square kilometres; they have a
population of 168 million, or 35.3 per cent of the country's 475 million;
and they contain 586 cities and towns, or 29 per cent of the 2,009 in the
whole country. Because our Party has resolutely led the peasants to carry
out the reform of the land system, the land problem has been thoroughly solved
in areas with a population of about 100 million, and the land of the landlords
and old-type rich peasants has been more or less equally distributed among
the peasants, primarily among the poor peasants and farm labourers. The
membership of the Communist Party of China has grown from 1,210,000 in 1945
to 3,000,000 today. The task of the Communist Party of China is to unite
the revolutionary forces of the whole country to drive out the aggressive
forces of U.S. imperialism, overthrow the reactionary rule of the Kuomintang
and establish a united, democratic people's republic. We know that there
are still many difficulties ahead. But we are not afraid of them. We believe
that difficulties must be and can be overcome.

The radiance of the October Revolution shines upon us. The long-suffering
Chinese people must win their liberation, and they firmly believe they can.
Always isolated in the past, China's revolutionary struggle no longer feels
isolated since the victory of the October Revolution. We enjoy the support
of the Communist Parties and the working class of the world. This point was
understood by Dr. Sun Yat-sen, forerunner of the Chinese revolution, who
established the policy of alliance with the Soviet Union against imperialism.
On his deathbed he wrote a letter to the Soviet Union as part of his testament.
It is the Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang of the Kuomintang that is betraying
Sun Yat-sen's policy, standing on the side of the imperialist
counter-revolutionary front and opposing the people of their own country.
But before long, people will witness the complete destruction of the whole
reactionary regime of the Kuomintang by the Chinese people. The Chinese people
are brave, so is the Communist Party of China, and they are determined to
liberate all China. 

NOTES


1. From "The October Revolution and the National Question",
Section III, "The World-wide Significance of the October Revolution", J.
V. Stalin, Works, Eng. ed., Moscow, 1953, Vol. IV, pp. 169-70. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Momentous Change in China's Military Situation







THE MOMENTOUS CHANGE IN CHINA'S MILITARY SITUATION



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE MOMENTOUS CHANGE IN CHINA'S MILITARY SITUATION


November 14, 1948

[This commentary was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Hsinhua News
Agency. Here Comrade Mao Tse-tung, basing himself on the new situation, that
is, the change in the relation of forces between the enemy and ourselves
after the Lisohsi-Shenyang campaign, made a new estimate of the time needed
to win victory in the People's War of Liberation and pointed out that the
reactionary rule of the Kuomintang could be overthrown in no more than a
year from November 1948. Subsequent developments in China's military situation
fully confirmed his prediction.] 
  

The military situation in China has reached a new turning point and the balance
of forces between the two sides in the war has undergone a fundamental change.
The People's Liberation Army, long superior in quality, has now become superior
in numbers as well. This is a sign that the victory of the Chinese revolution
and the realization of peace in China are at hand.

At the end of the second year of the war, that is, at the end of June this
year, the Kuomintang army still had a total of some 3,650,000 men. This was
650,000 less than the 4,300,000 men the Kuomintang had in July 1946 when
it started the country-wide civil war. The Kuomintang recruited about 2,440,000
men during the two years of war, which is the reason why the decrease was
only 650,000, although in that period approximately 3,090,000 were wiped
out or captured, or deserted (2,640,000 were wiped out or captured). Recently
a sudden change took place. In the first four months of the third year of
the war, from July 1 to November 2 when Shenyang was liberated, the Kuomintang
army lost 1,000,000 men. Its replacements during these four months have not
yet been ascertained; supposing it was able to recruit 300,000 men, then
the net decrease would be 700,000. Thus the whole of the Kuomintang's armed
forces -- army, navy and air force, regulars and irregulars, combat troops
and men in the rear-service establishments -- are now only some 2,900,000.
On the other hand, the People's Liberation Army, which had 1,200,000 men
in June 1946, grew to 2,800,000 in June 1948 and has now increased to more
than 3,000,000. Thus, the numerical superiority long enjoyed by the Kuomintang
army has rapidly turned into inferiority. This is the result of heroic fighting
by the People's Liberation Army during the past four months in all the war
theatres of the country; it is especially the result of the Sui-Ki and Tsinan
campaigns [1] on the southern front and of the
Chinchow, Changchun, Liaohsi and Shenyang campaigns
[2] on the northern front. Up to the end of June
this year, the Kuomintang still had designations for 285 divisions because
it had frantically incorporated its irregulars into its regular forces. In
these four months, the battalions and larger units wiped out by the People's
Liberation Army totalled 8, divisions, including 63 whole divisions.

Accordingly, the war will be much shorter than we originally estimated. The
original estimate was that the reactionary Kuomintang government could be
completely overthrown in about five years, beginning from July 1946.
As we now see it, only another year or so may be needed to overthrow
it completely. A longer time will be needed, however, to eliminate the
reactionary forces in all parts of the country and complete the liberation
of the people.

The enemy is collapsing rapidly, but the Communists, the People's Liberation
Army and people of all walks of life throughout the country must continue
to unite as one man and redouble their efforts; only thus can we finally
and completely wipe out the reactionary forces and build a united, democratic
people's republic in the whole country. 

NOTES


1. The Sui-Ki campaign, also known as the Eastern Honan
campaign, was fought by the People's Liberation Army in the sector comprising
Kaifeng, Suihsien and Kihsien. The campaign started on June 17, 1948. On
June 22 our army captured Kaifeng. To save his critical military situation,
Chiang Kai-shek went to the front, took personal command and mustered 3 armies
under Chiu Ching-chuan, Ou Shou-nien and Huang Po-tao to start an attack
on Kaifeng from several directions. Six columns of our Eastern China Field
Army, 2 columns of our Central Plains Field Army and our Kwangtung-Kwangsi
Column surrounded the armies under Ou Shou-nien and Huang Po-tao in the
Suihsien-Kihsien sector and, after nine days and nights of fierce fighting
(June 27-July 6), they wiped out 2 divisions, or 6 brigades, of Ou Shou-nien's
army and a part of Huang Po-tao's army, a total of over 90,000 men. Ou Shou-nien,
army commander, and Shen Cheng-nien, Commander of the Reorganized 75th Division,
were captured. For the Tsinan campaign, see "The Concept of Operations for
the Huai-Hai Campaign", Note 2, p. 282 of this volume.

2. The Chinchow, Changchun, Liaoshi and Shenyang campaigns
in northeastern China, taken together, were called the Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign.
See "The Concept of Operations for the Liaohsi-Shenyang Campaign", Note 1,
pp. 265-66 of this volume. 
 
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Concept of Operations for the Peiping-Tientsin Campaign







THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE PEIPING-TIENTSIN CAMPAIGN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS FOR THE PEIPING-TIENTSIN CAMPAIGN
  [1]


December 11, 1948

[This was a telegram drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Revolutionary
Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
and addressed to Lin Piao, Lo Jung-huan and other comrades. The Peiping-Tientsin
campaign was the last of the three greatest campaigns of decisive significance
in the Chinese People's War of Liberation. In this campaign, we wiped out
or reorganized over 520,000 Kuomintang troops, liberated the important cities
of Peiping, Tientsin and Changchiakou and concluded, in the main, the fighting
for the liberation of northern China. The concept of operations for the campaign,
set forth here by Comrade Mao Tse-tung, was fully realized in practice.]

  

1. The enemy forces in Changchiakou, Hsinpao-an and Huailai and
in the entire area of Peiping, Tientsin, Tangku and Tangshan -- except a
few units, such as certain divisions of the 35th 62nd and 84th Corps, which
still have a fairly high combat effectiveness for the defence of fortified
positions-have little offensive spirit; they are like birds startled by the
mere twang of a bow-string. This is especially the case since you advanced
south of the Great Wall. You should on no account overrate the enemy's combat
effectiveness. Some of our comrades have suffered through overrating the
enemy's combat effectiveness, but they have arrived at a correct understanding
after being criticized. The enemy at both Changchiakou and Hsinpao-an is
definitely encircled and will in all probability find it extremely difficult
to break through and escape. About half the 16th Corps has been speedily
wiped out. The enemy's 104th Corps at Huailai has hurriedly fled south and
will probably be wiped out today or tomorrow. After that is done, you will
be ready to dispatch the 4th Column from the southwest[2]
to the northeast to cut the link between Nankow and Peiping. We think this
may not be easy to accomplish; for, either the remnants of the 84th and 16th
Corps will quickly withdraw to Peiping, or the 94th, 16th and 92nd Corps
will concentrate in the Nankow-Changping-Shahochen region for joint defence.
But this move by our 4th Column will directly menace the northwestern and
northern suburbs of Peiping and tie down those enemy forces so that they
dare not move. If they should dare to move further west to reinforce the
35th Corps, we could either directly cut off their retreat or launch a direct
attack on Peiping; therefore they will probably not dare to move further
west. The army in northern China commanded by Yang Teh-chih, Lo Jui-ching
and Keng Piao is employing 9 divisions to encircle 3 divisions of the enemy's
35th Corps; this is absolute superiority. They have proposed to wipe out
these enemy divisions at an early date, but we intend to ask them not to
attack for the time being so as to lure the enemy at Peiping and Tientsin
and make it difficult for him to come to a decision to flee by sea. They
have employed 2 columns to encircle the 35th Corps and 1 column to check
the 104th Corps and have beaten back both these enemy forces.

2. We now agree to your sending the 5th Column immediately to the vicinity
of Nankow to menace the enemy at Peiping, Nankow and Huaijou from the northeast.
This column will remain there so that later (in about ten or fifteen days,
that is, when the army in northern China commanded by Yang Teh-chih, Lo Jui-ching
and Keng Piao has annihilated the 35th Corps) your 4th Column can be released
for service in the east. Therefore, please order the 5th Column to continue
its march west today.

3. The 3rd Column should on no account go to Nankow but, in accordance with
our telegram of the 9th, should move to the region east of Peiping and south
of Tunghsien to threaten Peiping from the east and, together with the 4th,
11th and 5th Columns, form an encirclement around Peiping.

4. But our real aim is not to encircle Peiping first but rather to encircle
Tientsin, Tangku, Lutai and Tangshan first.

5. We estimate that your 10th, 9th, 6th and 8th Columns, your Artillery Column
and your 7th Column will have assembled in the region around Yutien by about
December 15. We propose that, in the few days between December 20 and 25,
you move with lightning speed and employ the 6 columns -- the 3rd (which
is to march east from the eastern suburbs of Peiping), the 6th, 7th, 8th,
9th and 10th -- to encircle the enemy at Tientsin, Tangku, Lutai and Tangshan,
provided that the enemy's situation at those points remains roughly the same
as now. The method is to place 2 columns around Wuching -- at Langfang, Hohsiwu
and Yangtsun -- and to use 5 columns as wedges to be driven between enemy
positions at Tientsin, Tangku, Lutai, Tangshan and Kuyeh and so cut off contacts
between the enemy forces. All these columns should build two-way blocking
positions to ensure that the enemy cannot escape. Then they should rest and
consolidate their troops and, after recovering from fatigue, attack and wipe
out some small enemy groups. In the meantime the 4th Column should move from
northwest to east of Peiping. Before the 4th Column starts to move, the army
in northern China commanded by Yang Teh-chih, Lo Jui-ching and Keng Piao
should wipe out the enemy in Hsinpao-an. In the east, according to circumstances,
every effort should be made to wipe out the enemy in Tangku first and control
that seaport. If these two points, Tangku (the most important) and Hsinpao-an,
are captured, you will have the initiative on the whole chessboard. The above
dispositions constitute, in reality, the wholesale encirclement of the enemy
in Changchiakou, Hsinpao-an, Nankow, Peiping, Huaijou, Shunyi, Tunghsien,
Wanping (Chohsien and Lianghsiang have been captured), Fengtai, Tientsin,
Tangku, Lutai, Tangshan and Kaiping.

6. This method is generally the same as that you used in the fighting along
the line through Ihsien, Chinchow, Chinhsi, Hsingcheng, Suichung, Shanhaikuan
and Luanhsien.[3]

7. In the two weeks beginning from today (December 11-25), the basic principle
is to encircle without attacking (in the case of Changchiakou and Hsinpao-an)
and, in some cases, to cut off without encircling (in the case of Peiping,
Tientsin and Tungchow, to make only a strategic encirclement and cut the
links between the enemy forces, but not to make a tactical encirclement)
in order to wait for the completion of our dispositions and then wipe out
the enemy forces one by one. In particular, you must not wipe out all the
enemy forces at Changchiakou, Hsinpao-an and Nankow because that would compel
the enemy east of Nankow to make a quick decision to bolt. Please make sure
you understand this point.

8. In order not to prompt Chiang Kai-shek quickly to decide to ship his troops
in the Peiping-Tientsin area south by sea, we are going to order Liu Po-cheng,
Teng Hsiao-ping, Chen Yi and Su Yu, after they have wiped out Huang Wei's
army, to spare the remainder of Tu Yu-ming's armies under Chiu Ching-chuan,
Li Mi and Sun Yuanliang (about half of which have already been destroyed)
and for two weeks to make no dispositions for their final annihilation.

9. To prevent the enemy from fleeing towards Tsingtao, we are going to order
our troops in Shantung to mass certain forces to control a section of the
Yellow River near Tsinan and to make preparations along the Tsingtao-Tsinan
Railway.

10. There is little or no possibility that the enemy will flee towards Hsuchow,
Chengchow, Sian or Suiyuan.

11. The main or the only concern is that the enemy might flee by sea. Therefore,
in the coming two weeks the general method should be to encircle without
attacking or to cut off without encircling.

12. This plan is beyond the enemy's range of expectation, and it will be
very difficult for him to discern it before you complete your final dispositions.
At present, the enemy is probably calculating that you will attack Peiping.

13. The enemy always underrates the energy of our army and overrates his
own strength, though at the same time he is like a bird startled by the mere
twang of a bow-string. The enemy at Peiping and Tientsin will never expect
you to be able to complete the above dispositions by December 25.

14. In order to complete these dispositions by December 25, you should inspire
your troops in the next two weeks to ignore fatigue, to have no fear of depletion
of numbers and have no fear of cold and hunger; after these dispositions
have been made, they can rest and consolidate and take their time in attacking.

15. The sequence of attacks will be roughly the following: first, the
Tangku-Lutai sector; second, Hsinpao-an; third, the Tangshan sector; fourth,
the Tientsin and Changchiakou sectors; and, lastly, the Peiping sector.

16. What are your views on this plan? What are its shortcomings? Are there
any difficulties in its execution? Please consider all this and reply by
telegraph. 

NOTES


1. The Peiping-Tientsin campaign, fought by the Northeast
Field Army and two armies of the Northern China People's Liberation Army
under the command of Lin Piao, Lo Jung-huan, Nieh Jung-chen and other comrades,
began early in December 1948, immediately after the victorious conclusion
of the Liaohsi-Shenyang campaign in the Northeast. Acting upon Comrade Mao
Tse-tung's instructions, the Northeast Field Army, immediately after it had
victoriously fulfilled its task of liberating the whole Northeast, swept
south of the Great Wall and joined the armies of the People's Liberation
Army in northern China in co-ordinated actions to encircle and wipe out the
Kuomintang troops in northern China. Greatly alarmed by the victory of the
People's Liberation Army in the Northeast, more than 600,000 Kuomintang troops
under Fu Tso-yi, Commander-in-Chief of the Kuomintang's Northern China "Bandit
Suppression" Headquarters, hurriedly shortened their lines of defence with
the intention of fleeing south by sea or west to Suiyuan Province. Our army,
moving with lightning speed, cut apart the enemy forces and surrounded them
separately at five strong-points -- Peiping, Tientsin, Changchiakou, Hsinpao-an
and Tangku -- thus blocking their escape routes to the south and west. On
December 22, the enemy's main force at Hsinpao-an (the headquarters of his
35th Corps and 2 divisions) was surrounded and wiped out. On the 24th,
Changchiakou was taken and a corps headquarters and 7 divisions of the enemy's
11th Army, over 54,000 men in all, were wiped out. On January 14, 1949, our
troops surrounding Tientsin launched a general offensive against the city
after Chen Chang-chieh, commander of the enemy garrison, refused to surrender.
The city was liberated after twenty-nine hours' fierce fighting, the enemy
garrison of over 130,000 men was wiped out and Chen Chang-chieh was captured.
As a result, more than 200,000 enemy troops garrisoning Peiping were tightly
surrounded by our troops and their fate was sealed. Owing to the efforts
we made to win it over, the enemy's Peiping garrison, commanded by General
Fu Tso-yi, accepted peaceful reorganization. On January 31, our troops entered
Peiping, the city was proclaimed peacefully liberated and the Peiping-Tientsin
campaign came to a victorious close. During this campaign, with the exception
of the enemy garrison of over 50,000 men in Tangku, which fled by sea, over
520,000 Kuomintang troops were put out of action and reorganized by our army.
In September 1949 the Kuomintang troops in Suiyuan Province declared by telegram
that they had revolted and come over to the people and that they would accept
reorganization.

2. This means the area southwest of Nankow.

3. In September 1948, to prevent the enemy forces in Ihsien,
Chinchow, Chinhsi, Hsingcheng, Suichung, Shanhaikuan, Luanhsien and Changli,
all points along the Peiping-Liaoning Railway, from shortening their lines
and concentrating, the Northeast Field Army, then operating along that railway,
adopted the method of first using part of its troops to encircle and cut
apart the enemy units at these points and then wiping them out one by one.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Message Urging Tu Yu-ming and Others to Surrender







MESSAGE URGING TU YU-MING AND OTHERS TO SURRENDER



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  MESSAGE URGING TU YU-MING AND OTHERS TO SURRENDER


December 17, 1948

[This broadcast message was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Headquarters
of the Central Plains and the Eastern China People's Liberation Armies.]

  

General Tu Yu-ming, General Chiu Ching-chuan, General Li Mi and all corps,
division and regiment commanders of the two armies under Generals Chiu
Ching-chuan and Li Mi:

You are now at the end of your rope. Huang Wei's army was completely wiped
out on the night of the 15th, Li Yen-nien's army has taken to its heels and
fled south, and it is hopeless for you to think of joining them. Are you
hoping to break through? How can you break through when the People's Liberation
Army is all around? During the last few days you have tried to break through,
but what came of it? Your planes and tanks, too, are useless. We have more
planes and tanks than you, that is, artillery and explosives which people
call our home-made planes and tanks. Aren't they ten times more formidable
than your foreign-made planes and tanks? Your army under Sun Yuan-liang is
finished, and more than half the men in your two remaining armies have been
wounded or captured. You have brought many miscellaneous and idle personnel
of various organizations and many young students from Hsuchow and forced
them into your army, but how can these people fight? For more than ten days,
you have been surrounded ring upon ring and received blow upon blow, and
your position has shrunk greatly. You have such a tiny place, only a little
more than ten li square, and so many people are crowded together
that a single shell from us can kill a lot of you. Your wounded soldiers
and the families who have followed the army are complaining to high heaven.
Your soldiers and many of your officers have no stomach for any more fighting.
You, as deputy commander-in-chief, as commanders of armies, corps, divisions
and regiments, should understand and sympathize with the feelings of your
subordinates and families, hold their lives dear, find a way out for them
as early as possible and stop sending them to a senseless death.

Now that Huang Wei's army has been completely wiped out and Li Yen-nien's
army has fled towards Pengpu, we are able to concentrate an attacking force
several times your strength. This time we have fought for only forty days,
and you have already lost 10 divisions under Huang Po-tao, 11 under Huang
Wei, 4 under Sun Yuan-liang, 4 under Feng Chih-an, 2 under Sun Liang-cheng,
1 under Liu Ju-ming, 1 division in Suhsien and another in Lingpi -- altogether
you have lost 34 whole divisions. Of these, 27 divisions were completely
wiped out by our army; the only exceptions were the 3 divisions led by Ho
Chi-feng and Chang Ke-hsia and 1 division led by Liao Yun-chou, which revolted
and came over to our side, and 1 division led by Sun Liang-cheng and the
2 half-divisions led by Chao Pi-kuang and Huang Tse-hua, which
surrendered.[1] You have seen with your own eyes the fate
of the 3 armies under Huang Po-tao, Huang Wei and Sun Yuan-liang. You should
learn from the example of General Cheng Tung-kuo in
Changchun[2] and from the current example of corps commander
Sun Liang-cheng and division commanders Chao Pi-kuang and Huang Tse-hua and
immediately order all your troops to lay down their arms and cease resistance.
Our army will guarantee life and safety to you, high-ranking officers, and
to all officers and men. This is your only way out. Think it over! If you
feel this is right, then do it. If you still want to fight another round,
you can have it, but you will be finished off anyway.[3]

Headquarters of the Central Plains

People's Liberation Army

Headquarters of the Eastern China People's Liberation Army 

NOTES


1. Ho Chi-feng and Chang Ke-hsia, Deputy Commanders of
the Kuomintang's 3rd Pacification Zone, revolted against the Kuomintang in
the Chiawang sector, northeast of Hsuchow, on November 8, 1948, during the
first stage of the Huai-Hai campaign, and came over to the People's Liberation
Army with 1 corps headquarters, 3 divisions and 1 regiment, totalling more
than 20,000 men. Liao Yun-chou, Commander of the 110th Division of the
Kuomintang's 85th Corps, revolted against the Kuomintang at Lochi, southwest
of Suhsien, Anhwei Province, on November 27, 1948, during the second stage
of the Huai-Hai campaign, and came over to the People's Liberation Army with
his division headquarters and 2 full regiments, totalling 5,500 men. Sun
Liang-cheng, Deputy Commander of the Kuomintang's 1st Pacification Zone and
Commander of the 107th Corps, came over to the People's Liberation Army with
his corps headquarters and 1 division, totalling 5,800 men, northwest of
Suining, Kiangsu Province, on November 13, 1948, during the first stage of
the Huai-Hai campaign. Chao Pi-kuang, Commander of the 150th Division of
the Kuomintang's 44th Corps, came over to the People's Liberation Army with
over 2,000 of his remaining troops in the Nienchuang sector, east of Hsuchow,
Kiangsu Province, on November 18, 1948, during the first stage of the Huai-Hai
campaign. Huang Tse-hua, Commander of the 23rd Division of the Kuomintang's
85th Corps, came over to the People's Liberation Army with his division
headquarters and the remnants of 2 regiments at Shuangtuichi, northeast of
Mengcheng, Anhwei Province, in December 1948, during the second stage of
the Huai-Hai campaign.

2. Changchun had been besieged by the Northeast People's
Liberation Army since the winter of 1947. After the capture of Chinchow by
our army, when all the enemy troops in the Northeast were in a shaky position,
Cheng Tung-kuo, Kuomintang commander in Changchun and Deputy Commander-in-Chief
of the Kuomintang's Northeast "Bandit Suppression" Headquarters, led the
army troops of the 1st Army and the officers and men of the New 7th Corps
to surrender on October 19, 1948.

3. After receiving this message, Tu Yu-ming, Deputy
Commander-in-Chief of the Kuomintang's Hsuchow "Bandit Suppression" Headquarters,
Chiu Ching-chuan, Commander of the Kuomintang's 2nd Army, and Li Mi, Commander
of the Kuomintang's 13th Army, continued to resist desperately with the result
that all their troops were wiped out by our army's powerful offensive. Tu
Yu-ming was captured, Chiu Ching-chuan was killed and only Li Mi managed
to escape. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Carry the Revolution Through to the End 








CARRY THE REVOLUTION THROUGH TO THE END



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

CARRY THE REVOLUTION THROUGH TO THE END


December 30, 1948

[This New Year message for 1949 was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Hsinhua News Agency.] 
  

The Chinese people will win final victory in the great War of Liberation.
Even our enemy no longer doubts the outcome.

The war has followed a tortuous course. When the reactionary Kuomintang
government started the counter-revolutionary war, it had approximately three
and a half times as many troops as the People's Liberation Army; the equipment,
manpower and material resources of its army were far superior to those of
the People's Liberation Army; it had modern industries and modern means of
communication, which the People's Liberation Army lacked; it had received
large-scale military and economic aid from U.S. imperialism and had made
long preparations. Therefore, during the first year of the war (July 1946
-- June 1947) the Kuomintang was on the offensive and the People's Liberation
Army on the defensive. In 1946 in the Northeast, the Kuomintang occupied
Shenyang, Szepingkai, Changchun, Kirin, Antung and other cities and most
of Liaoning, Liaopei and Antung Provinces; [1]
south of the Yellow River, it occupied the cities of Huaiyin and Hotse and
most of the Hupeh-Honan-Anhwei, Kiangsu-Anhwei, Honan-Anhwei-Kiangsu and
Southwestern Shantung Liberated Areas; and north of the Great Wall, it occupied
the cities of Chengteh, Chining and Changchiakou and most of Jehol, Suiyuan
and Chahar Provinces. The Kuomintang blustered and swaggered like a conquering
hero. The People's Liberation Army adopted the correct strategy, which had
as its main objective to wipe out the Kuomintang's effective strength rather
than to hold territory, and in each month destroyed an average of some eight
brigades of the Kuomintang regular troops (the equivalent of eight present-day
divisions). As a result, the Kuomintang was finally compelled to abandon
its plan for the over-all offensive and by the first half of 1947 it had
to limit the major targets of its attack to the two wings of the southern
front, i.e., Shantung and northern Shensi. In the second year (July 1947
-- June 1948) a fundamental change took place in the war. Having wiped out
large numbers of Kuomintang regulars, the People's Liberation Army went over
from the defensive to the offensive on the southern and northern fronts,
while the Kuomintang had to turn from the offensive to the defensive. The
People's Liberation Army not only recovered most of the territories lost
in northeastern China, Shantung and northern Shensi but also extended the
battle front into the Kuomintang areas north of the Yangtse and Weishui Rivers.
Moreover, in the course of attacking and capturing Shihchiachuang, Yuncheng,
Szepingkai, Loyang, Yichuan, Paoki, Weihsien, Linfen and Kaifeng, our army
mastered the tactics of storming heavily fortified points.
[2] The People's Liberation Army formed its own
artillery and engineer corps. Don't forget that the People's Liberation Army
had neither aircraft nor tanks, but once it had formed an artillery and an
engineer corps superior to those of the Kuomintang army, the defensive system
of the Kuomintang, with all its aircraft and tanks, appeared negligible by
contrast. The People's Liberation Army was already able to conduct not only
mobile warfare but positional warfare as well. In the first half of the third
year of the war (July-December 1948), another fundamental change has occurred.
The People's Liberation Army, so long outnumbered, has gained numerical
superiority. It has been able not only to capture the Kuomintang's heavily
fortified cities but also to surround and destroy strong formations of Kuomintang
crack troops, a hundred thousand or several hundred thousand at a time. The
rate at which the People's Liberation Army is wiping out Kuomintang troops
has become much faster. Look at the statistics on the number of Kuomintang
regular units of battalion level and above which we have destroyed (including
enemy troops who have revolted and come over to our side). In the first year,
97 brigades, including 46 brigades entirely wiped out; in the second year,
94 brigades, including 50 brigades entirely wiped out; and in the first half
of the third year, according to incomplete figures, 147 divisions, including
111 divisions entirely wiped out.[3] In these six
months, the number of enemy divisions entirely wiped out was 15 more than
the grand total for the previous two years. The enemy front as a whole has
completely crumbled. The enemy troops in the Northeast have been entirely
wiped out, those in northern China will soon be entirely wiped out, and in
eastern China and the Central Plains only a few enemy forces are left. The
annihilation of the Kuomintang's main forces north of the Yangtse River greatly
facilitates the forthcoming crossing of the Yangtse by the People's Liberation
Army and its southward drive to liberate all China. Simultaneously with victory
on the military front, the Chinese people have scored tremendous victories
on the political and economic fronts. For this reason public opinion the
world over, including the entire imperialist press, no longer disputes the
certainty of the country-wide victory of the Chinese People's War of Liberation.

The enemy will not perish of himself. Neither the Chinese reactionaries nor
the aggressive forces of U.S. imperialism in China will step down from the
stage of history of their own accord. Precisely because they realize that
the country-wide victory of the Chinese People's War of Liberation can no
longer be prevented by purely military struggle, they are placing more and
more importance each day on political struggle. On the one hand, the Chinese
reactionaries and the U.S. aggressors are using the existing Kuomintang
government for their "peace" plot; on the other hand, they are scheming to
use certain persons who have connections both with them and with the
revolutionary camp, inciting and instigating these persons to work artfully,
strive to infiltrate the revolutionary camp and form a so-called opposition
faction within it. The purpose is to preserve the reactionary forces and
undermine the revolutionary forces. According to reliable information, the
U.S. government has decided on this scheme and begun to carry it out in China.
The U.S. government has changed its policy of simply backing the Kuomintang's
counter-revolutionary war to a policy embracing two forms of struggle:

  1. Organizing the remnants of the Kuomintang's armed forces and the so-called
  local forces to continue to resist the People's Liberation Army south of
  the Yangtse River and in the remote border provinces, and


  2. Organizing an opposition faction within the revolutionary camp to strive
  with might and main to halt the revolution where it is or, if it must advance,
  to moderate it and prevent it from encroaching too far on the interests of
  the imperialists and their running dogs.


  The British and French imperialists support this U.S. policy. Many people
  do not yet see this situation clearly, but it probably will not be long before
  they do.


The question now facing the Chinese people, all democratic parties and all
people's organizations is whether to carry the revolution through to the
end or to abandon it half-way. If the revolution is to be carried through
to the end, we must use the revolutionary method to wipe out all the forces
of reaction resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely; we must unswervingly
persist in overthrowing imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism;
and we must overthrow the reactionary rule of the Kuomintang on a country-wide
scale and set up a republic that is a people's democratic dictatorship under
the leadership of the proletariat and with the worker-peasant alliance as
its main body. In this way, the Chinese nation will completely throw off
the oppressor; the country will be transformed from a semi-colony into a
genuinely independent state; the Chinese people will be fully emancipated,
overthrowing once and for all both feudal oppression and oppression by
bureaucrat-capital (Chinese monopoly capital) and will thus achieve unity,
democracy and peace, create the prerequisites for transforming China from
an agricultural into an industrial country and make it possible for her to
develop from a society with exploitation of man by man into a socialist society.
If the revolution is abandoned half-way, it will mean going against the will
of the people, bowing to the will of the foreign aggressors and Chinese
reactionaries and giving the Kuomintang a chance to heal its wounds, so that
one day it may pounce suddenly to strangle the revolution and again plunge
the whole country into darkness. That is how clearly and sharply the question
is now posed. Which of these two roads to choose? Every democratic party,
every people's organization in China must consider this question, must choose
its road and clarify its stand. Whether China's democratic parties and people's
organizations can sincerely co-operate without parting company half-way depends
on whether they are agreed on this question and take unanimous action to
overthrow the common enemy of the Chinese people. What is needed here is
unanimity and co-operation, not the setting up of any "opposition faction"
or the pursuit of any "middle road".[4]

In the long period of more than twenty years from the counterrevolutionary
coup d'état of April 12, 1927 [5] to this
day, have the Chinese reactionaries headed by Chiang Kai-shek and his ilk
not given proof enough that they are a gang of blood-stained executioners,
who slaughter people without blinking? Have they not given proof enough that
they are a band of professional traitors and the running dogs of imperialism?
Think it over, everybody! How magnanimous the Chinese people have been towards
this gang of bandits in the hope of achieving internal peace with them, since
the Sian Incident of December 1936, since the Chungking negotiations of October
1945 and since the Political Consultative Conference of January 1946! But
has all this goodwill changed their class nature by one jot or little? In
their history not a single one of these bandits can be separated from U.S.
imperialism. Relying on U.S. imperialism, they have plunged 475 million of
our compatriots into a huge civil war of unprecedented brutality and slaughtered
millions upon millions of men and women, young and old, with bombers, fighter
planes, guns, tanks, rocket-launchers, automatic rifles, gasoline bombs,
gas projectiles and other weapons, all supplied by U.S. imperialism. And
relying on these criminals, U.S. imperialism on its part has seized China's
sovereign rights over her own territory, waters and air space, seized inland
navigation rights and special commercial privileges, seized special privileges
in China's domestic and foreign affairs and even seized the privilege of
killing people, beating them up, driving cars over them and raping women,
all with impunity. Can it be said that the Chinese people, who have been
compelled to fight such a long and bloody war, should still show affection
and tenderness towards these most vicious enemies and should not completely
destroy or expel them? Only by completely destroying the Chinese reactionaries
and expelling the aggressive forces of U.S. imperialism can China gain
independence, democracy and peace. Isn't this truth clear enough by now?

What deserves attention is that all of a sudden the enemies of the Chinese
people are doing their best to assume a harmless and even a pitiable look
(readers, please remember that in the future they will try to look pitiable
again). Didn't Sun Fo, who has now become president of the Kuomintang's Executive
Yuan, state in June last year that a "settlement will finally come, provided
militarily we fight to the end"? But this time, the moment he took office
he talked glibly about an "honourable peace" and said that "the Government
has been striving for peace and only resorted to fighting because peace could
not be realized, but the ultimate objective of fighting is still to restore
peace". Immediately afterwards, on December 21, a United Press dispatch from
Shanghai predicted that Sun Fo's statement would meet with widespread approval
in U.S. official quarters and among the Kuomintang liberals. At present,
U.S. officials have not only become deeply interested in "peace" in China
but also repeatedly assert that ever since the Moscow Conference of Foreign
Ministers of the Soviet Union, the United States and Britain in December
1945, the United States has adhered to a "policy of non-interference in China's
internal affairs". How are we to deal with these worthies from the "Land
of Gentlemen"? Here, it is fitting to quote an ancient Greek fable. One winter's
day, a farmhand found a snake frozen by the cold. Moved by compassion, he
picked it up and put it in his bosom. The snake was revived by the warmth,
its natural instincts returned, and it gave its benefactor a fatal bite.
The dying farmhand said, "I've got what I deserve for taking pity on an evil
creature."[6] Venomous snakes, foreign and Chinese,
hope that the Chinese people will die like the farmhand, that like him the
Chinese Communist Party and all Chinese revolutionary democrats will be
kind-hearted to them. But the Chinese people, the Chinese Communist Party
and the genuine revolutionary democrats of China have heard the labourer's
dying words and will well remember them. Moreover, the serpents infesting
most of China, big or small, black or white, baring their poisonous fangs
or assuming the guise of beautiful girls, are not yet frozen by the cold,
although they already sense the threat of winter.

The Chinese people will never take pity on snake-like scoundrels, and they
honestly believe that no one is their true friend who guilefully says that
pity should be shown these scoundrels and says that anything else would be
out of keeping with China's traditions, fall short of greatness, etc. Why
should one take pity on snake-like scoundrels? What worker, what peasant,
what soldier, says that such scoundrels should be pitied? True, there are
"Kuomintang liberals" or non-Kuomintang "liberals" who advise the Chinese
people to accept the "peace" offered by the United States and the Kuomintang,
that is, to enshrine and worship the remnants of imperialism, feudalism and
bureaucrat-capitalism so that these treasures shall not become extinct on
earth. But they are decidedly not workers, peasants or soldiers, nor are
they the friends of workers, peasants and soldiers.

We hold that the Chinese people's revolutionary camp must be expanded and
must embrace all who are willing to join the revolutionary cause at the present
stage. The Chinese people's revolution needs a main force and also needs
allies, for an army without allies cannot defeat the enemy. The Chinese people,
now at the high tide of revolution, need friends and they should remember
their friends and not forget them. In China there are undoubtedly many friends
faithful to the people's revolutionary cause, who try to protect the people's
interests and are opposed to protecting the enemy's interests, and undoubtedly
none of these friends should be forgotten or cold-shouldered. Also, we hold
that we must consolidate the Chinese people's revolutionary camp and not
allow bad elements to sneak in or wrong views to prevail. Besides keeping
their friends in mind, the Chinese people, now at the high tide of revolution,
should also keep their enemies and the friends of their enemies firmly in
mind. As we said above, since the enemy is cunningly using the method of
"peace" and the method of sneaking into the revolutionary camp to preserve
and strengthen his position, whereas the fundamental interests of the people
demand that all reactionary forces be destroyed thoroughly and that the
aggressive forces of U.S. imperialism be driven out of China, those who advise
the people to take pity on the enemy and preserve the forces of reaction
are not friends of the people, but friends of the enemy.

The raging tide of China's revolution is forcing all social strata to decide
their attitude. A new change is taking place in the balance of class forces
in China. Multitudes of people are breaking away from Kuomintang influence
and control and coming over to the revolutionary camp; and the Chinese
reactionaries have fallen into hopeless straits, isolated and abandoned.
As the People's War of Liberation draws closer and closer to final victory,
all the revolutionary people and all friends of the people will unite more
solidly and, led by the Communist Party of China, resolutely demand the complete
destruction of the reactionary forces and the thoroughgoing development of
the revolutionary forces until a people's democratic republic on a countrywide
scale is founded and a peace based on unity and democracy is achieved. The
U.S. imperialists, the Chinese reactionaries and their friends, on the contrary,
are incapable of uniting solidly and will indulge in endless squabbles, mutual
abuse, recrimination and betrayal. On one point, however, they will co-operate
-- in striving by every means to undermine the revolutionary forces and preserve
the reactionary forces. They will use every means, open and secret, direct
and indirect. But it can definitely be stated that their political intrigues
will meet with the same defeats as their military attacks. Having had plenty
of experience, the Chinese people and their general staff, the Communist
Party of China, are certain to smash the enemy's political intrigues, just
as they have shattered his military attacks, and to carry the great People's
War of Liberation through to the end.

In 1949, the Chinese People's Liberation Army will advance south of the Yangtse
River and will win even greater victories than in 1948.

In 1949, on the economic front we shall achieve even greater successes than
in 1948. Our agricultural and industrial production will rise to a higher
level than before, and rail and highway traffic will be completely restored.
In their operations the main formations of the People's Liberation Army will
discard certain survivals of guerrilla habits and reach a higher level of
regularization.

In 1949, the Political Consultative Conference, with no reactionaries
participating and having as its aim the fulfilment of the tasks of the people's
revolution, will be convened, the People's Republic of China will be proclaimed,
and the Central Government of the Republic will be established. This government
will be a democratic coalition government under the leadership of the Communist
Party of China, with the participation of appropriate persons representing
the democratic parties and people's organizations.

These are the main concrete tasks which the Chinese people, the Communist
Party of China and all the democratic parties and people's organizations
in China should strive to fulfil in 1949. We shall brave all difficulties
and unite as one to fulfil these tasks.

In our struggle we shall overthrow once and for all the feudal oppression
of thousands of years and the imperialist oppression of a hundred years.
The year 1949 will be a year of tremendous importance. We should redouble
our efforts.

NOTES


1. Following the Japanese surrender in 1945, the Kuomintang
government divided the three northeastern provinces of Liaoning, Kirin and
Heilungkiang into nine provinces, Liaoning, Liaopei, Antung, Kirin, Hokiang,
Sungkiang, Heilungkiang, Nunkiang and Hsingan. In 1949 our Northeast
Administrative Commission redivided the area into five provinces, Liaotung,
Liaohsi, Kirin, Heilungkiang and Sungkiang. Together with Jehol, these provinces
were then referred to as the six northeastern provinces. In 1954 the Central
People's Government Council merged the two provinces of Liaotung and Liaohsi
into the one province of Liaoning and the two provinces of Sungkiang and
Heilungkiang into the one province of Heilungkiang, while Kirin remained
unchanged. In 1955 Jehol Province was abolished and the area previously under
its jurisdiction was divided and incorporated into the provinces of Hopei
and Liaoning and the Inner Mongolian Autonomous Region.

2. The dates of the taking of these key points were:
Shihchiachuang, November 12, 1947; Yuncheng, December 28, 1947; Szepingkai,
March 13, 1948; Loyang, first on March 14, 1948, and again on April 5, 1948;
Yichuan, March 3, 1948; Paoki, April 26, 1948; Weihsien, April 27, 1948;
Linfen, May 17, 1948; and Kaifeng, June 22, 1948. All these cities were fortified
with many groups of blockhouses, and some had high, thick city walls; also,
they all had auxiliary defence works, including multiple lines of trenches,
barbed-wire entanglements and abatis. Our army at the time had neither planes
nor tanks, and little or no artillery. In attacking and taking these cities,
our army learned a complete set of tactics for taking strong fortifications.
These tactics were:

  (1) successive demolition -- using explosives to demolish the enemy's different
  defence installations in succession;


  (2) tunnel operations -- secretly digging tunnels to and under the enemy's
  blockhouses or city walls, then blowing them up with explosives and following
  up with fierce attacks;


  (3) approach trench operations -- digging trenches towards the enemy's
  fortifications, then approaching under cover to make sudden attacks;


  (4) explosive package projectors -- shooting packages of explosives from
  missile-projectors or mortars to destroy the enemy's defences;


  (5) "sharp knife" tactics -- concentrating manpower and firepower to effect
  a breakthrough and to cut up the enemy forces.


3. The brigades mentioned here were those designated as
brigades after the reorganization of the Kuomintang army, while the divisions
were pre-reorganization divisions (which were practically the same as the
reorganized brigades).

4. The "middle road" was also called the "third road".
See "The Present Situation and Our Tasks", Note 9, p. 176 of this volume.

5. See "The Situation and Our Policy After the Victory
in the War of Resistance Against Japan", Note 8, p. 23 of this volume.

6. "Evil for Good" in Aesop's Fables. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the War Criminal's Suing for Peace 








ON THE WAR CRIMINAL'S SUING FOR PEACE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON THE WAR CRIMINAL'S SUING FOR PEACE


January 5, 1949

[This commentary was the first of a series written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung
for the Hsinhua News Agency to expose the Kuomintang's use of peace negotiations
in order to preserve the counter-revolutionary forces. Other commentaries
in the series included "Why Do the Badly Split Reactionaries Still Idly Clamour
for 'Total Peace'?", "The Kuomintang Reactionaries Turn from an 'Appeal for
Peace' to an Appeal for War", "On the Kuomintang's Different Answers to the
Question of Responsibility for the War" and "Whither the Nanking Government?"
] 
  

In order to preserve the forces of Chinese reaction and U.S. aggression in
China, Chiang Kai-shek, China's No. 1 war criminal and chieftain
of the Kuomintang bandit gang, issued a statement on New Year's Day suing
for peace. The war criminal Chiang Kai-shek says: 

  I have no desire of my own other than that the peace negotiations should
  not impair the country's independence and integrity but instead should help
  the rehabilitation of the people; that the sacred constitution should not
  be violated by my action and that democratic constitutionalism should not
  be thereby undermined; that the form of government of the Republic of China
  should be guaranteed and the legally constituted authority of the Republic
  of China should not be interrupted; that the armed forces should be definitely
  preserved and that the people should be allowed to continue their free way
  of life and maintain their present minimum standard of living.


  . . . If only peace can be realized, I certainly do not care whether I remain
  in office or retire, but will abide by the common will of the people.


People should not think that there is something ridiculous about a war criminal
suing for peace, nor should they think that such a bid for peace is really
disgusting. It should be understood that for the No. 1 war criminal
and chieftain of the Kuomintang bandit gang to sue personally for peace and
issue such a statement is obviously of some benefit to the Chinese people,
because it enables them to see through the plots of the Kuomintang bandit
gang and the U.S. imperialists. For the Chinese people can tell from this
that the "peace" about which there has lately been so much clamour is exactly
what this Chiang Kai-shek gang of murderers and their U.S. master urgently
need.

Chiang Kai-shek has confessed the gang's whole plot. The main points of this
plot are as follows: 

"The peace negotiations should not impair the country's independence and
integrity" -- this is first in importance. "Peace" is all right, but "peace"
is a million times wrong if it impairs the "independence and integrity" of
the state of the four big families and the comprador and landlord classes.
"Peace" is absolutely all wrong if it impairs such treaties as the Sino-U.S.
Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation, the Sino-U.S. Air Transport
Agreement [1] and the Sino-U.S. bilateral agreement,
[2] or if it impairs such prerogatives enjoyed
by the United States in China as the stationing of ground, naval and air
forces, the building of military bases, the exploitation of mines and the
monopoly of trade, or if it interferes with China's becoming a U.S. colony
-- in short, if it impairs any such measures as protect the "independence
and integrity" of Chiang Kai-shek's reactionary state.

"Help the rehabilitation of the people" -- that is, "peace" must help the
rehabilitation of the Chinese reactionaries, who have been defeated but not
yet wiped out, so that, once rehabilitated, they can stage a comeback and
extinguish the revolution. This is exactly what "peace" is for. The war has
been going on for two and a half years, "the running dog can no longer run"
and the Americans are angry; a rest-cure, however brief, is better than none.

"The sacred constitution should not be violated by my action and democratic
constitutionalism should not be thereby undermined; the form of government
of the Republic of China should be guaranteed and the legally constituted
authority of the Republic of China should not be interrupted" -- all this
means guaranteeing the ruling position of China's reactionary classes and
reactionary government and guaranteeing that the "legally constituted authority"
of these classes and their government will not be "interrupted". This "legally
constituted authority" certainly must not be "interrupted", for to "interrupt"
it would be very dangerous -- it would mean the finish of the whole of the
comprador and landlord classes, the end of the Kuomintang gang of bandits
and the arrest and punishment of all the war criminals, big, medium and small.

"The armed forces should be definitely preserved" -- they are the lifeline
of the comprador and landlord classes, and although several millions have
been wiped out by the detested People's Liberation Army, there still remain
one million several hundred thousand troops which must be "preserved", and
"definitely" so. If they were "preserved", but not "definitely", the comprador
and landlord classes would lose their capital, their "legally constituted
authority" would still be "interrupted", the Kuomintang bandit gang would
still be finished, all the war criminals, big, medium and small, would still
be arrested and punished. Just as the life of Chia Pao-yu of the Grand View
Garden depended upon a piece of jade in his
necklace,[3] the life of the Kuomintang depends
upon its army, so how can one say that its army should not be "preserved",
or should only be "preserved" but not "definitely" so?

"The people should be allowed to continue their free way of life and maintain
their present minimum standard of living" -- this means the Chinese comprador
and landlord classes must preserve their freedom to oppress and exploit the
people of the whole country and their freedom to maintain their present standard
of lordly, luxurious, loose and idle living, while the Chinese working people
must preserve their freedom to be oppressed and exploited and maintain their
present standard of living, a life of cold and hunger. That is the ultimate
aim of the war criminals in suing for peace. What is the use of peace, if
the war criminals and the classes to which they belong cannot preserve their
freedom to oppress and exploit and cannot maintain their standard of lordly,
luxurious, loose and idle living? To preserve all this, it is of course necessary
for the workers, peasants, intellectuals, government employees and teachers
to maintain their present "free way of life and minimum standard of living",
a life of cold and hunger. Once our beloved President Chiang puts forward
this condition, the tens of millions of workers, handicraftsmen and
professionals, the hundreds of millions of peasants, and the millions of
intellectuals, government employees and teachers can only clap their hands
in unison, prostrate themselves and shout, "Long live the President!" If
the Communist Party still refuses peace, so that this wonderful way of life
and standard of living cannot be maintained, then it will be guilty of a
crime for which it deserves to die ten thousand deaths, and "the Communist
Party will be held responsible for all the consequences".

In saying all this, however, we have not exhausted the whole treasury of
wonderful ideas in the war criminal's statement of January 1 suing for peace.
Here is another gem -- what Chiang Kai-shek in his New Year message calls
"a decisive battle in the Nanking-Shanghai sector". Where is the strength
for such a "decisive battle"? Chiang Kai-shek says, "It must be understood
that today the strength of the government in the military, political, economic
or any other field is several times or even tens of times greater than that
of the Communist Party." Oh! Ho! How can people not be scared to death by
such immense strength? Leaving political and economic strength aside and
taking only military strength, one sees that the People's Liberation Army
now has over three million men, that two times "greater" than this number
is over six million and that ten times "greater" is over thirty million.
And how many will "tens of times" be? All right, let's take twenty times,
which gives over sixty million men; no wonder President Chiang says he has
"full confidence in winning the decisive battle". Why then should he beg
for peace? Certainly not because he can no longer fight. For if he were to
bring the pressure of over sixty million troops to bear, could there be any
chance of survival for the Communist Party or any other party in the world?
All of course would be crushed to powder. It is clear then that when he begs
for peace, it is certainly for no other reason than "to plead for the life
of the people".

But is everything going well, without any hitch? There is a hitch, it is
said. What is the hitch? President Chiang says:

  It is regrettable that there are people in our government who have come under
  the influence of malicious Communist propaganda and are consequently in a
  wavering state of mind, having almost lost their self-confidence. Spiritually
  menaced by the Communists, they see only the enemy's strength but not our
  own huge strength, which is tens of times greater than the enemy's.


Well, every year brings its crop of news, but this year's is something very
special. Isn't it an extra-special piece of news that members of the Kuomintang,
with their sixty million odd officers and men, see only the People's Liberation
Army of three million odd men but not their own army of over sixty million?

One may ask, "Is there a market for such news?" and "Is it worth even a glance?"
According to information received from inside the city of Peiping, "On New
Year's Day prices dropped slightly in the morning but recovered in the
afternoon." And a foreign news agency reports, "Shanghai's response to Chiang
Kai-shek's New Year message is cold." This answers the question as to whether
the war criminal Chiang Kai-shek has any market. As we said long ago, Chiang
Kai-shek has lost his soul, is merely a corpse, and no one believes him any
more. 

NOTES


1. The "Sino-U.S. Air Transport Agreement" between the
Chiang Kai-shek government and U.S. imperialism was signed on December 20,
1946. In this agreement, Chiang Kai-shek completely sold out China's sovereignty
over her air space. According to its provisions, U.S. aircraft were allowed
to fly, load and unload or trans-ship anywhere within China, and the United
States gained complete control of the country's air transport. U.S. aircraft
were also accorded the right of "non-traffic stop", that is, of military
landings on Chinese territory.

2. The "Sino-U.S. bilateral agreement" was the so-called
Sino-U.S. Economic Aid Agreement signed at Nanking on July 3, 1948 between
the representatives of the Chiang Kai-shek government and U.S. imperialism.
It stipulated that U.S. imperialism was to have supreme authority to supervise
and decide the financial and economic affairs of the Chiang Kai-shek government,
that U.S. personnel exercising direct control in China were to enjoy
"extraterritorial rights", and that U.S. imperialism could obtain from China
any strategic materials it needed and was to be kept informed regularly by
the Chiang Kai-shek government about their availability. In this agreement
the Chiang Kai-shek government also guaranteed that U.S. goods could be dumped
in China.

3. Chia Pao-yu was a character in The Dream of the
Red Chamber, an 18th century Chinese novel, and the Grand View Garden
was his family garden. It was said that Chia Pao-yu was born with a piece
of jade in his mouth. This jade was "the root of his life" and had to be
worn constantly around his neck. He was not to part with it. If be lost it,
he would lose his wits. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Statement on the Present Situation by Mao Tse-tung, Chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China 







STATEMENT ON THE PRESENT SITUATION BY MAO, CHAIRMAN OF THE CENTRAL
  COMMITTEE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

STATEMENT ON THE PRESENT SITUATION BY MAO TSE-TUNG, CHAIRMAN OF THE CENTRAL
  COMMITTEE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA


January 14, 1949 


Two and a half years have gone by since July 1946, when the reactionary Nanking
Kuomintang government, with the aid of the U.S. imperialists, violated the
will of the people, tore up the truce agreement and the resolutions of the
Political Consultative Conference and launched the country-wide
counter-revolutionary civil war. In these two and a half years of war, the
reactionary Nanking Kuomintang government has, in violation of the will of
the people, convened a bogus National Assembly, promulgated a bogus constitution,
elected a bogus president and issued a bogus decree on the so-called
"mobilization for putting down the rebellion"; sold out the national interest
wholesale to the U.S. government and received loans amounting to thousands
of millions of U.S. dollars; invited the U.S. navy and air force to occupy
China's territory and territorial sea and air; signed a large batch of
treasonable treaties with the U.S. government and accepted the U.S. Military
Advisory Group's participation in China's civil war; and obtained from the
U.S. government huge quantities of aircraft, tanks, light and heavy artillery,
machine-guns, rifles, shells, bullets and other war matériel for
slaughtering the Chinese people. And it was on the basis of these reactionary
and traitorous basic policies, domestic and foreign, that the reactionary
Nanking Kuomintang government ordered millions of troops to launch ruthless
attacks on the Chinese People's Liberated Areas and the Chinese People's
Liberation Army. All the People's Liberated Areas in eastern China, the Central
Plains, northern China, the Northwest and the Northeast were, without exception,
trampled upon by the Kuomintang troops. The leading cities in the Liberated
Areas, such as Yenan, Changchiakou, Huaiyin, Hotse, Taming, Linyi, Yentai,
Chengteh, Szepingkai, Changchun, Kirin and Antung, were all occupied by these
bandit troops at one time or another. Wherever they went, they massacred
and raped, burned and looted, and stopped at nothing. In the areas under
its rule, the reactionary Nanking Kuomintang government sucks the life-blood
of the broad masses of the people -- the workers, peasants, soldiers,
intellectuals and businessmen -- by exacting grain levies, taxes and forced
labour for "putting down the rebellion and suppressing the bandits". The
reactionary Nanking Kuomintang government deprives the people of all their
freedoms and rights; it oppresses all the democratic parties and the people's
organizations, denying them their legal status; it suppresses the righteous
movement of the students against civil war, hunger and persecution and against
U.S. interference in China's internal affairs and U.S. fostering of the forces
of aggression in Japan; it floods the country with the bogus national currency
and the bogus gold yuan notes, thus ruining the economic life of the people
and reducing the broad masses to bankruptcy; and by various means of
expropriation it concentrates the greatest part of the nation's wealth in
the hands of the bureaucrat-capitalists headed by the four big families of
Chiang, Soong, Kung and Chen. In short, the reactionary Nanking Kuomintang
government has plunged the whole nation into dire suffering by waging a civil
war based on its reactionary and traitorous basic policies, domestic and
foreign; it absolutely cannot escape full responsibility. In contrast to
the Kuomintang, the Communist Party of China did all it could after Japan's
surrender to press the Kuomintang government to prevent and stop the civil
war and realize domestic peace. Basing itself on this policy, the Communist
Party of China struggled steadfastly and, with the support of the people
of the whole country, first secured the signing of the Summary of Conversations
between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party in October 1945. In January
1946 the Party again signed a truce agreement with the Kuomintang and, in
co-operation with the democratic parties, forced the Kuomintang to accept
the joint resolutions of the Political Consultative Conference. From then
on the Communist Party of China, together with the democratic parties and
people's organizations, strove to uphold the agreement and the resolutions.
But it is regrettable that the reactionary Kuomintang government showed no
respect for any of the actions we took in defence of internal peace and the
democratic rights of the people. On the contrary, they were taken as signs
of weakness and as beneath notice. The reactionary Kuomintang government
thought that the people could be bullied, that the truce agreement and the
resolutions of the Political Consultative Conference could be torn up at
will, that the People's Liberation Army could not withstand even a single
blow while its own troops several million strong could overrun the country,
and that aid from the U.S. government was inexhaustible. Therefore, the
reactionary Kuomintang government had the audacity to violate the will of
the people of the whole country and unleash the counterrevolutionary war.
In these circumstances, the Communist Party of China had no choice but to
rise resolutely against the Kuomintang government's reactionary policies
and fight to safeguard the country's independence and the people's democratic
rights. Since July 1946, the Communist Party of China has led the heroic
People's Liberation Army to repulse the attacks of 4,300,000 troops of the
reactionary Kuomintang government and then to go over to the counter-offensive,
recover all the lost territories of the Liberated Areas and liberate many
large cities, such as Shihchiachuang, Loyang, Tsinan, Chengchow, Kaifeng,
Shenyang, Hsuchow and Tangshan. The People's Liberation Army has overcome
unparalleled difficulties, grown in strength and equipped itself with huge
quantities of arms given to the Kuomintang government by the U.S. government.
In two and a half years, it has wiped out the main military forces of the
reactionary Kuomintang government and all its crack divisions. Today the
People's Liberation Army is superior to the remnant military forces of the
reactionary Kuomintang government in numbers, morale and equipment. It is
only now that the Chinese people can begin to breathe freely. The present
situation is quite clear -- the whole structure of the reactionary Kuomintang
regime will crumble and perish if the People's Liberation Army launches a
few more powerful attacks against its remnant forces. Having pursued a policy
of civil war, the reactionary Kuomintang government is now reaping what it
has sown, the masses are in rebellion, its close followers are deserting,
and it can no longer maintain itself. In these circumstances, in order to
preserve the remnant forces of the Kuomintang government and in order to
gain a breathing space before making new onslaughts to destroy the revolutionary
forces, Chiang Kai-shek, China's No. I war criminal, chieftain of the Kuomintang
bandit gang and bogus president of the Nanking government, advanced the proposal
on January 1 of this year that he was willing to hold peace negotiations
with the Communist Party of China. The Communist Party of China considers
this proposal hypocritical. The reason is that Chiang Kai-shek has proposed
as the basis for the peace negotiations such terms as preserving the bogus
constitution, preserving the bogus "constituted authority" and preserving
the armed forces of reaction, terms which the people throughout the country
cannot accept. These are terms for continuing the war, not for peace. In
the last ten days the people throughout the country have made their will
clear. They eagerly hope for an early peace, but they do not approve the
so-called peace of the war criminals, do not approve their reactionary terms.
Basing itself on the will of the people, the Communist Party of China declares
that although the People's Liberation Army has ample strength and abundant
reason to wipe out completely the remnant armed forces of the reactionary
Kuomintang government in not too long a period and has full confidence that
it can do so, nevertheless, in order to hasten the end of the war, bring
about genuine peace and alleviate the people's sufferings, the Communist
Party of China is willing to hold peace negotiations with the reactionary
Nanking Kuomintang government or with any local governments or military groups
of the Kuomintang on the basis of the following terms: 

  (1) Punish the war criminals;


  (2) Abolish the bogus constitution;


  (3) Abolish the bogus "constituted authority";


  (4) Reorganize all reactionary troops on democratic principles;


  (5) Confiscate bureaucrat-capital;


  (6) Reform the land system;


  (7) Abrogate treasonable treaties;


  (8) Convene a political consultative conference without the participation
  of reactionary elements, and form a democratic coalition government to take
  over all the powers of the reactionary Nanking Kuomintang government and
  of its subordinate governments at all
  levels.[1]


The Communist Party of China holds that the above terms express the common
will of the people throughout the country and that only a peace based on
these terms can be called a genuine democratic peace. If the persons in the
reactionary Nanking Kuomintang government wish to achieve a genuine democratic
peace, and not a false reactionary peace, they should give up their reactionary
terms and accept the eight terms put forth by the Communist Party of China
as the basis for peace negotiations. Otherwise their so-called peace will
prove to be nothing but a fraud. We hope that the people throughout the country
and all democratic parties and people's organizations will rise to fight
for a genuine democratic peace and against a false reactionary peace. The
patriots in the Nanking Kuomintang governmental system should also support
this peace proposal. Comrade commanders and fighters of the People's Liberation
Army, attention! You should not slacken your fighting efforts in the slightest
until the reactionary Nanking Kuomintang government has accepted a genuine
democratic peace and carried it out. Any reactionaries who dare to resist
must be resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely annihilated.


NOTES


1. The eight terms for peace put forward by Comrade Mao
Tse-tung in this statement became the basis for the peace negotiations held
in April 1949 between the delegation of the Chinese Communist Party and the
Kuomintang government delegation headed by Chang Chih-chung. The Agreement
on Internal Peace, drafted in the course of these negotiations, set forth
concrete provisions for the eight peace terms. For details, see "Order to
the Army for the Country-wide Advance", Note 1, pp. 390-96 of this volume.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Comment by the Spokesman for the Communist Party of China on the Resolution of the Nanking Executive Yuan







COMMENT BY THE SPOKESMAN FOR THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA ON THE RESOLUTION
  OF THE NANKING EXECUTIVE YUAN



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

COMMENT BY THE SPOKESMAN FOR THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA ON THE RESOLUTION
  OF THE NANKING EXECUTIVE YUAN


January 21, 1949


The Central News Agency, the official news agency of the reactionary Nanking
Kuomintang government, said in a dispatch of January 19 that the
Executive Yuan, at a meeting at 9 a.m. on the same day, had extensively discussed
the current situation and passed the following resolution: 

  In deference to the desire of the people of the whole country to realize
  an early peace, the Government hereby expresses its considered wish, first,
  together with the Communist Party of China, to effect an immediate and
  unconditional cessation of hostilities, and then, to appoint delegates to
  enter into peace negotiations.


The spokesman for the Communist Party of China states: This resolution of
the Nanking Executive Yuan makes no mention of the statement proposing peace
negotiations issued on January 1 by Chiang Kai-shek, the bogus Nanking president,
or of the statement proposing peace negotiations issued on January 14 by
Chairman Mao Tse-tung of the Communist Party of China; nor does it indicate
which of the two statements it supports and which it opposes, but instead
puts forward a proposal of its own, as if neither the Kuomintang nor the
Communist Party had made any proposals on January 1 and January
14; all this is utterly incomprehensible. As a matter of fact, the
Nanking Executive Yuan has not only completely ignored the Chinese Communist
Party's proposal of January 14 but has also flatly repudiated the
proposal made on January 1 by the bogus President Chiang Kai-shek. He said
in his January 1 proposal: 

  As soon as the Communist Party has a sincere desire for peace and can give
  definite indications of this, the Government will certainly meet it in all
  sincerity and be willing to discuss concrete measures for ending hostilities
  and restoring peace.


Now, nineteen days later, an organ of this selfsame government, that is,
the "Executive Yuan" of the Nanking government, repudiates the statement
made by the "president" of that government and, instead of saying that the
government "will certainly meet" the Communist Party "in all sincerity and
be willing to discuss concrete measures for ending hostilities and restoring
peace", it says, "first, effect an immediate and unconditional cessation
of hostilities, and then, appoint delegates to enter into peace negotiations."
We should like to ask the gentlemen of the "Executive Yuan" at Nanking: after
all, which proposal stands, yours or that of your "president"? Your "president"
regarded "ending hostilities and restoring peace" as one and the same thing
and professed sincerity and willingness to discuss concrete measures for
doing so with the Communist Party of China, whereas you divorce war from
peace as two separate things and are reluctant to appoint delegates to discuss
with us concrete measures for ending hostilities and, instead, indulge in
the wildest fantasy, proposing "first, to effect an immediate and unconditional
cessation of hostilities" and then to appoint delegates to "enter into peace
negotiations". Which proposal is right, yours or that of your "president"?
We hold that the bogus Executive Yuan at Nanking has acted beyond its authority;
it has no right to cast aside the proposal of its bogus president and arbitrarily
make a new proposal of its own. We regard this new proposal as unreasonable;
having fought such a large-scale, protracted and cruel war, both sides should
as a matter of course appoint delegates to discuss basic peace terms and
work out a mutually acceptable truce agreement; only thus can the war be
stopped. Not only do the people desire this, even on the Kuomintang side
many persons have expressed this desire. If the absolutely groundless
"resolution" of the Nanking Executive Yuan is followed and the Kuomintang
is unwilling to carry on peace negotiations unless there is first a cessation
of hostilities, then where is its sincere desire for peace? The "resolution"
of the Nanking Executive Yuan has been adopted, there can be no peace
negotiations unless there is first a cessation of hostilities, and from now
on the door to peace is shut tight; if there are to be negotiations, the
only thing to do is to annul this absolutely groundless "resolution". It
must be one or the other. If the Nanking Executive Yuan is unwilling to annul
its own "resolution", this will only show that the reactionary Nanking Kuomintang
government has no sincere desire to hold peace negotiations with the opposing
side. People will ask, if Nanking is sincere, why is it unwilling to discuss
concrete peace terms? Hasn't the conclusion been confirmed that Nanking's
peace proposal is hypocritical? The spokesman for the Communist Party says:
Nanking has now fallen into a state of anarchy, the bogus president has one
proposal and the bogus Executive Yuan has another. With whom is one to deal?

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On Ordering the Reactionary Kuomintang Government to Re-Arrest Yasuji Okamura, Former Commander-in-Chief of the Japanese Forces of Aggrssion in China, and to Arrest the Kuomintang Civil War Criminals — Statement by the Spokesman for the Communist Party of China







ON ORDERING THE REACTIONARY KUOMINTANG GOVERNMENT



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON ORDERING THE REACTIONARY KUOMINTANG GOVERNMENT TO RE-ARREST YASUJI
  OKAMURA, FORMER COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF THE JAPANESE FORCES OF AGGRESSION IN
  CHINA, AND TO ARREST THE KUOMINTANG CIVIL WAR CRIMINALS STATEMENT BY THE
  SPOKESMAN FOR THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA


January 28, 1949

 

The Central News Agency of the reactionary Nanking Kuomintang government
reported in a dispatch dated January 26: 

  A Government spokesman made the following statement. In the past month the
  Government has taken various measures and steps for an early conclusion of
  the war in order to alleviate the sufferings of the people. Furthermore,
  on the 22nd of this month, the Government formally appointed a delegation
  [1] to the peace negotiations. During the last
  few days, the Government has only been waiting for the Communist Party of
  China to appoint its delegation and agree on a meeting place so that the
  negotiations may proceed. But in the statement broadcast from northern Shensi
  by the Hsinhua News Agency on the 25th,
  [2] a spokesman for the Communist Party of China,
  while indicating willingness to negotiate a peaceful settlement with the
  Government, resorted to unbridled insults and vilification and used absurd
  and offensive language. He also said that the place for the negotiations
  could not be fixed until Peiping was completely liberated. We should like
  to ask, if the Communist Party of China, on the pretext of awaiting the so-called
  complete liberation of Peiping, does not immediately appoint its delegation
  and agree on a meeting place and furthermore does not stop military operations,
  is it not stalling for time and prolonging the disaster of war? One should
  know that the hope of the people of the whole country to put an end to the
  disaster of war brooks no delay. To demonstrate its profound sincerity, the
  Government once again expresses the wish that the Communist Party of China
  will clearly realize that the salvation of the people should be the primary
  consideration today and that it will therefore appoint a delegation to the
  negotiations as soon as possible, so that peace can be realized at an early
  date.


In another dispatch dated January 26, Nanking's Central News Agency reported
from Shanghai: 

  Following a review of his case on the 26th by the National Defence Ministry's
  Military Court for the Trial of War Criminals, the Japanese war criminal
  General Yasuji Okamura, former Commander-in-Chief of the Japanese Expeditionary
  Forces in China, was declared not guilty at 4 o'clock this afternoon by Shih
  Mei-yu, the president of the court. The atmosphere in the courtroom was tense.
  Okamura, standing at attention, smiled a little on hearing the verdict.


In view of the above, the spokesman for the Communist Party of China makes
the following statement: 

1. The Communist Party of China and the General Headquarters of the Chinese
People's Liberation Army declare that it is impermissible for the Military
Court for the Trial of War Criminals set up by the reactionary Nanking Kuomintang
government to return a verdict of "not guilty" on the Japanese war criminal
General Yasuji Okamura, former Commander-in-Chief of the Japanese Expeditionary
Forces in China and the arch-criminal among all war criminals in the Japanese
Expeditionary Forces of aggression against
China.[3] The Chinese people, after untold human
and material sacrifices during the eight years of the War of Resistance Against
Japan, finally won victory and captured this war criminal, and they will
never allow the reactionary Nanking Kuomintang government arbitrarily to
declare him not guilty. The people of the whole country, all the democratic
parties and people's organizations and also the patriots in the reactionary
Nanking Kuomintang governmental system must rise at once to oppose the criminal
act of that government in betraying the national interests and collaborating
with the Japanese fascist militarists. We hereby give a serious warning to
the gentlemen of the reactionary Nanking government. You must re-arrest Yasuji
Okamura immediately and return him to prison without fail. This matter is
closely related to your request for negotiations with us. We hold that all
your present actions are an attempt to use fake peace negotiations to cover
up your new preparations for war, which include your conspiracy to induce
Japanese reactionaries to come to China and join you in massacring the Chinese
people; it is exactly for this purpose that you have set Yasuji Okamura free.
Therefore, we absolutely will not permit you to do it. We have the right
to order you to re-arrest Yasuji Okamura and be responsible for turning him
over to the People's Liberation Army at a time and place to be specified
by us. As to the other Japanese war criminals, they are to be in your temporary
custody, pending further instructions, and you must not take it upon yourselves
to release any of them or let any escape; those of you who disobey will be
severely punished.

2. We have learned from the January 26 statement of the spokesman for the
reactionary Nanking Kuomintang government that you gentlemen of Nanking are
all so very tense, eager, solicitous and anxious about peace negotiations,
all, it is said, for the sake of "shortening the duration of the war",
"alleviating the sufferings of the people" and "treating the salvation of
the people as the primary consideration"; we have also learned that you feel
that the Communist Party of China is so very untense, uneager, unsolicitous
and unanxious in its response to your wish and "furthermore does not stop
military operations" and is in reality "stalling for time and prolonging
the disaster of war". We tell you gentlemen of Nanking frankly: you are war
criminals, you will be brought to trial. We have no faith in your mouthings
about "peace" or "the will of the people". You relied on the power of the
United States, violated the will of the people, tore up the truce agreement
and the resolutions of the Political Consultative Conference and launched
this most ruthless, anti-popular, anti-democratic, counter-revolutionary
civil war. You were then so tense, eager, solicitous and anxious that you
would not listen to advice from anybody. And when you convened a bogus National
Assembly, drew up a bogus constitution, elected a bogus president and promulgated
a bogus decree of "mobilization for putting down the rebellion", you were
again so tense, eager, solicitous and anxious about it all that again you
would not listen to advice from anybody. At that time in Shanghai, Nanking
and other major cities, the so-called consultative councils, chambers of
commerce, trade unions, peasant associations, women's organizations and cultural
organizations, all of which are either run by your government or serve as
your tools, kicked up such a fuss about "supporting the mobilization for
putting down the rebellion" and "annihilating the Communist bandits" and
once again were so tense, eager, solicitous and anxious about it all that
they would not listen to advice from anybody. Two and a half years have now
passed, and during this period the number of people slaughtered by you has
run into many millions, and the villages burned down, the women raped and
the wealth plundered by you, as well as the lives and property destroyed
by your air force, are beyond count; you have committed heinous crimes, and
we must settle accounts with you. We hear that you are quite opposed to the
struggle for settling accounts. But this time there is good cause for the
struggle to settle accounts, there must be an accounting, there must be a
settlement, there must be a fight, there must be a struggle. You are defeated.
You have enraged the people. And the people have all risen against you in
a life-and-death struggle. The people do not like you, the people condemn
you, the people have risen, and you are isolated; that is why you have been
defeated. You proposed five terms [4] for peace
negotiations and we proposed eight; [5] the people
at once gave their support to our eight terms, not to your five. You don't
dare to rebut our eight terms or insist upon your five. You declare that
you are willing to take our eight terms as the basis for the negotiations.
Isn't that fine? Then why not hurry up and negotiate? So it seems that you
are very tense, eager, solicitous and anxious and that you are very much
for "unconditional cessation of hostilities", for "shortening the duration
of the war", for "alleviating the sufferings of the people" and for "treating
the salvation of the people as the primary consideration". And we? We, obviously,
are not tense, not eager, not solicitous nor anxious and we are "stalling
for time and prolonging the disaster of war". But wait a moment, gentlemen
of Nanking. We are going to be tense, eager, solicitous and anxious; the
duration of the war will surely be shortened; and the sufferings of the people
will surely be alleviated. Since you have already agreed to our eight terms
as the basis for the negotiations, you and we are both going to be busy.
The carrying out of these eight terms will keep you, us, all the democratic
parties, people's organizations and people in all walks of life through out
the country busy for several months, half a year, a whole year, or several
years -- perhaps even then we shall not have finished the job! Listen, gentlemen
of Nanking! The eight terms are not abstract items, they must have concrete
content; during the present short period it is important for everybody to
do some thinking, and the people will forgive us a little delay. To speak
frankly, the opinion of the people is that we should prepare well for these
negotiations. There will certainly be negotiations, and it absolutely will
not be permitted that anyone break them off in the middle and refuse to
negotiate. Therefore your delegates must get ready to come. But we still
need some time to complete our preparations and we will not allow war criminals
to set the date of the negotiations for us. We and the people of Peiping
are now doing an important job; we are working out a peaceful settlement
of the Peiping question on the basis of the eight terms. Your men in Peiping,
such as General Fu Tso-yi, are also participating in this work, which you
admitted to be proper in the communiqué of your news
agency.[6] This will not only provide a place for
the peace negotiations, but will set an example of peaceful settlement for
Nanking, Shanghai, Wuhan, Sian, Taiyuan, Kueisui, Lanchow, Tihua, Chengtu,
Kunming, Changsha, Nanchang, Hangchow, Foochow, Canton, Taiwan, Hainan Island,
etc. This work is therefore praiseworthy, and you gentlemen of Nanking should
not adopt a casual attitude towards it. We are now discussing with the democratic
parties, people's organizations and the democrats without party affiliation
in both our areas and yours the problem of drawing up a list of war criminals
and working out the concrete details of the first of our eight terms. It
will probably not be long before this list is officially issued. Gentlemen
of Nanking, as you know, we have not yet had time to discuss such a list
with the democratic parties and people's organizations and officially publish
it. For this we beg your pardon. The reason for the delay is that your request
for peace negotiations came a little late. Had it come earlier, our preparations
might have been completed by now. But this does not mean you have nothing
to do. Besides arresting the Japanese war criminal Yasuji Okamura, you must
at once set about arresting a batch of civil war criminals and, first of
all, those in Nanking, Shanghai, Fenghua and Taiwan who were among the
forty-three war criminals listed in the statement by an authoritative person
in the Communist Party of China on December 25, 1948. The most important
among them are Chiang Kai-shek, T. V. Soong, Chen Cheng, Ho Ying-chin, Ku
Chu-tung, Chen Li-fu, Chen Kuo-fu, Chu Chia-hua, Wang Shih-chieh, Wu Kuo-chen,
Tai Chuan-hsien, Tang En-po, Chou Chih-jou, Wang Shu-ming and Kuei Yung-ching.
[7] Of particular importance is Chiang Kai-shek,
who has now fled to Fenghua [8] and will very likely
flee abroad and seek the protection of U.S. or British imperialism; therefore,
you must quickly arrest this criminal and not let him escape. You shall assume
full responsibility for this matter. Should there be any escapes, you shall
be punished for the crime of setting bandits free, and no leniency whatsoever
shall be shown. Let no one say he has not been warned. We hold that only
by arresting these war criminals will one do a serious job in shortening
the duration of the war and alleviating the people's sufferings. As long
as the war criminals are at large, the duration of the war will be lengthened
and the sufferings of the people will be aggravated.

3. We demand that the reactionary Nanking government reply to the above two
points.

4. Nanking will be notified at another time concerning the preparations both
sides should make in connection with the remainder of the eight terms.


NOTES


1. The delegation appointed by the reactionary Kuomintang
government for the peace negotiations consisted of Shao Li-tse, Chang Chih-chung,
Huang Shao-hung, Peng Chao-hsien and Chung Tien-hsin.

2. On January 25, 1949, a spokesman for the Chinese Communist
Party pointed out in his statement concerning the peace negotiations: "We
have permitted the reactionary Nanking government to send a delegation for
peace negotiations with us not because we recognize that government as still
qualified to represent the Chinese people, but because it still has some
remnants of the reactionary armed forces. If that government feels that it
has completely forfeited the people's confidence and that the remnants of
its reactionary armed forces are unable to resist the powerful People's
Liberation Army and if that government is willing to accept the eight terms
for peace proposed by the Chinese Communist Party, then it is of course
preferable and beneficial to the cause of the liberation of the people to
settle the matter by negotiations, so as to lessen the people's sufferings."
As to the meeting place, the statement said, "It can be decided only after
the complete liberation of Peiping and will probably be Peiping." As to the
Nanking delegates, it stated, "Pen" Chao-hsien is one of the key figures
of the Kuomintang CC clique, which has been most vehemently clamouring for
war, and people consider him a war criminal; the Chinese Communist Party
cannot receive such a delegate."

3. Yasuji Okamura was one of the Japanese war criminals
with the longest and blackest record of crimes of aggression against China.
From 1925 to 1927, he was military adviser to Sun Chuan-fang, one of the
Northern warlords. In 1928, as commanding officer of a Japanese infantry
regiment, he took part in the war in which Japan attacked and seized Tsinan
and was the butcher in the Tsinan Massacre. In 1932 he served as deputy chief
of staff of the Japanese Expeditionary Forces which attacked and occupied
Shanghai. In 1933 he represented the Japanese government at the signing of
the "Tangku Agreement" with the traitorous Kuomintang government. From 1937
to 1945, he was successively the Commander of Japan's 11th Corps, Northern
China Front Army and 6th Front Army and the Commander-in-Chief of the Japanese
Expeditionary Forces in China. He enforced the extremely brutal policy of
"burn all, kill all, loot all" in China. He was among the chief Japanese
war criminals on the list published at Yenan in August 1945. During the People's
War of Liberation he was Chiang Kai-shek's secret military adviser and planned
Chiang's attacks on the Liberated Areas. In January 1949 he was declared
not guilty and set free by the reactionary Kuomintang government and returned
to Japan. In 1950 he accepted Chiang Kai-shek's offer of the post of senior
training officer in the so-called Research Institute of Revolutionary Practice.
Since 1955 he has organized ex-servicemen of the Japanese army and navy into
the "League of Comrades in Arms" (later called the League of Retired Comrades
in Arms) and has played a vigorous role in the reactionary activities to
revive Japanese militarism.

4. The "five terms" proposed by the reactionary Kuomintang
government for the peace negotiations were put forward in Chiang Kai-shek's
statement on New Year's Day, 1949. They were: 1. The peace negotiations "should
not impair the country's independence and integrity". 2. The peace negotiations
"should help the rehabilitation of the people". 3. "The sacred constitution
should not be violated by my action and democratic constitutionalism should
not be thereby undermined; the form of government of the Republic of China
should be guaranteed and the legally constituted authority of the Republic
of China should not be interrupted". 4. "The armed forces should be definitely
preserved". 5. "The people should be allowed to continue their free way of
life and maintain their present minimum standard of living". Comrade Mao
Tse-tung promptly and sternly refuted these five terms. See "On the War
Criminal's Suing for Peace", pp. 309-13 of this volume.

5. The "eight terms" proposed by the Communist Party of
China for the peace negotiations were put forward in Comrade Mao Tse-tung's
statement of January 14, 1949, on the current situation. See "Statement on
the Present Situation by Mao Tse-tung, Chairman of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China", pp. 315-19 of this volume.

6. According to a Kuomintang Central News Agency dispatch
dated January 27, 1949, the Ministry of National Defence of the Nanking
government stated: "In northern China, in order to shorten the war, secure
peace and thereby preserve the foundations of the ancient capital, Peiping,
and its cultural objects and historic monuments, Commander-in-Chief Fu Tso-yi
issued a proclamation on January 22 to the effect that hostilities were to
cease as from 10 o'clock that day. On orders from General Headquarters, the
bulk of our troops in Peiping have withdrawn from the city limits to certain
designated areas." It further stated, "Cessation of hostilities will be effected
also in Suiyuan and Tatung."

7. T. V. Soong, a plutocrat of the Kuomintang regime, had
served as minister of finance, president of the Executive Yuan, minister
of foreign affairs and special emissary of the Kuomintang government in the
United States. Chen Cheng, formerly chief of the general staff, was then
the Kuomintang governor of Taiwan Province. Ho Ying-chin had been the
Kuomintang's chief of the general staff and minister of national defence.
Ku Chu-tung was then chief of the general staff of the Kuomintang army. Chen
Li-fu, Chen Kuo-fu and Chu Chia-hua were all chieftains of the Kuomintang
CC clique. Wang Shih-chieh had been Kuomintang minister of foreign affairs.
Wu Kuo-chen was the Kuomintang mayor of Shanghai. Tai Chuan-hsien, also known
as Tai Chi-tao, had long been a member of Chiang Kai-shek's "brain trust"
and was then a member of the Standing Committee of the Kuomintang Central
Executive Committee. Tang En-po was commander-in-chief of the Kuomintang
garrison forces in the Nanking-Shanghai-Hangchow area. Chou Chih-jou was
commander-in-chief of the Kuomintang's air force. Wang Shu-ming was deputy
commander-in-chief and chief of staff of the air force. Kuei Yung-ching was
commander-in-chief of the Kuomintang navy.

8. A county in Chekiang Province, the birthplace of Chiang
Kai-shek. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Peace Terms Must Include the Punishment of Japanese War Criminals and Kuomintang War Criminals — Statement by the Spokesman for the Communist Party of China







PEACE TERMS MUST INCLUDE THE PUNISHMENT OF JAPANESE WAR CRIMINALS
  AND KUOMINTANG WAR CRIMINALS STATEMENT BY THE SPOKESMAN FOR THE COMMUNIST
  PARTY OF CHINA



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

PEACE TERMS MUST INCLUDE THE PUNISHMENT OF JAPANESE WAR CRIMINALS AND
  KUOMINTANG WAR CRIMINALS STATEMENT BY THE SPOKESMAN FOR THE COMMUNIST PARTY
  OF CHINA


February 5, 1949

 

The statement on the question of peace negotiations made on January 28 by
the spokesman for the Communist Party of China was answered on January 31
by a spokesman of the reactionary traitorous Kuomintang government. In his
reply, the spokesman of the reactionary traitorous Kuomintang government
quibbled about the points raised by the spokesman for the Communist Party
of China. Concerning the demand of the Communist Party of China that the
reactionary traitorous Kuomintang government should be responsible for
re-arresting Yasuji Okamura, the chief criminal in Japan's invasion of
China, turning him over to the People's Liberation Army, keeping the
other Japanese war criminals in custody and preventing their escape, the
Kuomintang spokesman said, "This is a judicial question. It has nothing
whatsoever to do with peace negotiations, much less can it be made a precondition
for peace negotiations." Concerning the demand of the Communist Party of
China that the reactionary traitorous Kuomintang government should be responsible
for arresting Chiang Kai-shek and other war criminals, the Kuomintang spokesman
said, "For genuine peace, no preconditions should be imposed." The statement
of the spokesman for the Communist Party of China, he added, "does not seem
to be serious enough in its attitude" and, moreover, "causes complications".
On this, the spokesman for the Communist Party of China states: As recently
as January 28, our attitude was indeed not serious enough insofar as we still
spoke of the reactionary traitorous Kuomintang government as a government.
Does this so-called "government" still really exist? Does it exist in Nanking?
There is no longer any administrative organ in Nanking. Does it exist in
Canton? There is no administrative head in Canton. Does it exist in Shanghai?
There is neither an administrative organ nor an administrative head in Shanghai.
Does it exist in Fenghua? In Fenghua there is only a bogus president, who
has already announced his "retirement"; there is nothing else. Therefore,
speaking seriously, we should not have regarded it as a government; it is,
at most, a hypothetical or token government. But let us go on supposing that
there is such a token "government" and that there is a spokesman who can
speak for that "government". Then its spokesman should realize that this
hypothetical, token, reactionary, traitorous Kuomintang government has not
only contributed nothing towards peace negotiations, but has in fact caused
endless complications. Didn't you cause complication, for instance, by suddenly
declaring Yasuji Okamura not guilty at a time when you were so anxious for
negotiations? Didn't you cause further complication by sending him to Japan,
along with 260 other Japanese war criminals, after the Communist Party of
China had demanded his re-arrest? Who rules Japan today? Can it be said that
the Japanese people rule Japan, and not the imperialists? Japan is a place
you love so much that you believe the Japanese war criminals will enjoy greater
security and comfort and receive more appropriate treatment there than in
the areas you rule. Is that a judicial question? And why has this judicial
question arisen? Can it be that you have forgotten that the Japanese aggressors
fought against us for eight whole years? Does this question have nothing
whatsoever to do with peace negotiations? When the Communist Party of China
put forward the eight terms for peace negotiations on January 14, the release
of Yasuji Okamura had not yet occurred. That occurred on January 26, and
so it should be raised; it is certainly relevant to the peace negotiations.
On January 31 you obeyed MacArthur's orders and sent 260 Japanese war criminals
to Japan, together with Yasuji Okamura; the matter thus became even more
relevant to the peace negotiations. Why do you sue for peace? Because you
have been defeated in war. And why have you been defeated? Because you launched
a civil war against the people. And when did you launch this civil war? After
the Japanese surrender. And against whom did you launch this war? Against
the People's Liberation Army and the People's Liberated Areas, which had
rendered extraordinary service in the War of Resistance Against Japan. And
by what means have you waged the civil war? In addition to U.S. aid, by means
of the men you have snatched and the wealth you have plundered from the people
in the areas under your rule. No sooner had the Chinese people's great decisive
fight with the Japanese aggressors ended, no sooner had the external war
ended, than you launched this civil war. You were defeated and you asked
for negotiations, but suddenly you declared the chief Japanese war criminal
Yasuji Okamura not guilty. And no sooner had we lodged a protest, demanding
that you put him back in prison and be ready to hand him over to the People's
Liberation Army, than you hurriedly sent him to Japan with 260 other Japanese
war criminals. Gentlemen of the reactionary traitorous Kuomintang government,
this action of yours is too unreasonable and is too gross a violation of
the people's will. We have now deliberately added the word "traitorous" to
your title, and you ought to accept it. Your government has long been traitorous,
and it was only for the sake of brevity that we sometimes omitted the word;
now we can omit it no longer. In addition to all the crimes of treason you
committed in the past, you have now committed another, and a very serious
one, which must be discussed at the meeting for peace negotiations. Whether
or not you call it causing complication, the matter must be discussed; and
since it happened after January 14 and was not included in the eight terms
we originally presented, we therefore deem it necessary to add to the first
term a new item, the punishment of Japanese war criminals. So the first term
now contains two items, (a) the punishment of Japanese war criminals and
(b) the punishment of civil war criminals. We are justified in adding this
new item; it reflects the will of the people of the whole country. The people
of the whole country demand that the Japanese war criminals be punished.
Even within the Kuomintang, many think that the punishment of Yasuji Okamura
and other Japanese war criminals and the punishment of Chiang Kai-shek and
other civil war criminals are both natural and right. Whether you say we
are sincere about peace or not, the question of these two types of war criminal
must be negotiated, and both types must be punished. We instructed you to
arrest them for fear that they would escape. At this time, when we have not
yet completed preparations for the negotiations, you are pathetically anxious
to negotiate and you are restless because you have too much leisure; therefore
we have assigned you a reasonable job. These war criminals have to be arrested;
even if they flee to the remotest corners of the globe, they must be arrested.
Since you are all infinitely compassionate and merciful saviours of afflicted
mankind, since you desire to "shorten the duration of the war", "alleviate
the sufferings of the people" and "treat the salvation of the people as the
primary consideration", and since you are great-hearted people, you should
not cherish those who are responsible for the slaughter of millions of our
fellow-countrymen. Judging by your willingness to accept the punishment of
war criminals as part of the basis for negotiations, it seems you do not
cherish these creatures very much. But, since you state that you find it
rather difficult to arrest them immediately -- all right, then, prevent them
from escaping; under no circumstances must you let these creatures run away.
Just imagine, gentlemen, after you have taken all the trouble to send a
delegation to discuss with us the question of punishing these war criminals,
what would we talk about if it should turn out that they have escaped? What
a loss of face for the gentlemen of your delegation! How then would you show
your great "sincerity for peace"? How then could you gentlemen prove that
you really wish to "shorten the duration of the war", "alleviate the sufferings
of the people" and "treat the salvation of the people as the primary
consideration", and that you are not at all hypocritical? The Kuomintang
spokesman also talked a great deal of other nonsense; such nonsense can fool
nobody, and we consider it unnecessary to reply. Gentlemen of the hypothetical,
token, reactionary, traitorous Kuomintang "government" (mind you, the word
government is in inverted commas) at Nanking or Canton or Fenghua or Shanghai!
If you think that our attitude in this statement is again not serious enough,
please excuse us, for it is the only attitude we can take towards you. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Turn the Army into a Working Force







TURN THE ARMY INTO A WORKING FORCE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

TURN THE ARMY INTO A WORKING FORCE


February 8, 1949

[This telegram was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Revolutionary
Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
in reply to one from the Second and Third Field Armies. It was sent also
to the other field armies concerned and to the bureaus of the Central Committee
concerned. Considering that the period of severe fighting had ended after
the three great campaigns of Liaohsi-Shenyang, Huai-Hai and Peiping-Tientsin,
Comrade Mao Tse-tung in this telegram pointed out in good time that the People's
Liberation Army was not only a fighting force but at the same time had to
be a working force and that under certain conditions it should function mainly
as a working force. This policy played a very important role in solving the
cadre problem of that period in the new Liberated Areas and in ensuring the
smooth development of the people's revolutionary cause. On the nature of
the People's Liberation Army as both a fighting and a working force, see
also "Report to the Second Plenary Session of the Seventh Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China", Section 2, pp. 362-63 of this volume.]

  

Your telegram of the 4th has been received. It is very good that you are
speeding training and consolidation and preparing to start moving one month
ahead of schedule. [1] Please proceed along these
lines and do not slacken. Actually, however, training and consolidation must
continue in March; the study of policy must be stressed and preparations
must be made to take over and administer the large cities. From now on, the
formula followed in the past twenty years, "first the rural areas, then the
cities", will be reversed and changed to the formula, "first the cities,
then the rural areas". The army is not only a fighting force, it is mainly
a working force. All army cadres should learn how to take over and administer
cities. In urban work they should learn how to be good at dealing with the
imperialists and Kuomintang reactionaries, good at dealing with the bourgeoisie,
good at leading the workers and organizing trade unions, good at mobilizing
and organizing the youth, good at uniting with and training cadres in the
new Liberated Areas, good at managing industry and commerce, good at running
schools, newspapers, news agencies and broadcasting stations, good at handling
foreign affairs, good at handling problems relating to the democratic parties
and people's organizations, good at adjusting the relations between the cities
and the rural areas and solving the problems of food, coal and other daily
necessities and good at handling monetary and financial problems. In short,
all urban problems, with which in the past our army cadres and fighters were
unfamiliar, should from now on be shouldered by them. You are to advance
and occupy four or five provinces, and in addition to the cities you will
have to attend to vast rural areas. Since in the south all the rural areas
will be newly liberated, the work will be fundamentally different from that
in the old Liberated Areas of the north. In the first year, the policy of
reducing rent and interest cannot be applied, and rent and interest will
have to be paid in roughly the same way as before. Our rural work will have
to proceed under these conditions. Therefore, rural work must also be learned
afresh. However, as compared with urban work, rural work is easy to learn.
Urban work is more difficult and is the main subject you are studying. If
our cadres cannot quickly master the administration of cities, we shall encounter
extreme difficulties. Consequently you must settle all other problems in
February and use the whole month of March to learn how to work in the cities
and in the new Liberated Areas. The Kuomintang has only one million several
hundred thousand troops, scattered over a huge territory. Of course, there
are still many battles to fight, but there is little possibility of such
large-scale fighting as in the Huai-Hai campaign, and it may even be said
that there is no such possibility and that the period of severe fighting
is over. The army is still a fighting force, and in this respect there must
be absolutely no relaxing; to relax would be a mistake. Nevertheless, the
time has come for us to set ourselves the task of turning the army into a
working force. If we do not now set ourselves this task and resolve to perform
it, we shall be making an extremely big mistake. We are preparing to send
53,000 cadres south with the army, but this is a very small number. The
occupation of eight or nine provinces and scores of big cities will require
a huge number of working cadres, and to solve this problem the army must
rely chiefly on itself. The army is a school. Our field armies of 2,100,000
are equivalent to several thousand universities and secondary schools. We
have to rely chiefly on the army to supply our working cadres. You must
understand this point clearly. Since severe fighting is basically over,
replenishment of the army's manpower and equipment should be kept within
suitable limits, and too much must not be demanded as regards quantity, quality
and completeness, lest this should cause financial crisis. That is another
point you should seriously consider. The above policies apply fully to the
Fourth Field Army, and Comrades Lin Piao and Lo Jung-huan are likewise asked
to pay attention to them. We have talked at length with Comrade Kang Sheng
and asked him to hurry to your place by the 12th to confer with you. After
conferring, please inform us promptly by telegram of your views and what
you propose to do. The Eastern China Bureau and the Eastern China Military
Area Headquarters should move at once to Hsuchow to work jointly with the
General Front Committee [2] and with the Front
Committee of the Third Field Army in a concentrated effort to plan the march
to the south. Turn all your rear-area work over to the Shantung Sub-Bureau.

NOTES


1. The Second and Third Field Armies had planned to advance
the date of crossing the Yangtse River from April to March 1949. The crossing
was postponed to late April because of the peace negotiations with the
reactionary Kuomintang government.

2. In order to meet the needs of the Huai-Hai campaign,
the Revolutionary Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China decided on November 16, 1948 to form a General Front Committee
consisting of Comrades Liu Po-cheng, Chen Yi, Teng Hsiao-ping, Su Yu and
Tan Chen-lin, with Comrade Teng Hsiao-ping as secretary, to assume unified
leadership of the Central Plains Field Army and the Eastern China Field Army
and to exercise command over military affairs and operations on the Huai-Hai
front. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Why do the Badly Split Reactionaries Still Idly Clamour for "Total Peace"?







WHY DO THE BADLY SPLIT REACTIONARIES STILL IDLY CLAMOUR FOR "TOTAL
  PEACE"?



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

WHY DO THE BADLY SPLIT REACTIONARIES STILL IDLY CLAMOUR FOR "TOTAL
  PEACE"?


February 15, 1949 

 

The reactionary Kuomintang rule is collapsing more rapidly than was expected.
It is only a little over four months since the People's Liberation Army captured
Tsinan and only a little over three months since it captured Shenyang, but
all the remnant forces of the Kuomintang in the military, political, economic,
cultural and propaganda fields are already hopelessly split and disintegrated.
The general collapse of Kuomintang rule began with the Liaohsi-Shenyang and
Peiping-Tientsin campaigns on the northern front and the Huai-Hai campaign
on the southern front. In less than four months, from early October last
year to the end of January this year, these three campaigns cost the Kuomintang
a total of more than 1,540,000 men, including 144 entire divisions of its
regular army. The general collapse of Kuomintang rule is the inevitable outcome
of the great victories of the Chinese People's War of Liberation and of the
revolutionary movement of the Chinese people, but the clamour for "peace"
by the Kuomintang and its U.S. masters has played a considerable part in
hastening this collapse. On January 1 of this year, the Kuomintang reactionaries
began to lift a rock called the "peace offensive"; they intended to hurl
it at the Chinese people, but now it has dropped on their own feet. To be
more exact, the rock has smashed the Kuomintang to pieces. Besides General
Fu Tso-yi, who has helped the People's Liberation Army to achieve a peaceful
settlement of the Peiping question, there are plenty of people everywhere
who hope for a peaceful settlement. The Americans are looking on in impotent
fury because their brats have failed them. In fact, this magic weapon, the
peace offensive, was made in U.S. factories and was delivered to the Kuomintang
more than half a year ago. It was Leighton Stuart himself who let out the
secret. After Chiang Kai-shek issued his so-called New Year's Day message,
Stuart told a correspondent of the Central News Agency that this was "what
I myself have consistently worked for". According to U.S. news agencies,
that correspondent lost his rice bowl for publishing this "off the record"
remark. The reason the Chiang Kai-shek clique did not dare to obey this American
order for quite a long time was clearly explained in a directive issued by
the Propaganda Department of the Kuomintang Central Executive Committee on
December 27, 1948:

  If we cannot fight, we cannot make peace. If we can fight, then to talk about
  peace will only demoralize the troops and the people. Hence, whether we can
  fight or not, we have everything to lose and nothing to gain by talking about
  peace.


The Kuomintang issued this directive at that time because some Kuomintang
factions other than Chiang's were already advocating peace talks. Last December
25, Pai Chung-hsi and the Hupeh Provincial Council under his direction raised
the question of a "peaceful settlement"[1] with
Chiang Kai-shek, who was compelled to issue a statement on January 1 about
holding peace negotiations on the basis of his five terms. He hoped to snatch
the patent for inventing the peace offensive from Pai Chung-hsi and to continue
his old rule under a new trade mark. On January 8 he sent Chang Chun to Hankow
to enlist the support of Pai Chung-hsi and on the same day he asked the
governments of the United States, Britain, France and the Soviet Union to
intervene in China's civil war.[2] But all these
moves failed completely. The statement by Chairman Mao Tse-tung of the Communist
Party of China on January 14 dealt a fatal blow to Chiang Kai-shek's plot
for a sham peace and compelled him to "retire" backstage a week later. Although
Chiang Kai-shek and Li Tsung-jen and the Americans had made all kinds of
arrangements for this plot and hoped to put on a fairly good puppet show,
the result was contrary to their expectations; not only did the audience
dwindle, but even the actors themselves vanished from the stage one after
another. In Fenghua, Chiang Kai-shek continues to direct his remnant forces
in his "status of retirement", but he has lost his legal status and those
people who believe in him are getting fewer and fewer. On its own initiative,
Sun Fo's "Executive Yuan" has proclaimed "the moving of the Government to
Canton"; it has broken away not only from the "president" and "acting president"
of the government but also from the "Legislative Yuan" and "Control Yuan".
Sun Fo's "Executive Yuan" calls for war, [3] but
the "Ministry of National Defence", which is charged with conducting the
war, is neither in Canton nor in Nanking, and the only thing that is known
of it is that its spokesman is in Shanghai. Thus, all that is left for Li
Tsung-jen to see from the ramparts of the "Stone City" is,

The sky brooding low over the land of Wu and Chu, 


With nothing between to meet the
  eye.[4]


None of the orders issued by Li Tsung-jen since he assumed office on January
21 has been carried out. Although the Kuomintang no longer has any "total"
"government" and although activities for local peace are going on in many
places, the Kuomintang die-hards oppose local peace and demand a so-called
"total peace", and they actually aim at rejecting peace in the vain hope
of carrying on the war; they are terribly afraid that these local peace
activities will spread and get out of hand. The farce of the badly split
and disintegrating Kuomintang's demand for a "total peace" reached its climax
in the statement issued on February 9 in Shanghai by the war criminal Teng
Wen-yi, head of the Bureau for Political Work of the bogus Ministry of National
Defence. Like Sun Fo, Teng Wen-yi repudiated Li Tsung-jen's January 22 statement,
which accepted the eight terms of the Communist Party of China as the basis
for peace negotiations; instead he demanded a so-called "peace on an equal
footing, a total peace", failing which, he said, "we will stop at no sacrifices
in order to fight the Communists to the bitter end". But Teng Wen-yi failed
to mention with whom we, his opponents, should now negotiate for a "peace
on an equal footing, a total peace". It seems that to approach Teng Wen-yi
will get us nowhere and that not to approach Teng Wen-yi or anyone else will
also get us nowhere. How very trying this is! According to a Central News
Agency dispatch from Shanghai on February 9:

  Teng Wen-yi was asked by a reporter, "Has Acting President Li approved the
  four points in your public statement?"[5] Teng
  Wen-yi answered, "I am speaking from the stand of the Ministry of National
  Defence, and the four points made today were not submitted beforehand to
  Acting President Li."


Here, Teng Wen-yi is not only inventing a partial stand of the bogus Ministry
of National Defence, as distinct from the total stand of the bogus Kuomintang
government, but is in fact inventing a smaller partial stand of the Bureau
for Political Work of the bogus Ministry of National Defence, as distinct
from the larger partial stand of the bogus Ministry of National Defence.
For Teng Wen-yi openly opposes and maligns the peaceful settlement in Peiping,
while the bogus Ministry of National Defence hailed it on January 27 as an
act "to shorten the war, secure peace and thereby preserve the foundations
of the ancient capital, Peiping, and its cultural objects and historic monuments"
and declared that "cessation of hostilities will be effected" in the same
way in places like Tatung and Suiyuan.[6] From this it
can be seen that those reactionaries who are the most energetic in their
clamour for "total peace" are the very reactionaries with the least total
stand. A Bureau for Political Work of the Ministry of National Defence can
contradict the Ministry of National Defence as well as the acting president.
These reactionaries are the greatest obstacle to the realization of peace
in China today. They dream of agitating for a total war under the slogan
of a "total peace"; in their own words, "if there is to be war, let it be
a total war; if there is to be peace, let it be a total peace." But as a
matter of fact they have neither the power to bring about a total peace nor
the power to wage a total war. Total power is in the hands of the Chinese
people, the Chinese People's Liberation Army, the Communist Party of China
and the other democratic parties, not in the hands of the badly split and
disintegrating Kuomintang. One side wields total power, while the other is
hopelessly split and disintegrated, and this is the result of the prolonged
struggle of the Chinese people and the prolonged evil-doing of the Kuomintang.
No serious person can ignore this basic fact of the political situation in
China today. 

NOTES


1. Taking advantage of the extremely unfavourable situation
then facing Chiang Kai-shek, Pai Chung-hsi, Commander-in-Chief of the Central
China "Bandit Suppression" Headquarters of the Kuomintang, proposed a "peaceful
settlement" of the civil war to Chiang, with the purpose of forcing him to
step down and of raising the position of the Kwangsi clique to which Pai
belonged. Under Pai Chung-hsi's direction the bogus Hupeh Provincial Council
sent a telegram to Chiang Kai-shek, warning him that "if the disaster of
war continues to spread and no attempt is made to change the course immediately,
both the state and the people will be ruined", and advising him to "follow
the normal course of political settlement and seek ways to resume peace
negotiations".

2. The request for intervention was rejected by the governments
of the United States, Britain, France and the Soviet Union. In its
aide-mémoire to the Kuomintang government on January 12,
the U.S. government explained that the United States had rejected the request
of the Kuomintang government because "it is not believed that any useful
purpose would be served". This meant that the U.S. government was already
aware that it could no longer avert the doom of the reactionary Chiang Kai-shek
regime it had fostered.

3. On February 6 and 7, 1949, Sun Fo, president of the
bogus Executive Yuan of the Kuomintang government, made two statements at
Canton opposing Li Tsung-jen's statement about accepting the eight terms
for peace put forward by the Communist Party of China as the basis for
negotiations. He said that "the Government has begun functioning in Canton
where it has moved, and we should make a critical review of our past". He
also said that "the term on the punishment of war criminals proposed by the
Communists is absolutely unacceptable".

4. Lines from an ode by the 14th century Chinese poet,
Sadul, of the Yuan Dynasty. The first half of the ode reads: 

From the ramparts of the Stone City

One sees the sky brooding low over the land of Wu and Chu,

With nothing between to meet the eye. 

Pointing to strategic points famous in the Six Dynasties,

Only the green hills stand like walls. 

Where army flags blotted the sun

And masts of war vessels touched the clouds

Snow-white skeletons lie scattered. 

North and south of the River

How many warriors died! 


The "Stone City" was an ancient name for Nanking.

5. In his written statement on the "Development of Peace
and War", Teng Wen-yi set forth the following "four points": (1) "The Government
wants peace"; (2) "The Chinese Communist Party wants war"; (3) "The local
peace at Peiping has become a hoax"; (4) "We will stop at no sacrifices in
order to fight the Communists to the bitter end".

6. After the liberation of Tientsin and Peiping, only a
few isolated strong-points in northern China remained in the hands of the
Kuomintang forces. They included Taiyuan, Tatung, Hsinhsiang, Anyang and
Kueisui. The enemy at Taiyuan was completely wiped out on April 24, 1949.
The enemy at Tatung submitted to peaceful reorganization on May 1. The enemy
at Hsinhsiang surrendered on May 5. The enemy at Anyang was wiped out on
May 6. Kueisui was peacefully liberated on September 19. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Kuomintang reactionaries Turn from an "Appeal for Peace" to an Appeal for War







THE KUOMINTANG REACTIONARIES TURN  AN "APPEAL FOR PEACE" TO AN
  APPEAL FOR WAR



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE KUOMINTANG REACTIONARIES TURN  AN "APPEAL FOR PEACE" TO AN APPEAL
  FOR WAR


February 16, 1949


From the time the bandit Chiang Kai-shek launched his peace offensive on
January 1, the heroes of the reactionary Kuomintang clique kept on repeating
at great length their willingness to "shorten the duration of the war",
"alleviate the sufferings of the people" and "treat the salvation of the
people as the primary consideration". But early in February they suddenly
began to play down their peace tune and strike up the old tune of "fighting
the Communists to the bitter end". This has been especially so in the last
few days. On February 13 the Propaganda Department of the Kuomintang Central
Executive Committee issued a "Special Directive for Propaganda" to "all party
headquarters and party papers" which stated: 

  Yeh Chien-ying has been spreading propaganda over our rear areas about the
  Chinese Communist Party's good faith in seeking peace, while condemning the
  Government's military moves as showing a lack of good faith in seeking peace.
  All our papers must emphatically refute this, directly and indirectly, in
  accordance with the following points. 


The "Special Directive" gives quite a number of reasons why this "refutation"
should be made: 

  Rather than surrender unconditionally, the Government should fight to the
  bitter end.


  The eight terms Mao Tse-tung put forward in his January 14 statement would
  ruin the nation, and the Government should not have accepted them.


  The Communist Party of China should bear the responsibility for wrecking
  peace. Instead, it has now drawn up a list of so-called war criminals which
  includes all the Government leaders and has even demanded that the Government
  first arrest them; this clearly shows how truculent and unreasonable the
  Communist Party is. Unless the Communist Party of China changes this behaviour,
  it will indeed be difficult to find a way to peace negotiations.


There is no more of the pathetic anxiety for peace negotiations of two weeks
ago. There is no further mention of those famous phrases, "shorten the duration
of the war", "alleviate the sufferings of the people" and "treat the salvation
of the people as the primary consideration", phrases which gladdened the
heart and spread everywhere. If the Communist Party of China is unwilling
to change its "behaviour" and insists on the punishment of the war criminals,
then peace talks will be impossible. Which, then, is the primary consideration
-- the salvation of the people or the salvation of the war criminals? According
to the "Special Directive for Propaganda" issued by these heroes of the
Kuomintang, they prefer the latter. The Communist Party of China is still
consulting the democratic parties and people's organizations about the list
of war criminals, and opinions have now been received from several quarters.
Judging by the opinions so far received, they all disapprove of the list
put forward on December 25 last year by an authoritative person in the Communist
Party of China. They consider that a list containing the names of only
forty-three war criminals is too short; they consider that those to be held
responsible for launching the counter-revolutionary war and butchering several
million people should certainly not be limited to forty-three, but should
be well over a hundred. For the time being, let us suppose that the number
of war criminals will be set at well over a hundred. Then we should like
to ask the heroes of the Kuomintang, why do you oppose the punishment of
war criminals? Aren't you willing to "shorten the duration of the war" and
"alleviate the sufferings of the people"? If the war continues because of
this opposition of yours, won't that be stalling for time and prolonging
the disaster of war? "Stalling for time and prolonging the disaster of war"
was the very accusation you made against the Communist Party of China in
the statement issued in the name of the Nanking government spokesman on January
26, 1949; can it be that now you want to take it back, write it on a placard
and hang it on yourselves as a badge of honour? You are men of infinite
compassion and mercy, who profess to "treat the salvation of the people as
the primary consideration". Then why do you suddenly change and treat the
salvation of the war criminals as the primary consideration? According to
the statistics of your government's Ministry of the Interior, the number
of the Chinese people is not 450 million, but 475 million; compare that with
100 odd war criminals -- which number is bigger? You heroes have studied
arithmetic; please do a careful sum in accordance with your arithmetic textbook
and then draw your conclusion. If, without doing this sum, you hastily change
your original formula of "treating the salvation of the people as the primary
consideration" -- a good formula with which we agree and the people of the
whole country agree -- into the formula of "treating the salvation of more
than a hundred war criminals as the primary consideration", then be careful,
for you certainly will not be able to maintain your ground. After having
"appealed for peace" over several weeks, those individuals who have repeatedly
mouthed the phrase, "treat the salvation of the people as the primary
consideration", are no longer "appealing for peace" but are appealing for
war. The reason the Kuomintang die-herds are in trouble is this: they have
stubbornly opposed the people, ridden roughshod over them and thus have isolated
themselves on the pinnacle of a pagoda; moreover, they will not repent, even
unto death. All you broad masses of the people of the Yangtse valley and
the south -- workers, peasants, intellectuals, urban petty bourgeoisie, national
bourgeoisie, enlightened gentry and Kuomintang members with a conscience
-- your attention, please! The days of the Kuomintang die-hards who have
been riding roughshod over you are numbered. You and we are on the same side.
The handful of die-herds will soon topple from their pinnacle, and a people's
China will soon emerge. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Kuomintang's Different Answers to the Question of Responsibility for the War







ON THE KUOMINTANG'S DIFFERENT ANSWERS TO THE QUESTION OF RESPONSIBILITY
  FOR THE WAR



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON THE KUOMINTANG'S DIFFERENT ANSWERS TO THE QUESTION OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR
  THE WAR


February 18, 1949


  "After the conclusion of the War of Resistance, the Government, following
  a policy of peace and national reconstruction, endeavoured to solve peacefully
  the problem of the Communist Party of China. For a period of a year and a
  half the Communist Party of China broke every agreement and therefore it
  should bear the responsibility for wrecking peace. Instead, it has now drawn
  up a list of so-called war criminals which includes all the Government leaders
  and has even demanded that the Government first arrest them; this clearly
  shows how truculent and unreasonable the Communist Party is. Unless the Communist
  Party of China changes this behaviour, it will indeed be difficult to find
  a way to peace negotiations."


The above is the entire argument on the question of the responsibility for
the war which the Propaganda Department of the Central Executive Committee
of the Kuomintang advanced in a "Special Directive for Propaganda", issued
on February 13, 1949.

It is the argument of none other than War Criminal No. 1, Chiang Kai-shek.
In his New Year's Day statement he said: 

  As a devoted adherent of the Three People's Principles and the teachings
  of the Father of the Republic, I was reluctant to follow the conclusion of
  the war against Japan with the armed suppression of the bandits and thereby
  to aggravate the sufferings of the people. Therefore, as soon as the War
  of Resistance came to an end, our Government proclaimed its policy of peace
  and national reconstruction and moreover sought to solve the Communist problem
  by means of political consultation and military mediation. But contrary to
  our expectations, the Communist Party for a period of a year and a half wilfully
  obstructed all agreements and proposals and made it impossible to carry them
  out by the measures which were originally intended. Finally, it even started
  an all-out armed rebellion which threatened the very existence of the state.
  This Government was thus driven to the painful necessity of mobilization
  to put down the rebellion.


On December 25, 1948, seven days before Chiang Kai-shek made this statement,
an authoritative person in the Communist Party of China put forward a list
of forty-three war criminals and illustrious at the head of the list was
none other than this same Chiang Kai-shek. The war criminals, who want both
to sue for peace and to shirk their responsibility, have no alternative but
to shift the blame onto the Communist Party. But the two are irreconcilable.
Since the Communist Party should bear the responsibility for launching the
war, then the Communist Party should be punished. Since the Communists are
"bandits", then the "bandits" should be "suppressed". Since they "started
an all-out armed rebellion", then the "rebellion" should be "put down". "Bandit
suppression" and "the putting down of rebellion" are a hundred per cent right,
so why should they be abandoned? Why has the term "Communist bandits" been
changed into "Communist Party" in all Kuomintang public documents issued
since January 1, 1949?

Sun Fo, feeling that something was amiss, put forward a different argument
about the responsibility for the war in a speech broadcast on the evening
of the same day Chiang Kai-shek issued his New Year's Day statement. Sun
Fo said:

  We remember that in the early period following the victory of the War of
  Resistance, three years ago, because the people needed rehabilitation, the
  country needed active reconstruction and there was still common understanding
  of these needs among the various parties, we called together representatives
  from various quarters and public personages for a Political Consultative
  Conference. After three weeks' effort and thanks especially to the kind mediation
  of Mr. Marshall, President Truman's special envoy, we agreed upon a programme
  for peace and national reconstruction and upon specific measures for settling
  various disputes. If we had then carried out all these measures in good time,
  just think how prosperous China would be today, and how happy her people
  would be! Unfortunately, at the time none of the various parties concerned
  would entirely forgo its selfish interests, the people throughout the country
  did not exert themselves to the utmost to promote the success of the peace
  movement, and so the disaster of war again occurred, plunging the people
  into misery and suffering.


Sun Fo is a little bit more "fair" than Chiang Kai-shek. You see, unlike
Chiang Kai-shek, he does not shift the responsibility for the war entirely
onto the Communist Party, but divides the blame equally among "the various
parties concerned" by the method of "equalization of
landownership".[1] Those involved are the Kuomintang,
also the Communist Party, also the Democratic League and also the public
personages. That isn't all; "the people throughout the country" are also
involved; not one of our 475 million fellow-countrymen can escape responsibility.
While Chiang Kai-shek caned the Communist Party alone, Sun Fo canes all the
parties, all the people without party affiliation, every one of his
fellow-countrymen; even Chiang Kai-shek, and perhaps even Sun Fo himself,
will get a caning. Here you see two Kuomintangites at loggerheads, Sun Fo
and Chiang Kai-shek.

A third Kuomintangite has come forward, saying, "No, in my opinion, the
responsibility should be borne entirely by the Kuomintang." His name is Li
Tsung-jen. On January 22, 1949, Li Tsung-jen issued a statement in his capacity
as "acting president". Regarding the responsibility for the war, he said:


  The three years' civil war that followed the eight years' War of Resistance
  has not only completely destroyed the country's last hope of recovery after
  the victory in the War of Resistance but has also spread ruin everywhere
  north and south of the Yellow River, devastating innumerable farmsteads and
  houses, killing and wounding thousands upon thousands of innocent people,
  breaking up countless families and causing people everywhere to lament in
  hunger and cold. Such a terrible holocaust is really without parallel in
  the history of civil wars in our country.


Here Li Tsung-jen makes a statement but names no names; he fixes the
responsibility neither on the Kuomintang, nor on the Communist Party, nor
on any other quarter; yet he has stated one fact, that this "terrible holocaust"
has occurred in no other place than "north and south of the Yellow River".
Wherefore, let us examine who caused this "terrible holocaust" in the area
from the Yellow River south to the Yangtse River and north to the Sungari
River. Could it have been caused by the people and the people's army there,
fighting among themselves? Since Li Tsung-jen was once Chief of Chiang Kai-shek's
Peiping Headquarters and since the troops of his Kwangsi clique together
with Chiang's troops once fought into the Yi-Meng mountain area in Shantung
Province,[2] he has reliable information about
where and how this "holocaust" took place. If there is nothing else good
about Li Tsung-jen, at least it is good that he has made this one honest
statement. What is more, instead of speaking about "putting down the rebellion"
or "suppressing the bandits", he calls the war a "civil war", and this, for
the Kuomintang, may be said to be quite novel.

Following his own logic, Li Tsung-jen declared in the same statement that
"the Government is willing to start negotiations immediately on the basis
of the eight terms proposed by the Communist Party of China". Li Tsung-jen
knows that the first of the eight terms is the punishment of war criminals
and that his own honourable name is among them. That the war criminals should
be punished is a logical conclusion from the "holocaust". For this reason
the Kuomintang die-hards are even now muttering complaints against Li Tsung-jen,
saying that "the eight terms Mao Tse-tung put forward in his January 14 statement
would ruin the nation, and the Government should not have accepted them".

There are reasons why the die-hards can only mutter and dare not speak out
openly. Before Chiang Kai-shek "retired", the diehards had thought of rejecting
our eight terms, but then Chiang Kai-shek on second thoughts decided not
to do so, probably because he considered that to reject them would leave
no way out; this was the state of affairs on January 19. On that morning,
Chang Chun-mai [3] upon his return to Shanghai
from Nanking said that "the Government may issue another statement soon in
reply to the eight terms put forward by the Communist Party of China", whereupon
the Central News Agency sent a service message the same evening, saying:


  Add the following note to the Shanghai dispatch on Chang Chun-mai's statement
  that has just come through. As regards his assertion that the Government
  will soon issue another statement, a Central News Agency correspondent has
  just learned from the quarters concerned that the Government has no intention
  of making another statement.


In the January 21 statement on his "retirement", Chiang Kai-shek said not
a single word in criticism of the eight terms and even revoked his own five
terms, changing them into "attaining peace on the principle that the integrity
of territory and sovereignty is maintained, that the historic culture and
social order are not destroyed and that the people's livelihood and right
to freedom are safeguarded". He no longer dared raise such matters as the
constitution, the legally constituted authority or the army. That is why
on January 22 Li Tsung-jen dared to accept the eight terms of the Communist
Party of China as the basis for negotiations and why the Kuomintang die-hards
dared not openly reject them, but could only mutter that "the Government
should not have accepted them".

Did Sun Fo consistently maintain his policy of "equalization of landownership"?
No. After he "moved the Government to Canton" on February 5, 1949, he made
a speech on February 7 about the question of war responsibility, saying:


  In the last six months the spread of the disaster of war has brought about
  serious changes in the situation and inflicted untold suffering on the people.
  All this has its origin in past mistakes, failures and unreasonableness,
  and today's grave situation is the consequence. We are all convinced that
  China needs the Three People's Principles. So long as the Three People's
  Principles are not put into effect, China's problems can never be solved.
  It may be recalled that twenty years ago the Tsungli of our party
  personally entrusted the Three People's Principles to our party as his legacy
  in the hope that they would be put into effect step by step. If they had
  been put into effect, the situation would never have developed into such
  a hopeless mess.


People will please note that here the president of the Executive Yuan of
the Kuomintang government is not apportioning responsibility for the war
equally among the various parties and all his fellow-countrymen but is putting
it on the Kuomintang itself. It makes people feel exceedingly good to see
Sun Fo applying the cane to the backside of the Kuomintang alone. What about
the Communist Party? President Sun says: 

  We can see that the Communist Party of China has been able to lure and dupe
  the people merely by appealing for the equalization of landownership, which
  is one part of the Three People's Principles, the Principle of the People's
  Livelihood. We ought to feel deeply ashamed, sharpen our vigilance and examine
  afresh our past mistakes.


Thank you, dear President! Although the Communist Party is still charged
with the crime of "luring and duping the people", at least it is innocent
of other horrible crimes and hence escapes a caning and is let off with its
head and its backside unscathed.

Nor is President Sun lovable for this reason alone. In the same speech, he
says: 

  The spread of Communist influence today is a result of our failure to put
  into effect the principles we believe in. Our party's greatest mistake in
  the past was that certain members worshipped force too much and scrambled
  for power among themselves, thus giving the enemy opportunities to sow dissension
  in our ranks. The conclusion of the eight years' War of Resistance should
  have been the occasion for realizing the country's peaceful unification,
  an opportunity of a thousand years, and originally the Government had a plan
  of settling domestic disputes by political means, but unfortunately it was
  not carried out. After years of war and chaos the people urgently needed
  rehabilitation. The renewal of armed conflict made life impossible for the
  people, and the suffering was great, it also lowered the morale of the troops
  and caused repeated military setbacks. In deference to the feelings of the
  people and because he realized that military means had failed to solve the
  problem, President Chiang issued a New Year's Day message calling for peace.


Good! Here this war criminal Sun Fo has made a voluntary confession, and
a frank and truthful one too, although he has not been arrested or caned.
Who was it who worshipped force, launched the war and sued for peace only
after military means had failed to solve the problem? None other than the
Kuomintang, none other than Chiang Kai-shek himself. President Sun is very
precise in his choice of words when he says that "certain members" of his
party worshipped force too much. This conforms with the demand of the Communist
Party of China that only a certain number of Kuomintang members be punished
and branded as war criminals, but no more than this number, and of course
not its entire membership.

So we have no dispute with Sun Fo over the number. We differ with him as
to the conclusion to be drawn. We hold that "certain members" of the Kuomintang
must be punished as war criminals because they "worshipped force" and caused
the "renewal of armed conflict", which "made life impossible for the people".
But Sun Fo does not agree. He says: 

  In delaying the appointment of its delegation and constantly stalling for
  time, the Communist Party has shown that it also worships force, believes
  it has now become full-fledged and can conquer the whole country by force,
  it therefore refuses to cease hostilities as a first step. Its motive is
  all too clear. I hereby propose in all seriousness that in order to obtain
  lasting peace negotiations should be conducted by the two parties on an equal
  footing and that the terms should be fair and reasonable and acceptable to
  the people of the whole country.


From this you can see that President Sun is not quite so lovable. He seems
to think that the punishment of war criminals is not a fair and reasonable
term. On the question of war criminals, his words reveal an attitude similar
to that of the "Special Directive for Propaganda" issued by the Kuomintang
Propaganda Department on February 13, and similarly he only mutters and dares
not openly object. He differs sharply from Li Tsung-jen who dares to accept
the punishment of war criminals as one of the basic terms for negotiations.

But there is still something lovable about President Sun, for he says that
although the Communist Party "also worships force", as shown by two points,
"delaying the appointment of its delegation" and "refusing to cease hostilities
as a first step", yet it is not like the Kuomintang, which worshipped force
as early as 1946 and unleashed a most cruel war. Well, the Communist Party
has "delayed the appointment of its delegation" because making a list of
war criminals is an important matter, it must be "acceptable to the people
of the whole country" and a list that is too long or too short would be
unrealistic and unacceptable to "the people of the whole country" (whose
ranks do not include the war criminals and their accomplices). This requires
consultation with the democratic parties and people's organizations; it has
therefore caused some "stalling", and we were not able to appoint our delegates
quickly, thus arousing the displeasure of Sun Fo and his like. But from this,
one cannot jump to the conclusion that the Communist Party "also worships
force". It is probable that before long the list of war criminals will be
published, our delegates named and the negotiations started; and then President
Sun will not be able to say that we "worship force".

As for "refusing to cease hostilities as a first step", this is a correct
attitude adopted in obedience to President Chiang's New Year's Day message.
In that message President Chiang said: 

  As soon as the Communist Party has a sincere desire for peace and can give
  definite indications of this, the Government will certainly meet it in all
  sincerity and be willing to discuss concrete measures for ending hostilities
  and restoring peace.


On January 19 Sun Fo's Executive Yuan passed a resolution in violation of
Chiang Kai-shek's message, saying "first, effect an immediate and unconditional
cessation of hostilities, and then, appoint delegates to enter into peace
negotiations". On January 21 a Chinese Communist Party spokesman sternly
criticized this absurd resolution.[4] Curiously
enough, the president of the Executive Yuan turned a deaf ear to the criticism
and on February 7 again nonsensically said that the Communist Party's "refusal
to cease hostilities as a first step" was proof that it "also worships force".
Even such a war criminal as Chiang Kai-shek knows that without negotiations
it is impossible to cease hostilities and restore peace; on this point Sun
Fo is far behind Chiang Kai-shek.

As is generally known, Sun Fo is listed as a war criminal because he has
all along supported Chiang Kai-shek in launching and continuing the war.
As late as June 22, 1947, he was still saying that a "settlement will finally
come, provided militarily we fight to the end" and that "at present peace
negotiations are out of the question, and the Government must crush the Communist
Party of China or be overthrown by it".[5] Sun
Fo himself is one of those "certain members" of the Kuomintang who worshipped
force. But now he is making irresponsible and carping comments from the
side-lines, as if he himself had never worshipped force and bore no
responsibility for the failure to carry out the Three People's Principles.
This is dishonest. Whether tried according to the law of the state or judged
according to the party discipline of the Kuomintang, Sun Fo cannot escape
the caning he deserves.

NOTES


1. A famous slogan of Sun Yat-sen. (See "On New Democracy"
Section 6, Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. II.) Here it is
used as a pun in ridicule of Sun Fo.

2. This refers to the region of the Yi and Meng Mountains
in Shantung Province. It was the 46th Army of the Kwangsi clique which attacked
this region jointly with Chiang Kai-shek's troops. This army had been brought
from Hainan Island by sea and landed at Tsingtao in October 1946. It was
completely wiped out in February 1947 in the Laiwu region of Shantung Province.

3. A reactionary politician, the head of the small reactionary
Democratic Socialist Party. See "Greet the New High Tide of the Chinese
Revolution", Note 8, p. 126 of this volume and "On New Democracy", Note 9,
Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Vol. II.

4. See "Comment by the Spokesman for the Communist Party
of China on the Resolution of the Nanking Executive Yuan", pp. 321-23 of
this volume.

5. This refers to the remarks made in Nanking on June 22,
1947 by Sun Fo, then vice-president of the Kuomintang government, when he
received reporters of the Associated Press, the Kuomintang Central Daily
News and the Hsin Min Pao. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Report to the Second Plenary Session of the Seventh Central Committee of the ommunist Party of China







REPORT TO THE SECOND PLENARY SESSION OF THE SEVENTH CENTRAL COMMITTEE
  OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

REPORT TO THE SECOND PLENARY SESSION OF THE SEVENTH CENTRAL COMMITTEE
  OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CHINA


March 5, 1949

[The Seventh Central Committee of the Communist Party of China held its Second
Plenary Session in Hsipaipo Village, Pingshan County, Hopei Province, from
March 5 to 13, 1949. Thirty-four members and nineteen alternate members of
the Central Committee were present. This session, which was convened on the
eve of the country-wide victory of the Chinese people's revolution, was extremely
important. In his report at the session, Comrade Mao Tse-tung set forth policies
to promote the speedy achievement of the country-wide victory of the revolution
and to organize this victory. He explained that with this victory the centre
of gravity of the Party's work should be shifted from the village to the
city, defined the basic political, economic and foreign policies the Party
should adopt after victory and set the general tasks and main course for
transforming China from an agricultural into an industrial country, from
a new-democratic into a socialist society. In particular, he analysed the
current conditions in the different sectors of China's economy and the correct
policies the Party had to adopt, pointed out the necessary ways to realize
the socialist transformation in China, criticized various "Left" and Right
deviations on this question and expressed the firm conviction that China's
economy would develop at a comparatively high speed. Comrade Mao Tse-tung
appraised the new situation in the class struggle both at home and abroad
following the victory of the Chinese people's democratic revolution and gave
timely warning that the "sugar-coated bullets" of the bourgeoisie would become
the main danger to the proletariat. All this gives the document great
significance for a long historical period. This report and his article On
the People's Democratic Dictatorship, written in June of the same year,
formed the basis for the policies embodied in the Common Programme adopted
by the First Plenary Session of the Chinese People's Political Consultative
Conference, which served as a provisional constitution after the founding
of New China. The Second Plenary Session of the Seventh Central Committee
of the Party adopted a resolution based on Comrade Mao Tse-tung's report.
After the session, the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
moved from Hsipaipo, Pingshan County, Hopei Province to Peiping.]

  

I

With the conclusion of the Liaohsi-Shenyang, Huai-Hai and Peiping-Tientsin
campaigns, the main force of the Kuomintang army has been destroyed. Only
a million odd of its combat troops are left, dispersed over vast areas from
Sinkiang to Taiwan and over extremely long fronts. From now on there can
be only three patterns for disposing of these Kuomintang troops -- the Tientsin
pattern, the Peiping pattern or the Suiyuan
pattern.[1] To dispose of the enemy forces by fighting,
as we did in Tientsin, must still be the primary object of our attention
and preparations. The commanders and fighters of the entire Chinese People's
Liberation Army absolutely must not relax in the least their will to fight;
any thinking that relaxes the will to fight and belittles the enemy is wrong.
The possibility has increased for solutions on the Peiping pattern, that
is, to compel enemy troops to reorganize peacefully, quickly and thoroughly
into the People's Liberation Army in conformity with the latter's system.
For the purpose of rapidly eliminating the vestiges of counter-revolution
and liquidating its political influence, this solution is not quite as effective
as the solution by fighting. However, it is bound to occur and is unavoidable
after the main force of the enemy has been destroyed; furthermore, it is
advantageous to our army and the people because casualties and destruction
can be avoided. Therefore, the leading comrades of the various field armies
should all pay attention to this form of struggle and learn how to use it.
This is one form of struggle, a form of struggle without bloodshed; it does
not mean that problems can be solved without struggle. The Suiyuan pattern
is deliberately to keep part of the Kuomintang troops wholly or nearly intact,
that is, to make temporary concessions to these troops in order to help win
them over to our side or neutralize them politically. Thereby, we can concentrate
our forces to finish off the main part of the remnant Kuomintang forces first
and then, after a certain period (say, a few months, half a year or a year
later), proceed to reorganize these troops into the People's Liberation Army
in conformity with its system. That is another form of struggle. It will
preserve more of the vestiges and political influence of counter-revolution
than the Peiping form and for a longer period. But there is not the slightest
doubt that they will eventually be eliminated. It must never be assumed that,
once they yield to us, the counter-revolutionaries turn into revolutionaries,
that their counterrevolutionary ideas and designs cease to exist. Definitely
not. Many of the counter-revolutionaries will be remoulded, some will be
sifted out, and certain die-hard counter-revolutionaries will be suppressed.

II

The People's Liberation Army is always a fighting force. Even after country-wide
victory, our army will remain a fighting force during the historical period
in which classes have not been abolished in our country and the imperialist
system still exists in the world. On this point there should be no
misunderstanding or wavering. The People's Liberation Army is also a working
force; this will be the case especially when the Peiping or the Suiyuan pattern
of solution is used in the south. With the gradual decrease in hostilities,
its function as a working force will increase. There is a possibility that
before very long the entire People's Liberation Army will be turned into
a working force, and we must take this possibility into account. The 53,000
cadres now ready to leave with the army for the south are very inadequate
for the vast new areas we shall soon hold, and we must prepare to turn all
the field armies, 2,100,000 strong, into a working force. In that event,
there will be enough cadres and the work can develop over large areas. We
must look upon the field armies with their 2,100,000 men as a gigantic school
for cadres.

III

From 1927 to the present the centre of gravity of our work has been in the
villages -- gathering strength in the villages, using the villages in order
to surround the cities and then taking the cities. The period for this method
of work has now ended. The period of "from the city to the village" and of
the city leading the village has now begun. The centre of gravity of the
Party's work has shifted from the village to the city. In the south the People's
Liberation Army will occupy first the cities and then the villages. Attention
must be given to both city and village and it is necessary to link closely
urban and rural work, workers and peasants, industry and agriculture. Under
no circumstances should the village be ignored and only the city given attention;
such thinking is entirely wrong. Nevertheless, the centre of gravity of the
work of the Party and the army must be in the cities; we must do our utmost
to learn how to administer and build the cities. In the cities we must learn
how to wage political, economic and cultural struggles against the imperialists,
the Kuomintang and the bourgeoisie and also how to wage diplomatic struggles
against the imperialists. We must learn how to carry on overt struggles against
them, we must also learn how to carry on covert struggles against them. If
we do not pay attention to these problems, if we do not learn how to wage
these struggles against them and win victory in the struggles, we shall be
unable to maintain our political power, we shall be unable to stand on our
feet, we shall fail. After the enemies with guns have been wiped out, there
will still be enemies without guns; they are bound to struggle desperately
against us; we must never regard these enemies lightly. If we do not now
raise and understand the problem in this way, we shall commit very grave
mistakes.

IV

On whom shall we rely in our struggles in the cities? Some muddle-headed
comrades think we should rely not on the working class but on the masses
of the poor. Some comrades who are even more muddle-headed think we should
rely on the bourgeoisie. As for the direction of industrial development,
some muddle-headed comrades maintain that we should chiefly help the development
of private enterprise and not state enterprise, whereas others hold the opposite
view that it suffices to pay attention to state enterprise and that private
enterprise is of little importance. We must criticize these muddled views.
We must whole-heartedly rely on the working class, unite with the rest of
the labouring masses, win over the intellectuals and win over to our side
as many as possible of the national bourgeois elements and their representatives
who can co-operate with us -- or neutralize them -- so that we can wage a
determined struggle against the imperialists, the Kuomintang and the
bureaucrat-capitalist class and defeat these enemies step by step. Meanwhile
we shall set about our task of construction and learn, step by step, how
to administer cities and restore and develop their production. Regarding
the problem of restoring and developing production we must be clear about
the following: first comes the production of state industry, second
the production of private industry and third handicraft production. From
the very first day we take over a city, we should direct our attention to
restoring and developing its production. We must not go about our work blindly
and haphazardly and forget our central task, lest several months after taking
over a city its production and construction should still not be on the right
track and many industries should be at a standstill, with the result that
the workers are unemployed, their livelihood deteriorates and they become
dissatisfied with the Communist Party. Such a state of affairs is entirely
impermissible. Therefore, our comrades must do their utmost to learn the
techniques of production and the methods of managing production as well as
other closely related work such as commerce and banking. Only when production
in the cities is restored and developed, when consumer-cities are transformed
into producer-cities, can the people's political power be consolidated. Other
work in the cities, for example, in Party organization, in organs of political
power, in trade unions and other people's organizations, in culture and
education, in the suppression of counter-revolutionaries, in news agencies,
newspapers and broadcasting stations -- all this work revolves around and
serves the central task, production and construction. If we know nothing
about production and do not master it quickly, if we cannot restore and develop
production as speedily as possible and achieve solid successes so that the
livelihood of the workers, first of all, and that of the people in general
is improved, we shall be unable to maintain our political power, we shall
be unable to stand on our feet, we shall fail.

V

Conditions in the south are different from those in the north, and the Party's
tasks must also be different. The south is still under Kuomintang rule. There,
the tasks of the Party and the People's Liberation Army are to wipe out the
Kuomintang's reactionary armed forces in city and countryside, set up Party
organizations, set up organs of political power, arouse the masses, establish
trade unions, peasant associations and other people's organizations, build
the people's armed forces, mop up the remnant Kuomintang forces and restore
and develop production. In the countryside, our first tasks are to wage struggles
step by step, to clean out the bandits and to oppose the local tyrants (the
section of the landlord class in power) in order to complete preparations
for the reduction of rent and interest; this reduction can then be accomplished
within a year or two after the arrival of the People's Liberation Army, and
the precondition for the distribution of land will thus be created. At the
same time care must be taken to maintain the present level of agricultural
production as far as possible and to prevent it from declining. In the north,
except for the few new Liberated Areas, conditions are completely different.
Here the Kuomintang rule has been overthrown, the people's rule has been
established and the land problem has been fundamentally solved. Here the
central task of the Party is to mobilize all forces to restore and develop
production; this should be the centre of gravity in all work. It is also
necessary to restore and develop cultural and educational work, wipe out
the remnants of the reactionary forces, consolidate the entire north and
support the People's Liberation Army.

VI

We have already carried out extensive economic construction, and the Party's
economic policy has been implemented in practice and has achieved marked
success. However, there are still many muddled views within the Party on
the question of why we should adopt this kind of economic policy and not
another, i.e., on a question of theory and principle. How should this question
be answered? In our opinion, the answer should be as follows. Before the
War of Resistance Against Japan, the proportions of industry and agriculture
in the entire national economy of China were, modern industry about 10 per
cent, and agriculture and handicrafts about 90 per cent. This was the result
of imperialist and feudal oppression; this was the economic expression of
the semi-colonial and semi-feudal character of the society of old China;
and this is our basic point of departure for all questions during the period
of the Chinese revolution and for a fairly long period after victory. This
gives rise to a series of problems regarding our Party's strategy, tactics
and policy. An important task for our Party at present is to reach a clearer
understanding of these problems and their solution. That is to say: 

1. China already has a modern industry constituting about 10 per cent of
her economy; this is progressive, this is different from ancient times. As
a result, China has new classes and new political parties -- the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie, proletarian and bourgeois parties. The proletariat and
its party, because they have been oppressed by manifold enemies, have become
steeled and are qualified to lead the Chinese people's revolution. Whoever
overlooks or belittles this point will commit Right opportunist mistakes.

2. China still has scattered and individual agriculture and handicrafts,
constituting about 90 per cent of her entire economy; this is backward, this
is not very different from ancient times -- about 90 per cent of our economic
life remains the same as in ancient times. We have abolished, or will soon
abolish, the age-old feudal ownership of land. In this respect, we have become,
or will soon become, different from what we were in ancient times, and have
or will soon have the possibility of modernizing our agriculture and handicrafts
step by step. In their basic form, however, our agriculture and handicrafts
today are still scattered and individual, somewhat as they were in ancient
times, and they will remain so for a fairly long time to come. Whoever overlooks
or belittles this point will commit "Left" opportunist mistakes.

3. China's modern industry, though the value of its output amounts to only
about 10 per cent of the total value of output of the national economy, is
extremely concentrated; the largest and most important part of the capital
is concentrated in the hands of the imperialists and their lackeys, the Chinese
bureaucrat-capitalists. The confiscation of this capital and its transfer
to the people's republic led by the proletariat will enable the people's
republic to control the economic lifelines of the country and will enable
the state-owned economy to become the leading sector of the entire national
economy. This sector of the economy is socialist, not capitalist, in character.
Whoever overlooks or belittles this point will commit Right opportunist mistakes.

4. China's private capitalist industry, which occupies second place in her
modern industry, is a force which must not be ignored. Because they have
been oppressed or hemmed in by imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism,
the national bourgeoisie of China and its representatives have often taken
part in the people's democratic revolutionary struggles or maintained a neutral
stand. For this reason and because China's economy is still backward, there
will be need, for a fairly long period after the victory of the revolution,
to make use of the positive qualities of urban and rural private capitalism
as far as possible, in the interest of developing the national economy. In
this period, all capitalist elements in the cities and countryside which
are not harmful but beneficial to the national economy should be allowed
to exist and expand. This is not only unavoidable but also economically
necessary. But the existence and expansion of capitalism in China will not
be unrestricted and uncurbed as in the capitalist countries. It will be
restricted from several directions -- in the scope of its operation and by
tax policy, market prices and labour conditions. We shall adopt well-measured
and flexible policies for restricting capitalism from several directions
according to the specific conditions in each place, each industry and each
period. It is necessary and useful for us to apply Sun Yat-sen's slogan of
"regulation of capital".[2] However, in the interest
of the whole national economy and in the present and future interest of the
working class and all the labouring people, we must not restrict the private
capitalist economy too much or too rigidly, but must leave room for it to
exist and develop within the framework of the economic policy and planning
of the people's republic. The policy of restricting private capitalism is
bound to meet with resistance in varying degrees and forms from the bourgeoisie,
especially from the big owners of private enterprises, that is, from the
big capitalists. Restriction versus opposition to restriction will be the
main form of class struggle in the new-democratic state. It is entirely wrong
to think that at present we need not restrict capitalism and can discard
the slogan of "regulation of capital"; that is a Right opportunist view.
But the opposite view, which advocates too much or too rigid restriction
of private capital or holds that we can simply eliminate private capital
very quickly, is also entirely wrong; this is a "Left" opportunist or adventurist
view.

5. Scattered, individual agriculture and handicrafts, which make up 90 per
cent of the total value of output of the national economy, can and must be
led prudently, step by step and yet actively to develop towards modernization
and collectivization; the view that they may be left to take their own course
is wrong. It is necessary to organize producers', consumers' and credit
co-operatives and leading organs of the co-operatives at national, provincial,
municipal, county and district levels. Such co-operatives are collective
economic organizations of the labouring masses, based on private ownership
and under the direction of the state power led by the proletariat. The fact
that the Chinese people are culturally backward and have no tradition of
organizing co-operatives may confront us with difficulties, but cooperatives
can and must be organized and must be promoted and developed. If there were
only a state-owned economy and no cooperative economy, it would be impossible
for us to lead the individual economy of the labouring people step by step
towards collectivization, impossible to develop from the new-democratic society
to the future socialist society and impossible to consolidate the leadership
of the proletariat in the state power. Whoever overlooks or belittles this
point will also commit extremely serious mistakes. The state-owned economy
is socialist in character and the co-operative economy is semi-socialist;
these plus private capitalism, plus the individual economy, plus the
state-capitalist economy in which the state and private capitalists work
jointly, will be the chief sectors of the economy of the people's republic
and will constitute the new-democratic economic structure.

6. The restoration and development of the national economy of the people's
republic would be impossible without a policy of controlling foreign trade.
When imperialism, feudalism, bureaucrat-capitalism and the concentrated
expression of all three, the Kuomintang regime, have been eliminated in China,
the problem of establishing an independent and integrated industrial system
will remain unsolved and it will be finally solved only when our country
has greatly developed economically and changed from a backward agricultural
into an advanced industrial country. It will be impossible to achieve this
aim without controlling foreign trade. After the country-wide victory of
the Chinese revolution and the solution of the land problem, two basic
contradictions will still exist in China. The first is internal, that is,
the contradiction between the working class and the bourgeoisie. The second
is external, that is, the contradiction between China and the imperialist
countries. Consequently, after the victory of the people's democratic revolution,
the state power of the people's republic under the leadership of the working
class must not be weakened but must be strengthened. The two basic policies
of the state in the economic struggle will be regulation of capital at home
and control of foreign trade. Whoever overlooks or belittles this point will
commit extremely serious mistakes.

7. China has inherited a backward economy. But the Chinese people are brave
and industrious. With the victory of the Chinese people's revolution and
the founding of the people's republic, and with the leadership of the Communist
Party of China, plus the support of the working class of the countries of
the world and chiefly the support of the Soviet Union, the speed of China's
economic construction will not be very slow, but may be fairly fast. The
day is not far off when China will attain prosperity. There is absolutely
no ground for pessimism about China's economic resurgence.

VII

Old China was a semi-colonial country under imperialist domination. Thoroughly
anti-imperialist in character, the Chinese people's democratic revolution
has incurred the bitter hatred of the imperialists who have done their utmost
to help the Kuomintang. This has aroused the Chinese people to even deeper
indignation against the imperialists and deprived them of their last shred
of prestige among the Chinese people. At the same time the whole imperialist
system is very much weakened after World War II, while the strength of the
world anti-imperialist front headed by the Soviet Union is greater than ever
before. In these circumstances, we can and should adopt a policy of
systematically and completely destroying imperialist domination in China.
This imperialist domination manifests itself in the political, economic and
cultural fields. In each city or place where the Kuomintang troops are wiped
out and the Kuomintang government is overthrown, imperialist political domination
is overthrown with it, and so is imperialist economic and cultural domination.
But the economic and cultural establishments run directly by the imperialists
are still there, and so are the diplomatic personnel and the journalists
recognized by the Kuomintang. We must deal with all these properly in their
order of urgency. Refuse to recognize the legal status of any foreign diplomatic
establishments and personnel of the Kuomintang period, refuse to recognize
all the treasonable treaties of the Kuomintang period, abolish all imperialist
propaganda agencies in China, take immediate control of foreign trade and
reform the customs system -- these are the first steps we must take upon
entering the big cities. When they have acted thus, the Chinese people will
have stood up in the face of imperialism. As for the remaining imperialist
economic and cultural establishments, they can be allowed to exist for the
time being, subject to our supervision and control, to be dealt with by us
after country-wide victory. As for ordinary foreign nationals, their legitimate
interests will be protected and not encroached upon. As for the question
of the recognition of our country by the imperialist countries, we should
not be in a hurry to solve it now and need not be in a hurry to solve it
even for a fairly long period after countrywide victory. We are willing to
establish diplomatic relations with all countries on the principle of equality,
but the imperialists, who have always been hostile to the Chinese people,
will definitely not be in a hurry to treat us as equals. As long as the
imperialist countries do not change their hostile attitude, we shall not
grant them legal status in China. As for doing business with foreigners,
there is no question; wherever there is business to do, we shall do it and
we have already started; the businessmen of several capitalist countries
are competing for such business. So far as possible, we must first of all
trade with the socialist and people's democratic countries; at the same time
we will also trade with capitalist countries.

VIII

All the conditions are ripe for convening the Political Consultative Conference
and forming a democratic coalition government. All the democratic parties,
people's organizations and democrats without party affiliation are on our
side. The bourgeoisie in Shanghai and in the Yangtse valley are trying to
establish contacts with us. Navigation and postal communications between
north and south have been resumed. The disintegrating Kuomintang has alienated
itself from all the masses. We are preparing to have negotiations with the
reactionary Nanking government.[3] Its moving forces
for negotiating with us are the warlords of the Kwangsi clique, those factions
of the Kuomintang favouring peace and the Shanghai bourgeoisie. Their aims
are to obtain a share in the coalition government, retain as many troops
as possible, preserve the interests of the bourgeoisie in Shanghai and the
south and do their best to moderate the revolution. These groups recognize
our eight terms as the basis for negotiations, but they want to bargain so
that their losses will not be too great. Those trying to wreck the negotiations
are Chiang Kai-shek and his sworn followers. Chiang Kai-shek still has sixty
divisions south of the Yangtse and they are preparing to fight. Our policy
is not to refuse negotiations, but to demand that the other side accept the
eight terms in their entirety and to allow no bargaining. In return, we would
refrain from fighting the Kwangsi clique and the other Kuomintang factions
which favour peace, postpone the reorganization of their troops for about
a year, allow some individuals in the Nanking government to take part in
the Political Consultative Conference and the coalition government and agree
to protect certain interests of the bourgeoisie in Shanghai and in the south.
The negotiations are to be on an over-all basis and, if successful, they
will reduce many obstacles to our advance into the south and to the take-over
of the big cities there, which will have great advantages. If they are not
successful, then separate negotiations on a local basis will be held after
our army advances. The negotiations on an over-all basis are tentatively
fixed for late March. We hope to occupy Nanking by April or May, then convene
the Political Consultative Conference in Peiping, form a coalition government
and make Peiping the capital. Since we have agreed to hold negotiations,
we should be prepared for the many troubles which will arise after the success
of the negotiations, and we should be ready with clear heads to deal with
the tactics the other side will adopt, the tactics of the Monkey who gets
into the stomach of the Princess of the Iron Fan to play the
devil.[4] As long as we are fully prepared mentally,
we can beat any devilish Monkey. Whether the peace negotiations are overall
or local, we should be prepared for such an eventuality. We should not refuse
to enter into negotiations because we are afraid of trouble and want to avoid
complications, nor should we enter into negotiations with our minds in a
haze. We should be firm in principle; we should also have all the flexibility
permissible and necessary for carrying out our principles.

IX

The people's democratic dictatorship, led by the proletariat and based on
the worker-peasant alliance, requires that our Party conscientiously unite
the entire working class, the entire peasantry and the broad masses of
revolutionary intellectuals; these are the leading and basic forces of the
dictatorship. Without this unity, the dictatorship cannot be consolidated.
It is also required that our Party unite with as many as possible of the
representatives of the urban petty bourgeoisie and national bourgeoisie who
can co-operate with us and with their intellectuals and political groups,
so that, during the revolutionary period, we can isolate the
counter-revolutionary forces and completely overthrow both the
counter-revolutionary and imperialist forces in China and so that, after
the victory of the revolution, we can speedily restore and develop production,
cope with foreign imperialism, steadily transform China from an agricultural
into an industrial country and build China into a great socialist state.
Therefore, our Party's policy of long-term co-operation with non-Party democrats
should be clearly established in the thinking and work of the whole Party.
We must regard the majority of non-Party democrats as we do our own cadres,
consult with them sincerely and frankly to solve those problems that call
for consultation and solution, give them work, entrust them with the
responsibility and authority that should go with their posts and help them
do their work well. Proceeding from the desire to unite with them, we should
carry out serious and appropriate criticism or struggle against their errors
and shortcomings in order to attain the objective of unity. It would be wrong
to adopt an accommodating attitude towards their errors or shortcomings.
It would also be wrong to adopt a dosed-door or perfunctory attitude towards
them. In each big or medium city, each strategic region and each province,
we should develop a group of non-Party democrats who have prestige and can
co-operate with us. The incorrect attitude towards non-Party democrats, fostered
by the closed-door style in our Party during the War of Agrarian Revolution,
was not entirely overcome during the War of Resistance Against Japan, and
it reappeared in 1947 during the high tide of the land reform in the base
areas. This attitude would serve only to isolate our Party, prevent the
consolidation of the people's democratic dictatorship and enable the enemy
to obtain allies. Now that China's first Political Consultative Conference
under the leadership of our Party will soon be convened, that a democratic
coalition government will soon be formed and that the revolution will soon
be victorious throughout the country, the whole Party must make a serious
and self-critical examination of this problem and understand it correctly;
it must oppose the two deviations, the Right deviation of accommodation and
the closed-door and perfunctory "Left" deviation, and adopt an entirely correct
attitude.

X

Very soon we shall be victorious throughout the country. This victory will
breach the eastern front of imperialism and will have great international
significance. To win this victory will not require much more time and effort,
but to consolidate it will. The bourgeoisie doubts our ability to construct.
The imperialists reckon that eventually we will beg alms from them in order
to live. With victory, certain moods may grow within the Party -- arrogance,
the airs of a self-styled hero, inertia and unwillingness to make progress,
love of pleasure and distaste for continued hard living. With victory, the
people will be grateful to us and the bourgeoisie will come forward to flatter
us. It has been proved that the enemy cannot conquer us by force of arms.
However, the flattery of the bourgeoisie may conquer the weak-willed in our
ranks. There may be some Communists, who were not conquered by enemies with
guns and were worthy of the name of heroes for standing up to these enemies,
but who cannot withstand sugar-coated bullets; they will be defeated by
sugar-coated bullets. We must guard against such a situation. To win countrywide
victory is only the first step in a long march of ten thousand li.
Even if this step is worthy of pride, it is comparatively tiny; what will
be more worthy of pride is yet to come. After several decades, the victory
of the Chinese people's democratic revolution, viewed in retrospect, will
seem like only a brief prologue to a long drama. A drama begins with a prologue,
but the prologue is not the climax. The Chinese revolution is great, but
the road after the revolution will be longer, the work greater and more arduous.
This must be made clear now in the Party. The comrades must be taught to
remain modest, prudent and free from arrogance and rashness in their style
of work. The comrades must be taught to preserve the style of plain living
and hard struggle. We have the Marxist-Leninist weapon of criticism and
self-criticism. We can get rid of a bad style and keep the good. We can learn
what we did not know. We are not only good at destroying the old world, we
are also good at building the new. Not only can the Chinese people live without
begging alms from the imperialists, they will live a better life than that
in the imperialist countries.

NOTES


1. On September 19, 1949, Tung Chi-wu, Kuomintang governor
of Suiyuan Province, and Sun Lan-feng, Kuomintang army commander, revolted
and came over with more than forty thousand men. The regrouping of these
units began on February 21, 1950, under the leadership of the Suiyuan Military
Command of the People's Liberation Army. They were reorganized into the People's
Liberation Army on April 10.

2. "Regulation of capital" was one of Sun Yat-sen's well-known
slogans. The Manifesto of the Kuomintang's First National Congress, in which
the Kuomintang and the Communist Party co-operated, was published on January
23, 1924 and gave the following interpretation to this slogan: "Private
industries, whether of Chinese or of foreign nationals, which are either
of a monopolistic nature or are beyond the capacity of private individuals
to develop, such as banking, railways, and navigation, shall be undertaken
by the state, so that privately owned capital shall not control the economic
life of the people."

3. Concerning peace negotiations with the reactionary Nanking
Kuomintang government, the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
made the following decisions on March 26, 1949: 

  (1) Time for the negotiations to begin, April l;


  (2) Place for the negotiations, Peiping;


  (3) Chou En-lai, Lin Po-chu, Lin Piao, Yeh Chien-ying and Li Wei-han are
  appointed as delegates (on April 1, the Central Committee decided to add
  Nieh Jung-chen to the list of delegates), with Chou En-lai as chief delegate,
  to negotiate with the Nanking delegation on the basis of Chairman Mao Tse-tung's
  Statement on the Present Situation made on January 14 and the eight terms
  set forth therein;


  (4) The reactionary Nanking Kuomintang government is to be immediately notified
  of the aforesaid by radio broadcast and told to send its delegation to the
  specified place, at the specified time and, in order to facilitate the
  negotiations, to bring all necessary material relating to the eight terms.


4. For the story of how Sun Wu-kung, the Monkey, changed
himself into a tiny insect, found his way into the stomach of the Princess
of the Iron Fan and thus defeated her, see the Chinese novel, Pilgrimage
to the West, Chapter 59. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Methods of Work Committtees







METHODS OF WORK OF PARTY COMMITTEES



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

METHODS OF WORK OF PARTY COMMITTEES


March 13, 1949

[This was part of Comrade Mao Tse-tung's concluding speech at the Second
Plenary Session of the Seventh Central Committee of the Communist Party of
China. ] 
  

1. The secretary of a Party committee must be good at being a "squad
leader". A Party committee has ten to twenty members; it is like a squad
in the army, and the secretary is like the "squad leader". It is indeed not
easy to lead this squad well. Each bureau or sub-bureau of the Central Committee
now leads a vast area and shoulders very heavy responsibilities. To lead
means not only to decide general and specific policies but also to devise
correct methods of work. Even with correct general and specific policies,
troubles may still arise if methods of work are neglected. To fulfil its
task of exercising leadership, a Party committee must rely on its "squad
members" and enable them to play their parts to the full. To be a good "squad
leader", the secretary should study hard and investigate thoroughly. A secretary
or deputy secretary will find it difficult to direct his "squad" well if
he does not take care to do propaganda and organizational work among his
own "squad members", is not good at handling his relations with committee
members or does not study how to run meetings successfully. If the "squad
members" do not march in step, they can never expect to lead tens of millions
of people in fighting and construction. Of course, the relation between the
secretary and the committee members is one in which the minority must obey
the majority, so it is different from the relation between a squad leader
and his men. Here we speak only by way of analogy.

2. Place problems on the table. This should be done not only by the "squad
leader" but by the committee members too. Do not talk behind people's backs.
Whenever problems arise, call a meeting, place the problems on the table
for discussion, take some decisions and the problems will be solved. If problems
exist and are not placed on the table, they will remain unsolved for a long
time and even drag on for years. The "squad leader" and the committee members
should show understanding in their relations with each other. Nothing is
more important than mutual understanding, support and friendship between
the secretary and the committee members, between the Central Committee and
its bureaus and between the bureaus and the area Party committees. In the
past this point received little attention, but since the Seventh Party Congress
much progress has been made in this respect and the ties of friendship and
unity have been greatly strengthened. We should continue to pay constant
attention to this point in the future.

3. "Exchange information." This means that members of a Party committee should
keep each other informed and exchange views on matters that have come to
their attention. This is of great importance in achieving a common language.
Some fail to do so and, like the people described by Lao Tzu, "do not visit
each other all their lives, though the crowing of their cocks and the barking
of their dogs are within hearing of each
other".[1] The result is that they lack a common
language. In the past some of our high-ranking cadres did not have a common
language even on basic theoretical problems of Marxism-Leninism, because
they had not studied enough. There is more of a common language in the Party
today, but the problem has not yet been fully solved. For instance, in the
land reform there is still some difference in the understanding of what is
meant by "middle peasants" and "rich peasants".

4. Ask your subordinates about matters you don't understand or don't know,
and do not lightly express your approval or disapproval. Some documents,
after having been drafted, are withheld from circulation for a time because
certain questions in them need to be clarified and it is necessary to consult
the lower levels first. We should never pretend to know what we don't know,
we should "not feel ashamed to ask and learn from people
below"[2] and we should listen carefully to the
views of the cadres at the lower levels. Be a pupil before you become a teacher;
learn from the cadres at the lower levels before you issue orders. In handling
problems, this should be the practice of all bureaus of the Central Committee
and Party committees of the fronts, except in military emergencies or when
the facts of the matter are already clear. To do this will not lower one's
prestige, but can only raise it. Since our decisions incorporate the correct
views of the cadres at the lower levels, the latter will naturally support
them. What the cadres at the lower levels say may or may not be correct;
we must analyse it. We must heed the correct views and act upon them. The
reason why the leadership of the Central Committee is correct is chiefly
that it synthesizes the material, reports and correct views coming from different
localities. It would be difficult for the Central Committee to issue correct
orders if the localities did not provide material and put forward opinions.
Listen also to the mistaken views from below; it is wrong not to listen to
them at all. Such views, however, are not to be acted upon but to be criticized.

5. Learn to "play the piano". In playing the piano all ten fingers are in
motion; it won't do to move some fingers only and not others. But if all
ten fingers press down at once, there is no melody. To produce good music,
the ten fingers should move rhythmically and in co-ordination. A Party committee
should keep a firm grasp on its central task and at the same time, around
the central task, it should unfold the work in other fields. At present,
we have to take care of many fields; we must look after the work in all the
areas, armed units and departments, and not give all our attention to a few
problems, to the exclusion of others. Wherever there is a problem, we must
put our finger on it, and this is a method we must master. Some play the
piano well and some badly, and there is a great difference in the melodies
they produce. Members of Party committees must learn to "play the piano"
well.

6. "Grasp firmly." That is to say, the Party committee must not merely "grasp",
but must "grasp firmly", its main tasks. One can get a grip on something
only when it is grasped firmly, without the slightest slackening. Not to
grasp firmly is not to grasp at all. Naturally, one cannot get a grip on
something with an open hand. When the hand is clenched as if grasping something
but is not clenched tightly, there is still no grip. Some of our comrades
do grasp the main tasks, but their grasp is not firm and so they cannot make
a success of their work. It will not do to have no grasp at all, nor will
it do if the grasp is not firm.

7. "Have a head for figures." That is to say, we must attend to the quantitative
aspect of a situation or problem and make a basic quantitative analysis.
Every quality manifests itself in a certain quantity, and without quantity
there can be no quality. To this day many of our comrades still do not understand
that they must attend to the quantitative aspect of things -- the basic
statistics, the main percentages and the quantitative limits that determine
the qualities of things. They have no "figures" in their heads and as a result
cannot help making mistakes. For instance, in carrying out the land reform
it is essential to have such figures as the percentages of landlords, rich
peasants, middle peasants and poor peasants among the population and the
amount of land owned by each group, because only on this basis can we formulate
correct policies. Whom to call a rich peasant, whom a well-to-do middle peasant,
and how much income derived from exploitation makes a person a rich peasant
as distinct from a well-to-do middle peasant -- in all these cases too, the
quantitative limits must be ascertained. In all mass movements we must make
a basic investigation and analysis of the number of active supporters, opponents
and neutrals and must not decide problems subjectively and without basis.

8. "Notice to Reassure the Public." Notice of meetings should be given
beforehand; this is like issuing a "Notice to Reassure the Public", so that
everybody will know what is going to be discussed and what problems are to
be solved and can make timely preparations. In some places, meetings of cadres
are called without first preparing reports and draft resolutions, and only
when people have arrived for the meeting are makeshifts improvised; this
is just like the saying, "Troops and horses have arrived, but food and fodder
are not ready", and that is no good. Don't call a meeting in a hurry if the
preparations are not completed.

9. "Fewer and better troops and simpler administration." Talks, speeches,
articles and resolutions should all be concise and to the point. Meetings
also should not go on too long.

10. Pay attention to uniting and working with comrades who differ with you.
This should be borne in mind both in the localities and in the army. It also
applies to relations with people outside the Party. We have come together
from every corner of the country and should be good at uniting in our work
not only with comrades who hold the same views as we but also with those
who hold different views. There are some among us who have made very serious
mistakes; we should not be prejudiced against them but should be ready to
work with them.

11. Guard against arrogance. For anyone in a leading position, this is a
matter of principle and an important condition for maintaining unity. Even
those who have made no serious mistakes and have achieved very great success
in their work should not be arrogant. Celebration of the birthdays of Party
leaders is forbidden. Naming places, streets and enterprises after Party
leaders is likewise forbidden. We must keep to our style of plain living
and hard work and put a stop to flattery and exaggerated praise.

12. Draw two lines of distinction. First, between revolution and
counter-revolution, between Yenan and Sian. [3]
Some do not understand that they must draw this line of distinction. For
example, when they combat bureaucracy, they speak of Yenan as though "nothing
is right" there and fail to make a comparison and distinguish between the
bureaucracy in Yenan and the bureaucracy in Sian. This is fundamentally wrong.
Secondly, within the revolutionary ranks, it is necessary to make a clear
distinction between right and wrong, between achievements and shortcomings
and to make clear which of the two is primary and which secondary. For instance,
do the achievements amount to 30 per cent or to 70 per cent of the whole?
It will not do either to understate or to overstate. We must have a fundamental
evaluation of a person's work and establish whether his achievements amount
to 30 per cent and his mistakes to 70 per cent, or vice versa. If his
achievements amount to 70 per cent of the whole, then his work should in
the main be approved. It would be entirely wrong to describe work in which
the achievements are primary as work in which the mistakes are primary. In
our approach to problems we must not forget to draw these two lines of
distinction, between revolution and counter-revolution and between achievements
and shortcomings. We shall be able to handle things well if we bear these
two distinctions in mind; otherwise we shall confuse the nature of the problems.
To draw these distinctions well, careful study and analysis are of course
necessary. Our attitude towards every person and every matter should be one
of analysis and study.

The members of the Political Bureau and I personally feel that only by using
the above methods can Party committees do their work well. In addition to
conducting Party congresses well, it is most important for the Party committees
at all levels to perform their work of leadership well. We must make efforts
to study and perfect the methods of work so as to raise further the Party
committees' level of leadership.

NOTES


1. The quotation is from Lao Tzu, Chapter LXXX.

2. The quotation is from the Confucian Analects,
Book V, "Kungyeh Chang".

3. Yenan was the headquarters of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of China from January 1937 to March 1947; Sian was
the centre of the reactionary rule of the Kuomintang in northwestern China.
Comrade Mao Tse-tung cited the two cities as symbols of revolution and
counter-revolution. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Whither the Nanking Govenment?







WHITHER THE NANKING GOVERNMENT?



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

WHITHER THE NANKING GOVERNMENT?


April 4, 1949


Two roads are open to the Nanking Kuomintang government and its military
and administrative personnel. Either they cling to the Chiang Kai-shek clique
of war criminals and its master, U.S. imperialism, that is, continue to be
the enemy of the people and so perish together with the Chiang Kai-shek clique
of war criminals in the People's War of Liberation. Or they come over to
the people, that is, break with the Chiang Kai-shek clique of war criminals
and U.S. imperialism, perform meritorious service in the People's War of
Liberation to atone for their crimes and so obtain clemency and understanding
from the people. There is no third road.

There are three different groups of people in the government of Li Tsung-jen
and Ho Ying-chin at Nanking.[1] One group stubbornly
persist in following the first road. No matter how plausible they are in
words, in deeds they are continuing to prepare for war, to betray the nation
and to oppress and massacre the people who are demanding genuine peace. They
are Chiang Kai-shek's followers even unto death. Another group want to follow
the second road but have not yet been able to take any decisive action. The
third group are hesitating at the crossroads, and it is uncertain which way
they will go. They do not want to offend Chiang Kai-shek and the U.S. government,
yet they hope that they will be understood and admitted by the camp of people's
democracy. But this is an illusion and is impossible.

The Nanking government of Li Tsung-jen and Ho Ying-chin is mainly a mixture
of people from the first and third groups, with only a handful from the second.
To this day, this government remains a tool of Chiang Kai-shek and the U.S.
government.

The massacre which occurred in Nanking on April
1,[2] was no accident. It was the inevitable result
of the actions taken by the government of Li Tsung-jen and Ho Ying-chin to
protect Chiang Kai-shek, his sworn followers and the forces of U.S. aggression.
It was the result of the absurd trumpeting about "honourable peace on an
equal footing" by the government of Li Tsung-jen and Ho Ying-chin and by
the sworn followers of Chiang Kai-shek, which had the purpose of countering
the Chinese Communist Party's eight terms for peace, and particularly the
punishment of war criminals. Now that the government of Li Tsung-jen and
Ho Ying-chin has sent its delegation to Peiping to negotiate peace with the
Communist Party of China and has indicated its willingness to accept the
Communist Party's eight terms as the basis for negotiations, it should, if
it has the slightest good faith, start by dealing with the Nanking Massacre,
arrest and severely punish the chief criminals, Chiang Kai-shek, Tang En-po
and Chang Yao-ming, arrest and severely punish the thugs of the secret police
in Nanking and Shanghai and arrest and severely punish the chief
counter-revolutionaries, who are obstinately opposing peace, actively disrupting
the peace negotiations and actively preparing to resist the advance of the
People's Liberation Army to the south of the Yangtse River. "Until Ching
Fu is done away with, the crisis in the state of Lu will not be
over."[3] Until the war criminals are eliminated,
there will be no peace in the country. Isn't this truth clear enough by now?

We should like to speak plainly to the Nanking government. If you are unequal
to this job, you should at least help the People's Liberation Army do it,
as our army will soon cross the Yangtse River and advance south. At this
late hour, you should not indulge in idle talk and had better do some real
work to atone for your crimes. In that case you will not have to flee for
your lives, you will not have to submit to the bullying of Chiang Kai-shek's
sworn followers, and you will not be spurned for ever by the people. This
is your last chance. Don't lose it. The People's Liberation Army will soon
advance south of the Yangtse River. We are not bluffing. The People's Liberation
Army will advance, whether or not you sign the agreement accepting the eight
terms. An agreement signed before our army advances, will be advantageous
to many -- to the people, to the People's Liberation Army, to all those in
the Kuomintang government who wish to atone for their crimes by performing
meritorious service, and to the broad ranks of officers and men in the Kuomintang
army; it will be disadvantageous only to Chiang Kai-shek, his sworn followers
and the imperialists. If the agreement is not signed, the situation will
be about the same; solutions can be achieved by local negotiations. There
may yet be some fighting, but not much. Over the vast area and long front
extending from Sinkiang to Taiwan, the Kuomintang has only about 1,100,000
combat troops left, and so there will not be much fighting. Whether a general
agreement is signed, or whether no such agreement is signed but instead many
local agreements are signed, it will be all the same for Chiang Kai-shek,
for his sworn followers and for U.S. imperialism, in a word, for all those
reactionaries who will not change even unto death; they are irrevocably doomed.
Perhaps it will be slightly more advantageous to Nanking, as well as to
ourselves, to sign rather than not to sign a general agreement, and that
is why we are still striving to conclude it. But if a general agreement is
to be signed, we must be prepared as a consequence to deal with many messy
matters. It would be very much neater for us not to sign a general agreement
but instead to sign many local agreements. Nevertheless, we are still ready
to sign a general agreement. If the Nanking government and its delegation
are also willing to do so, they must make up their minds in the next few
days; all illusions and all empty talk should be discarded. We are not forcing
you to make up your minds. The Nanking government and its delegation are
free to make up their minds or not to. That is to say, you may either listen
to Chiang Kai-shek and Leighton Stuart and side with them irrevocably, or
listen to us and side with us; you are free to choose. But there is not much
time for you to make your choice. The People's Liberation Army will soon
start its march, and there is no opportunity left for hesitation.

NOTES


1. After Sun Fo's resignation, Li Tsung-jen appointed Ho
Ying-chin to succeed him as president of the bogus Executive Yuan on March
12, 1949.

2. On April l, 1949, over six thousand students from eleven
colleges and universities in Nanking demonstrated, demanding that the reactionary
Kuomintang government should accept the eight peace terms of the Chinese
Communist Party. On the instructions of Chiang Kai-shek, Chang Yao-ming,
commander-in-chief of the Kuomintang garrison forces at Nanking, ordered
soldiers, policemen and secret agents to beat the students brutally; two
were killed and more than a hundred wounded.

3. According to Tso Chuan, an ancient Chinese
historical work dealing with the important events of the Spring and Autumn
Era (770-475 B.C.), Ching Fu, a noble in the state of Lu, repeatedly stirred
up internal strife and murdered two reigning princes of that state. The saying
in the text was then current among the people of Lu, and Ching Fu's name
has since become a byword for those who stir up internal strife. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Order to the Army for the Country-Wide Advance







ORDER TO THE ARMY FOR THE COUNTRY-WIDE ADVANCE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ORDER TO THE ARMY FOR THE COUNTRY-WIDE ADVANCE


April 21, 1949

[This order was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung. After the reactionary Kuomintang
government refused to sign the Agreement on Internal Peace, the People's
Liberation Army acted on this order issued by Chairman Mao Tse-tung and
Commander-in-Chief Chu Teh and embarked upon a general advance, unprecedented
in scale, into the vast areas which had not yet been liberated. On the morning
of April 21, 1949, the Second Field Army led by Liu Po-cheng, Teng Hsiao-ping
and other comrades and the Third Field Army led by Chen Yi, Su Yu, Tan Chen-lin
and other comrades, forced the Yangtse River on a front extending more than
five hundred kilometres from Hukou (northeast of Kiukiang) in the west to
Kiangyin in the east and completely destroyed the defence line along the
Yangtse which the enemy had painstakingly built in three and a half months.
On April 23 these forces liberated Nanking, which had been the centre of
the counter-revolutionary rule of the Kuomintang for twenty-two years, and
proclaimed the downfall of the reactionary Kuomintang regime. Then they thrust
south along separate routes, liberated Hangchow on May 3 and Nanchang on
May 22 and captured Shanghai, China's biggest city, on May 27. In June they
began their march into Fukien Province; they liberated Foochow on August
17 and Amoy on October 17. On May 14 the Fourth Field Army led by Lin Piao,
Lo Jung-huan and other comrades forced the Yangtse on a front of more than
one hundred kilometres in the Tuanfeng-Wuhsueh sector east of Wuhan. On May
16 and 17 it liberated Wuchang, Hanyang and Hankow, cities of strategic
importance in central China. Then it marched south into Hunan. Cheng Chien,
Kuomintang governor of Hunan Province, and Chen Mingjen, Commander of the
1st Army renounced their allegiance to the Kuomintang on August 4, and Hunan
Province was peacefully liberated. The Fourth Field Army fought the
Hengyang-Paoching campaign in September and October, wiped out the main force
of the Kuomintang troops under Pai Chung-hsi and then pushed on to Kwangtung
and Kwangsi Provinces. It liberated Canton on October 14, Kweilin on November
22 and Nanning on December 4. While the Second and Third Field Armies were
forcing the Yangtse River, the armies in northern China led by Nieh Jung-chen,
Hsu Hsiang-chien and other comrades captured Taiyuan on April 24, 1949. The
First Field Army led by Peng Teh-huai, Ho Lung and other comrades, after
liberating Sian on May 20, continued its march into the Kuomintang areas
in the Northwest together with two armies from northern China. They captured
Lanchow on August 26, liberated Sining on September 5 and Yinchuan on September
23 and completely annihilated the Kuomintang troops under Ma Pu-fang and
Ma Hung-kuei. Late in September Tao Chih-yueh, Kuomintang Garrison
Commander-in-Chief of Sinkiang Province, and Burhan, the governor, renounced
their allegiance to the Kuomintang, and Sinkiang was peacefully liberated.
At the beginning of November the Second Field Army led by Liu Po-cheng, Teng
Hsiao-ping and other comrades, together with the 18th Army of the Northern
China Field Army and part of the First Field Army led by Ho Lung, Li Ching-chuan
and other comrades, began their march into southwestern China. They liberated
Kweiyang on November 15 and Chungking on November 30. On December 9 Lu Han,
Kuomintang governor of Yunnan Province, Liu Wen-hui, Kuomintang governor
of Sikang Province, and Teng Hsi-hou and Pan Wen-hua, deputy directors of
the Kuomintang Bureau of Military and Administrative Affairs in the Southwest,
renounced their allegiance to the Kuomintang, and the two provinces of Yunnan
and Sikang were peacefully liberated. In late December the People's Liberation
Army which had entered the Southwest fought the Chengtu campaign, completely
wiped out the Kuomintang troops under Hu Tsung-nan and liberated Chengtu
on December 27. By the end of December 1949 the People's Liberation Army
had wiped out all the Kuomintang troops on China's mainland and liberated
the entire mainland except Tibet.]

  

Comrade commanders and fighters of all field armies, comrades of the People's
Liberation Army in the guerrilla areas of the south!

The Agreement on Internal Peace, drafted after long negotiations between
the delegation of the Communist Party of China and the delegation of the
Nanking Kuomintang government, has been rejected by that
government.[1] The responsible members of the Nanking
Kuomintang government have rejected the agreement because they are still
obeying the orders of U.S. imperialism and Chiang Kai-shek, the chieftain
of the Kuomintang bandit gang, and because they are trying to block the progress
of the cause of the Chinese people's liberation and prevent the internal
problem from being solved by peaceful means. The Agreement on Internal Peace,
comprising eight sections with twenty-four articles formulated by the two
delegations in the negotiations, is lenient on the problem of war criminals,
is lenient towards the Kuomintang officers, soldiers and government personnel
and provides appropriate solutions for other problems, all proceeding from
the interests of the nation and the people. The rejection of this agreement
shows that the Kuomintang reactionaries are determined to fight to the finish
the counter-revolutionary war which they started. The rejection of this agreement
shows that in proposing peace negotiations on January 1 of this year the
Kuomintang reactionaries were only trying to check the advance of the People's
Liberation Army and thus gain a breathing space for a later comeback to crush
the revolutionary forces. The rejection of this agreement shows that the
Li Tsung-jen government at Nanking was utterly hypocritical in professing
to accept the Chinese Communist Party's eight terms for peace as the basis
for negotiations. Inasmuch as the Li Tsung-jen government had already accepted
such fundamental terms as the punishment of war criminals, the reorganization
of all the reactionary Kuomintang troops on democratic principles and the
handing over of all power and authority by the Nanking government and its
subordinate governments at all levels, it had no reason to reject the specific
measures which were drawn up on the basis of these fundamental terms and
which are most lenient. In these circumstances, we order you as follows:


1. Advance bravely and annihilate resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely
all the Kuomintang reactionaries within China's borders who dare to resist.
Liberate the people of the whole country. Safeguard China's territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence.

2. Advance bravely and arrest all the incorrigible war criminals. No matter
where they may flee, they must be brought to justice and punished according
to law. Pay special attention to arresting the bandit chieftain Chiang Kai-shek.

3. Proclaim to all Kuomintang local governments and local military groups
the final amended version of the Agreement on Internal Peace. In accordance
with its general ideas, you may conclude local agreements with those who
are willing to cease hostilities and to settle matters by peaceful means.

4. After the People's Liberation Army has encircled Nanking, we are willing
to give the Li Tsung-jen government at Nanking another opportunity to sign
the Agreement on Internal Peace, if that government has not yet fled and
dispersed and desires to sign it. 

Mao Tse-tung

Chairman of the Chinese People's Revolutionary Military Commission

Chu Teh

Commander-in-Chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army 


NOTES


1. On April 1, 1949, the Kuomintang government delegation
headed by Chang Chih-chung arrived in Peiping to negotiate peace with the
delegation of the Communist Party of China. An Agreement on Internal Peace
was drafted after a half month of negotiations. The agreement (final amended
version) was handed to the Nanking government delegation by the delegation
of the Communist Party of China on April 15 and was rejected by the Nanking
government on April 20. The full text of the agreement (final amended version)
is as follows: 

In the 35th year of the Republic of China, the National Government at Nanking,
with the aid of the Government of the United States of America, defied the
will of the people, wrecked the truce agreement and the resolutions of the
Political Consultative Conference and, on the pretext of opposing the Communist
Party of China, launched a country-wide civil war against the Chinese people
and the Chinese People's Liberation Army. This war has lasted two years and
nine and a half months. It has brought untold disaster to the people throughout
the country. The country has suffered tremendous losses of financial and
material resources, and its sovereignty has been further infringed. The people
of the whole country have always expressed dissatisfaction with the National
Government at Nanking for its violation of Dr. Sun Yat-sen's revolutionary
Three People's Principles and of his correct policies of alliance with Russia,
co-operation with the Communist Party and assistance to the peasants and
workers, and for its violation of his revolutionary testament. In particular,
the whole people have voiced their opposition to the launching of the present
unprecedented large-scale civil war by the National Government at Nanking
and to the erroneous political, military, financial, economic, cultural and
foreign policies and measures which that government has adopted in its pursuit
of the civil war. The National Government at Nanking has completely forfeited
the confidence of the entire people. In the present civil war its troops
have already been defeated by the People's Liberation Army led by the Communist
Party of China and commanded by the Chinese People's Revolutionary Military
Commission. Finding itself in this situation, the National Government at
Nanking proposed to the Communist Party of China on January 1 of the 38th
year of the Republic of China that negotiations should be held for the cessation
of the civil war and the restoration of peace. On January 14 of the same
year, the Communist Party of China issued a statement agreeing to this proposal
of the Kuomintang government at Nanking and putting forward eight terms as
the basis for the peace negotiations between the two sides. These terms are
as follows: punish the war criminals; abolish the bogus constitution; abolish
the bogus "constituted authority"; reorganize all reactionary troops on
democratic principles; confiscate bureaucrat-capital; reform the land system;
abrogate treasonable treaties; convene a New Political Consultative Conference
without the participation of reactionary elements and form a democratic coalition
government to take over all the power and authority of the reactionary Nanking
Kuomintang government and of its subordinate governments at all levels. These
eight basic terms were agreed to by the National Government at Nanking.
Thereupon, the Communist Party of China and the National Government at Nanking
appointed their respective delegations, fully empowered to conduct negotiations
and to sign an agreement. The delegates of both parties met in Peiping, have
affirmed first of all that the National Government at Nanking should bear
the full responsibility for the present civil war and for all its erroneous
policies and have agreed to conclude this agreement. 

SECTION ONE 

Article 1. In order to distinguish between right and wrong and to establish
responsibility, the delegation of the Communist Party of China and the delegation
of the National Government at Nanking (hereinafter referred to as both sides)
affirm that, as a matter of principle, punishment shall be meted out to the
war criminals of the National Government at Nanking who are held responsible
for launching and prosecuting the present civil war, but that they will be
dealt with on the merits of each case in accordance with the following
conditions:

  Item 1. All war criminals, no matter who they are, may be cleared of the
  charge of being war criminals and treated with leniency, provided they show
  by actual deeds that they are really sincere in distinguishing right from
  wrong and are determined to make a clean break with their past, thus facilitating
  the progress of the cause of the Chinese people's liberation and the peaceful
  settlement of the internal problem.

  Item 2. All incorrigible war criminals, no matter who they are, shall be
  severely punished if they obstruct the progress of the cause of the people's
  liberation, hinder the peaceful settlement of the internal problem, or go
  so far as to instigate rebellion. The Chinese People's Revolutionary Military
  Commission will be responsible for suppressing the ringleaders of rebellion.

Article 2. Both sides affirm that the National Government at Nanking was
wrong in pronouncing General Yasuji Okamura, war criminal in the Japanese
aggression against China, not guilty and releasing him on January 26 of the
38th year of the Republic of China and in granting permission on January
31 of the same year for the repatriation to Japan of 260 other Japanese war
criminals. The cases of all these Japanese war criminals shall be reopened
as soon as the Democratic Coalition Government of China, the new central
government representing the people throughout China, is formed.

SECTION TWO 

Article 3. Both sides affirm that the "Constitution of the Republic of China",
adopted by the "National Assembly" convened by the National Government at
Nanking in November of the 35th year of the Republic of China, shall be
abolished.

Article 4. After the abolition of the "Constitution of the Republic of China",
the fundamental law to be observed by the state and the people shall be
determined in accordance with the resolutions of the New Political Consultative
Conference and the Democratic Coalition Government. 

SECTION THREE 

Article 5. Both sides affirm that the entire legally constituted authority
of the National Government at Nanking shall be abolished.

Article 6. After the Democratic Coalition Government is formed, the people's
democratic constituted authority shall be established, and all reactionary
laws and decrees shall be annulled in all places entered and taken over by
the People's Liberation Army. 


SECTION FOUR

Article 7. Both sides affirm that all armed forces under the Nanking National
Government (all the ground, naval and air forces, gendarmerie, communications
police corps, local troops, all military institutions, academies, factories,
rear-service establishments, etc.) shall be reorganized into the People's
Liberation Army on democratic principles. After the signing of the Agreement
on Internal Peace, a national reorganization committee shall be established
at once to take charge of this work of reorganization. The reorganization
committee is to consist of seven to nine members, four to five of whom shall
be appointed by the People's Revolutionary Military Commission, and three
to four by the National Government at Nanking, with one of the members appointed
by the People's Revolutionary Military Commission serving as chairman and
one of the members appointed by the National Government at Nanking serving
as vice-chairman. In places entered and taken over by the People's Liberation
Army, regional sub-committees of the reorganization committee may be established
as required. The proportion of the members of both sides in the sub-committees
and the allocation of the posts of chairmen and vice-chairmen shall be the
same as in the national reorganization committee. A reorganization committee
shall be established for the navy and another for the air force. All matters
relating to the People's Liberation Army's entry into, and taking over of,
the areas at present administered by the National Government at Nanking shall
be decided by orders issued by the Chinese People's Revolutionary Military
Commission. The armed forces of the National Government at Nanking must not
resist the entry of the People's Liberation Army.

Article 8. Both sides agree that the reorganization plan in each region shall
be carried out in two stages: 

  Item 1. The first stage -- assembling and regrouping.

  Point 1. All the armed forces under the Nanking National Government (ground,
  naval and air forces, gendarmerie, communications police corps, local troops,
  etc.) shall be assembled and regrouped. The principle of regrouping shall
  be as follows: the reorganization committee shall, on the basis of the actual
  local conditions, order such armed forces in the areas entered and taken
  over by the People's Liberation Army to move, area by area and stage by stage,
  to the designated places for assembling and regrouping, according to their
  original designations, formations and numerical strength.

  Point 2. Before the People's Liberation Army enters and takes over, all the
  armed forces under the Nanking National Government shall be held responsible
  for maintaining local order and preventing any acts of sabotage where they
  are stationed: in all large and small cities, along important lines of
  communication and rivers, at seaports and in the villages.

  Point 3. In the above-mentioned places, when the People's Liberation Army
  enters and takes over, the armed forces under the Nanking National Government
  shall, in accordance with the orders of the reorganization committee and
  its sub-committees, hand over peacefully and move to the designated places.
  While moving to the designated places and after arriving there, the armed
  forces under the Nanking National Government shall observe strict discipline
  and shall not disturb local order.

  Point 4. When, in compliance with the orders of the reorganization committee
  and its sub-committees, the armed forces under the Nanking National Government
  leave their original stations, the local police or peace preservation corps
  stationed in those places shall not withdraw, but shall be responsible for
  maintaining local peace and order and shall obey the directions and orders
  of the People's Liberation Army.

  Point 5. The reorganization committee, its sub-committees and the local
  governments shall be responsible for providing all the armed forces of the
  Nanking National Government which are being moved or assembled with necessary
  supplies, such as grain, fodder, bedding and clothing.

  Point 6. The reorganization committee and its sub-committees shall, according
  to the actual conditions in various areas, order the authorities of the Nanking
  National Government to hand over, area by area and stage by stage, all its
  military establishments (institutions, schools, factories, storehouses and
  the like, belonging to all its organizations ranging from the Ministry of
  National Defence to the Combined Rear-Service Headquarters), all its military
  installations (naval ports, forts, air bases and the like) and all its military
  supplies to the People's Liberation Army and the latter's Military Control
  Commissions in various places.

  Item 2. The second stage -- reorganization area by area.

  Point 1. After the ground forces under the Nanking National Government (infantry,
  cavalry, special arms, gendarmerie, communications police corps and local
  troops) have moved to the designated places and have been assembled and
  regrouped, area by area and stage by stage, the reorganization committee
  shall, according to the actual conditions in different areas, draw up plans
  for their reorganization area by area and carry out these plans at specified
  times. The principle of reorganization shall be that all the above-mentioned
  ground forces, after being assembled and regrouped, shall be reorganized
  into regular units of the People's Liberation Army in conformity with its
  democratic system and regular structure. The reorganization committee and
  its sub-committees shall be responsible for handling the cases of those soldiers
  who have been found eligible for retirement because of age or disability
  and who wish to retire, as well as the cases of those officers and
  non-commissioned officers who wish to retire or take up other occupations;
  the committees shall provide them with facilities to return home and with
  means of livelihood, so that everyone will be properly placed and no one
  will commit misdeeds because he lacks means of support.

  Point 2. After the naval and air forces under the Nanking National Government
  have moved to the designated places and been assembled and regrouped, area
  by area and stage by stage, they shall be reorganized according to their
  original designations, formations and numerical strength by the navy and
  air force reorganization committees, in conformity with the democratic system
  of the People's Liberation Army.

  Point 3. All the armed forces under the Nanking National Government, after
  being reorganized into the People's Liberation Army, must strictly observe
  the Three Main Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for Attention of
  the People's Liberation Army and loyally abide by the military and political
  systems of the People's Liberation Army, without any violation,

  Point 4. The officers and men who have retired after reorganization must
  respect the local people's governments and obey the laws and decrees of the
  People's Government. The people's governments and the people of various
  localities shall be considerate of these retired officers and men and shall
  not discriminate against them.

Article 9. After the signing of the Agreement on Internal Peace, all the
armed forces under the Nanking National Government must cease conscripting
or recruiting soldiers or other personnel. They must be responsible for
protecting all their arms and ammunition, equipment, military institutions
and installations and military matériel, and must not destroy, conceal,
transfer or sell any of them.

Article 10. After the signing of the Agreement on Internal Peace, the National
Government at Nanking must, in case any of its armed forces refuses to carry
out the reorganization plan, assist the People's Liberation Army to enforce
the reorganization plan and ensure its thorough execution.

SECTION FIVE

Article 11. Both sides agree that all bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises and
property (including banks, factories, mines, vessels, companies and shops)
acquired or seized during the rule of the National Government at Nanking
through the use of political prerogatives and the influence of wealth and
position shall be confiscated and become the property of the state.

Article 12. In areas not yet entered and taken over by the People's Liberation
Army, the National Government at Nanking shall be held responsible for
supervising the bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises and property mentioned
in Article 11 so that no theft or concealment, damage, transfer or secret
sale shall occur. Assets which have already been moved shall be frozen wherever
found, and their being subsequently removed, transported abroad or damaged
shall not be permitted. Bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises and property located
abroad shall be declared the property of the state.

Article 13. In areas already entered and taken over by the People's Liberation
Army, the bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises and property mentioned in Article
11 shall be confiscated by the local Military Control Commissions or institutions
authorized by the Democratic Coalition Government. Private shares in them,
if any, shall be investigated, after they have been verified as being in
fact private and not secretly transferred bureaucrat-capital, they shall
be recognized, and their owners shall be permitted to remain shareholders
or to withdraw their shares.

Article 14. Bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises dating from the period prior
to the rule of the National Government at Nanking, as well as those dating
from the period of the rule of the National Government at Nanking, which
are neither large nor harmful to the national economy and the people's
livelihood, shall not be confiscated. But among these, the enterprises and
property of certain persons who have committed criminal offences, such as
reactionaries guilty of heinous crimes which have been reported by the people
and confirmed, shall be confiscated.

Article 15. In cities not yet entered and taken over by the People's Liberation
Army, the provincial, municipal and county governments under the National
Government at Nanking shall be responsible for protecting the people's democratic
forces and their activities in the locality and must not suppress or injure
them. 

SECTION SIX 

Article 16. Both sides affirm that the feudal system of landownership in
the rural areas of China shall be reformed step by step. After the entry
of the People's Liberation Army, reduction of rent and interest shall generally
be carried out first and distribution of land later.

Article 17. In areas not yet entered and taken over by the People's Liberation
Army, the local governments under the National Government at Nanking shall
be responsible for protecting the organizations of the peasant masses and
their activities and must not suppress or damage them.

SECTION SEVEN 

Article 18. Both sides agree that all treaties and agreements concluded with
foreign states during the rule of the National Government at Nanking and
other diplomatic documents and archives, open or secret, shall be handed
over by the National Government at Nanking to the Democratic Coalition Government
and examined by the Democratic Coalition Government. All treaties or agreements
which are detrimental to the Chinese people and their state, especially those
which are in the nature of selling out the rights of the state, shall be
either abrogated, or revised, or new treaties and agreements shall be concluded
instead, as the case may be. 

SECTION EIGHT

Article 19. Both sides agree that after the signing of the Agreement on Internal
Peace and before the formation of the Democratic Coalition Government, the
National Government at Nanking and its yuan, ministries, commissions
and other organs shall temporarily continue to function but must consult
the Chinese People's Revolutionary Military Commission in the conduct of
affairs and assist the People's Liberation Army in matters relating to the
taking over and handing over of the various areas. After the formation of
the Democratic Coalition Government, the National Government at Nanking shall
immediately hand over to the Democratic Coalition Government and proclaim
its own termination.

Article 20. Upon the handing over of the National Government at Nanking and
its local governments at various levels and all their subordinate organs,
the People's Liberation Army, the local people's governments and the Democratic
Coalition Government of China shall take care to enlist all the patriotic
and useful persons among the former's personnel, give them democratic education
and assign them to suitable posts so that they will not become destitute
and homeless.

Article 21. Before the People's Liberation Army enters and takes over, the
National Government at Nanking and its subordinate local governments in the
provinces, cities and counties shall be responsible for maintaining peace
and order in their respective areas, looking after and protecting all government
organizations and state-owned enterprises (including banks, factories, mines,
railways, postal and telegraph offices, aircraft, vessels, companies, warehouses
and all communications facilities) and other movable and immovable properties
belonging to the state; and no destruction, loss, removal, concealment, or
sale is permitted. Books, archives, antiques, valuables, bullion, foreign
currencies and all properties and assets which have been removed or concealed
shall be frozen at once wherever they are found, pending their take-over.
As for those properties which have been sent abroad or were originally abroad,
the National Government at Nanking shall be responsible for their recovery
and safekeeping and be prepared to hand them over.

Article 22. All the powers as well as the properties and assets of the state
in areas already entered and taken over by the People's Liberation Army shall
be taken over by the local Military Control Commissions, the local people's
governments or institutions authorized by the Coalition Government.

Article 23. After the Agreement on Internal Peace has been signed by the
delegation of the National Government at Nanking and carried out by that
government, the delegation of the Communist Party of China will take the
responsibility of proposing to the preparatory committee of the New Political
Consultative Conference that the National Government at Nanking should be
permitted to send a number of patriotic persons as representatives to the
Conference; after securing the approval of its preparatory committee, the
representatives of the National Government at Nanking may attend the New
Political Consultative Conference.

Article 24. After the National Government at Nanking has sent its representatives
to the New Political Consultative Conference, the Communist Party of China
will take the responsibility of proposing to the Conference that in the interests
of co-operation there should be included in the Democratic Coalition Government
a number of patriotic persons from the National Government at Nanking.

The delegations of both sides declare: We hereby assume the responsibility
of signing this agreement for the sake of the liberation of the Chinese people
and the independence and freedom of the Chinese nation and for the sake of
an early conclusion of the war and the restoration of peace so that the
commencement of the great task of production and construction on a nation-wide
scale will be facilitated and so that our country and people will steadily
attain prosperity, strength and well-being. It is hoped that the people of
the entire country will unite as one to struggle for the complete fulfilment
of this agreement. This agreement shall enter into force immediately upon
signature. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Proclamation of the Chinese People's Liberation Army







PROCLAMATION OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

PROCLAMATION OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY


April 25, 1949


The Kuomintang reactionaries have rejected the terms for peace and persist
in their stand of waging a criminal war against the nation and the people.
The people all over the country hope that the People's Liberation Army will
speedily wipe out the Kuomintang reactionaries. We have ordered the People's
Liberation Army to advance courageously, wipe out all reactionary Kuomintang
troops who dare to resist, arrest all the incorrigible war criminals, liberate
the people of the whole country, safeguard China's territorial integrity,
sovereignty and independence, and bring about the genuine unification of
the country, which the whole people long for. We earnestly hope that people
in all walks of life will assist the People's Liberation Army wherever it
goes. We hereby proclaim the following eight-point covenant by which we,
together with the whole people, shall abide.

1. Protect the lives and property of all the people. People in all walks
of life, irrespective of class, belief or occupation, are expected to maintain
order and adopt a co-operative attitude towards the People's Liberation Army.
The People's Liberation Army on its part will adopt a co-operative attitude
towards people in all walks of life. Counter-revolutionaries or other saboteurs
who seize the opportunity to create disturbances, loot or sabotage shall
be severely dealt with.

2. Protect the industrial, commercial, agricultural and livestock enterprises
of the national bourgeoisie. All privately owned factories, shops, banks,
warehouses, vessels, wharves, farms, livestock farms and other enterprises
will without exception be protected against any encroachment. It is hoped
that workers and employees in all occupations will maintain production as
usual and that all shops will remain open as usual.

3. Confiscate bureaucrat-capital. All factories, shops, banks and warehouses,
all vessels, wharves and railways, all postal, telegraph, electric light,
telephone and water supply services, and all farms, livestock farms and other
enterprises operated by the reactionary Kuomintang government and the big
bureaucrats shall be taken over by the People's Government. In such enterprises
the private shares held by national capitalists engaged in industry, commerce,
agriculture or livestock raising shall be recognized, after their ownership
is verified. All personnel working in bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises must
remain at their posts pending the take-over by the People's Government and
must assume responsibility for the safekeeping of all assets, machinery,
charts, account books, records, etc., in preparation for the check-up and
take-over. Those who render useful service in this connection will be rewarded;
those who obstruct or sabotage will be punished. Those desiring to go on
working after the take-over by the People's Government will be given employment
commensurate with their abilities so that they will not become destitute
and homeless.

4. Protect all public and private schools, hospitals, cultural and educational
institutions, athletic fields and other public welfare establishments. It
is hoped that all personnel in these institutions will remain at their posts;
the People's Liberation Army will protect them from molestation.

5. Except for the incorrigible war criminals and counter-revolutionaries
who have committed the most heinous crimes, the People's Liberation Army
and the People's Government will not hold captive, arrest or subject to indignity
any officials, whether high or low, in the Kuomintang's central, provincial,
municipal and county governments, deputies to the "National Assembly", members
of the Legislative and Control Yuans, members of the political consultative
councils, police officers and district, township, village and
pao-chia[1] officials, so long as they
do not offer armed resistance or plot sabotage. All these persons are enjoined,
pending the take-over, to stay at their posts, abide by the orders and decrees
of the People's Liberation Army and the People's Government and assume
responsibility for the safekeeping of all the assets and records of their
offices. The People's Government will permit the employment of those among
them who can make themselves useful in some kind of work and have not committed
any grave reactionary act or other flagrant misdeed. Punishment shall be
meted out to those who seize the opportunity to engage in sabotage, theft
or embezzlement, or abscond with public funds, assets or records, or refuse
to give an accounting.

6. In order to ensure peace and security in both cities and rural areas and
to maintain public order, all stragglers and disbanded soldiers are required
to report and surrender to the People's Liberation Army or the People's
Government in their localities. No action will be taken against those who
voluntarily do so and hand over their arms. Those who refuse to report or
who conceal their arms shall be arrested and investigated. Persons who shelter
stragglers and disbanded soldiers and do not report them to the authorities
shall be duly punished.

7. The feudal system of landownership in the rural areas is irrational and
should be abolished. To abolish it, however, preparations must be made and
the necessary steps taken. Generally speaking, the reduction of rent and
interest should come first and land distribution later; only after the People's
Liberation Army has arrived at a place and worked there for a considerable
time will it be possible to speak of solving the land problem in earnest.
The peasant masses should organize themselves and help the People's Liberation
Army to carry out the various initial reforms. They should also work hard
at their farming so as to prevent the present level of agricultural production
from falling and should then raise it step by step to improve their own
livelihood and supply the people of the cities with commodity grain. Urban
land and buildings cannot be dealt with in the same way as the problem of
rural land.

8. Protect the lives and property of foreign nationals. It is hoped
that all foreign nationals will follow their usual pursuits and observe order.
All foreign nationals must abide by the orders and decrees of the People's
Liberation Army and the People's Government and must not engage in espionage,
act against the cause of China's national independence and the people's
liberation, or harbour Chinese war criminals, counter-revolutionaries or
other law-breakers. Otherwise, they shall be dealt with according to law
by the People's Liberation Army and the People's Government.

The People's Liberation Army is highly disciplined; it is fair in buying
and selling and is not allowed to take even a needle or a piece of thread
from the people. It is hoped that the people throughout the country will
live and work in peace and will not give credence to rumours or raise false
alarms. This proclamation is hereby issued in all sincerity and earnestness.


Mao Tse-tung
Chairman of the Chinese People's Revolutionary Military Commission


Chu Teh
Commander-in-Chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army 

NOTES


1. Pao chia was the administrative system
by which the Kuomintang reactionary clique enforced its fascist rule at the
primary level. On August 1, 1932, Chiang Kai-shek promulgated the "Regulations
for the Organization of Pao and Chia and for a Population
Census in the Counties" covering the provinces of Honan, Hupeh and Anhwei.
The "Regulations" provided that "the pao and chia are to
be organized on the basis of households; there is to be a head of each household,
of each chia, which is made up of ten households, and of each pao,
which is made up of ten chia". Neighbours were required to
watch and report each other's activities to the authorities, and all were
punishable when one was found guilty; various counter-revolutionary measures
for exacting compulsory labour were also laid down. On November 7, 1934,
the Kuomintang government officially announced that this system of fascist
rule was to be established in all the provinces and municipalities under
its rule. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the Outrages by British Warships — Statement by the Spokesman of the general Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army







ON THE OUTRAGES BY BRITISH WARSHIPS



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

  ON THE OUTRAGES BY BRITISH WARSHIPS [1] STATEMENT BY THE
  SPOKESMAN OF THE GENERAL HEADQUARTERS OF THE CHINESE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION
  ARMY


April 30, 1949

[This statement was drafted by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the spokesman of
the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army. It expressed
the solemn stand of the Chinese people who fear no threats and resolutely
oppose imperialist aggression; it also set forth the foreign policy of the
new China which was soon to be established. ] 
  

We denounce the preposterous statement of the warmonger Churchill.
[2] In the British House of Commons on April 26, Churchill
demanded that the British government should send two aircraft carriers to
the Far East for "effective power of retaliation". What are you "retaliating"
for, Mr. Churchill? British warships together with Kuomintang warships intruded
into the defence area of the Chinese People's Liberation Army and fired on
the People's Liberation Army, causing no less than 252 casualties among our
loyal and gallant fighters. Since the British have trespassed on Chinese
territory and committed so great a crime, the People's Liberation Army has
good reason to demand that the British government admit its wrongdoing, apologize
and make compensation. Isn't this what you should do, instead of dispatching
forces to China to "retaliate" against the Chinese People's Liberation Army?
Prime Minister Attlee's statement is also wrong.
[3] Britain, he said, has the right to send her
warships into China's Yangtse River. The Yangtse is an inland waterway of
China. What right have you British to send in your warships? You have no
such right. The Chinese people will defend their territory and sovereignty
and absolutely will not permit encroachment by foreign governments. Attlee
said that the People's Liberation Army "would be prepared to allow the ship
[the Amethyst] to proceed to Nanking but only on condition
that she should assist the People's Liberation Army to cross the Yangtse".
Attlee lied. The People's Liberation Army gave no permission to the
Amethyst to proceed to Nanking. The People's Liberation Army does
not want the armed forces of any foreign country to help it cross the Yangtse
or to do anything else. On the contrary, the People's Liberation Army demands
that Britain, the United States and France quickly withdraw their armed forces
-- their warships, military aircraft and marines stationed in the Yangtse
and Whangpoo Rivers and other parts of China -- from China's territorial
inland waters, seas, land and air and that they refrain from helping the
enemy of the Chinese people to wage civil war. The Chinese People's Revolutionary
Military Commission and the People's Government have so far not established
diplomatic relations with any foreign government. The Chinese People's
Revolutionary Military Commission and the People's Government will protect
those foreign nationals in China who are engaged in legitimate pursuits.
They are willing to consider the establishment of diplomatic relations with
foreign countries; such relations must be based on equality, mutual benefit,
mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and, first of all,
on no help being given to the Kuomintang reactionaries. They will tolerate
no act of intimidation by any foreign government. A foreign government which
wishes to consider establishing diplomatic relations with us must sever relations
with the remnant Kuomintang forces and withdraw its armed forces from China.
Attlee complained that the Communist Party of China, having no diplomatic
relations with foreign countries, was unwilling to have contacts with the
old diplomatic personnel of foreign governments (consuls recognized by the
Kuomintang). Such complaints are groundless. In the past few years, the
governments of the United States, Britain, Canada, etc. have helped the
Kuomintang to oppose us. Can Mr. Attlee have forgotten this? Can it also
be that Mr. Attlee does not know which country gave the Kuomintang the
Chungking,[4] the heavy cruiser which
was recently sunk?

NOTES


1. On April 20-21 1949, while the People's Liberation Army
was fighting its way across the Yangtse, the Amethyst and three
other British warships intruded into the river, an inland waterway of China,
and, together with Kuomintang warships, fired on our army, causing 252
casualties. The People's Liberation Army returned the fire; the Amethyst
was disabled and forced to anchor near Chinkiang; the other three British
warships escaped. The British authorities requested that the Amethyst
should be allowed to leave, and its captain, acting on the orders of
Brind, Commander-in-Chief of the British Far Eastern Fleet, conducted
negotiations with the representative of our army. During these negotiations,
the British side consistently prevaricated and refused to admit its criminal
acts of aggression. While the negotiations were continuing, on the night
of July 30, the Amethyst forced her way alongside a passenger ship,
the Liberated Chiangling, which was going downstream off Chinkiang,
and escaped by using that ship as a shield. When our army signalled a warning
to the Amethyst to stop, she opened fire, collided with and sank
a number of junks and escaped from the Yangtse River.

2. On April 26, 1949, speaking in the British House of
Commons, Churchill, the chieftain of the British Conservative Party, slandered
as an "atrocious outrage" the action taken by the Chinese People's Liberation
Army in counter-attacking the British warships which had fired on our army,
and demanded that the British government "get in Chinese waters one aircraft
carrier, if not two, capable of . . . effective power of retaliation".

3. On April 26, 1949, British Prime Minister Attlee declared
in the House of Commons that British naval vessels had been within their
rights in going up the Yangtse on their "peaceful missions", because they
had the permission of the Kuomintang government of China. At the same time,
when speaking about the negotiations which the British representative was
holding with the representative of the Chinese People's Liberation Army,
Attlee lied, saying that the Chinese People's Liberation Army "would be prepared
to allow the ship [the Amethyst] to proceed to Nanking
but only on condition that she should assist the People's Liberation Army
to cross the Yangtse".

4. It was the British government which in February 1948
gave the Kuomintang the heavy cruiser Chungking, the largest cruiser
in the Kuomintang navy. On February 25, 1949, the officers and men of the
cruiser revolted, renounced their allegiance to the reactionary Kuomintang
government and joined the Chinese People's Navy. On March 19 the U.S.
imperialists and the Kuomintang bandits sent heavy bombers and sank the
Chungking off Hulutao, in Liaotung Gulf in northeastern China. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Address to the Prepatory Meeting of the New Political Consultive Conference







ADDRESS TO THE PREPARATORY MEETING OF THE NEW POLITICAL CONSULTATIVE
  CONFERENCE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ADDRESS TO THE PREPARATORY MEETING OF THE NEW POLITICAL CONSULTATIVE
  CONFERENCE


June 15, 1949


Fellow Delegates,

Today we are holding the inaugural session of the Preparatory Meeting of
the New Political Consultative Conference. [1]
The task of this meeting is to complete all necessary preparations and speedily
convene the New Political Consultative Conference, which will form a democratic
coalition government in order to lead the people of the whole country in
eliminating the remnant forces of Kuomintang reaction and unifying all China
as swiftly as possible, and in carrying out, systematically and step by step,
country-wide construction in the political, economic and cultural fields
and in national defence. This is what the people of the whole country expect
us to do, and we must do it.

The convening of the New Political Consultative Conference was proposed to
the people of the whole country by the Communist Party of China on May 1,
1948.[2] The proposal obtained a quick response
from the democratic parties, people's organizations, democratic personages
in all walks of life throughout China, the country's minority nationalities
and the overseas Chinese. The Communist Party of China, the democratic parties,
people's organizations, democratic personages in all walks of life, minority
nationalities and overseas Chinese all hold that we must overthrow the rule
of imperialism, feudalism, bureaucrat-capitalism and the Kuomintang
reactionaries, convene a Political Consultative Conference of representatives
of all the democratic parties, people's organizations, democratic personages
in all walks of life, minority nationalities and overseas Chinese, proclaim
the founding of the People's Republic of China and elect a democratic coalition
government to represent it. Only thus can our great motherland free herself
from a semi-colonial and semi-feudal fate and take the road of independence,
freedom, peace, unity, strength and prosperity. This is a common political
basis. It is the common political basis for the united struggle of the Communist
Party of China, the democratic parties, people's organizations, democratic
personages in all walks of life, minority nationalities and overseas Chinese;
it is also the common political basis for the united struggle of the whole
people. So firm is this political basis that no serious-minded democratic
party, people's organization or democratic personage has expressed any
differences of opinion, and all hold that this is the only road which leads
in the right direction for solving all China's problems.

The people of the whole country supporting their own People's Liberation
Army have won the war. This great People's War of Liberation, begun in July
1946 has now lasted three years. The war was launched by the Kuomintang
reactionaries with the help they received from foreign imperialism. In unleashing
this civil war against the people the Kuomintang reactionaries perfidiously
and unscrupulously tore up the truce agreement and the resolutions of the
Political Consultative Conference of January 1946. But in three short years
they have been defeated by the heroic People's Liberation Army. Not long
ago, after the Kuomintang reactionaries' peace plot was exposed, the People's
Liberation Army bravely advanced and crossed the Yangtse River. Nanking,
the capital of the Kuomintang reactionaries, is now in our hands. Shanghai,
Hangchow, Nanchang, Wuhan and Sian have been liberated. At this very moment,
the field armies of the People's Liberation Army are conducting a great march
unprecedented in Chinese history into the southern and northwestern provinces.
In three years the People's Liberation Army has wiped out a total of 5,590,000
of the reactionary Kuomintang troops. Now the remnants of the Kuomintang
forces number only about 1,500,000, including regulars, irregulars and those
in the military establishments and academies in the rear. It will still take
some time to mop up these enemy remnants, but not long.

This is a victory for the people of all China, and also a victory for the
peoples of the whole world. The whole world, except the imperialists and
the reactionaries in various countries, is elated and inspired by this great
victory of the Chinese people. The struggle of the Chinese people against
their own enemies and the struggles of the peoples of the world against their
own enemies have the same meaning. The people of China and the peoples of
the world have all witnessed the fact that the imperialists have directed
the Chinese reactionaries ruthlessly to oppose the Chinese people by means
of a counter-revolutionary war and that the Chinese people have triumphantly
overthrown the reactionaries by means of a revolutionary war.

Here, I think it is necessary to call people's attention to the fact that
the imperialists and their running dogs, the Chinese reactionaries, will
not resign themselves to defeat in this land of China. They will continue
to gang up against the Chinese people in every possible way. For example,
they will smuggle their agents into China to sow dissension and make trouble.
That is certain; they will never neglect these activities. To take another
example, they will incite the Chinese reactionaries, and even throw in their
own forces, to blockade China's ports. They will do this as long as it is
possible. Furthermore, if they still hanker after adventures, they will send
some of their troops to invade and harass China's frontiers; this, too, is
not impossible. All this we must take fully into account. Just because we
have won victory, we must never relax our vigilance against the frenzied
plots for revenge by the imperialists and their running dogs. Whoever relaxes
vigilance will disarm himself politically and land himself in a passive position.
In view of these circumstances, the people all over the country must unite
to smash resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely every plot against
the Chinese people by the imperialists and their running dogs, the Chinese
reactionaries. China must be independent, China must be liberated, China's
affairs must be decided and run by the Chinese people themselves, and no
further interference, not even the slightest, will be tolerated from any
imperialist country.

The Chinese revolution is a revolution of the broad masses of the whole nation.
Everybody is our friend, except the imperialists, the feudalists and the
bureaucrat-capitalists, the Kuomintang reactionaries and their accomplices.
We have a broad and solid revolutionary united front. This united front is
so broad that it includes the working class, the peasantry, the urban petty
bourgeoisie and the national bourgeoisie. This united front is so solid that
it possesses the resolute will and the inexhaustible capacity to defeat every
enemy and overcome every difficulty. The epoch we are living in is an epoch
in which the imperialist system is heading for total collapse, the imperialists
have fallen inextricably into crisis and, no matter how they continue to
oppose the Chinese people, the Chinese people will always have a way to win
final victory.

At the same time, we proclaim to the whole world that what we oppose is
exclusively the imperialist system and its plots against the Chinese people.
We are willing to discuss with any foreign government the establishment of
diplomatic relations on the basis of the principles of equality, mutual benefit
and mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, provided it
is willing to sever relations with the Chinese reactionaries, stops conspiring
with them or helping them and adopts an attitude of genuine, and not
hypocritical, friendship towards People's China. The Chinese people wish
to have friendly co-operation with the people of all countries and to resume
and expand international trade in order to develop production and promote
economic prosperity.

Fellow Delegates, all the conditions are ripe for us to convene the New Political
Consultative Conference and to form a democratic coalition government. The
people throughout the country are most eagerly expecting us to convene the
conference and form the government. I believe the work we have now begun
will fulfil this hope, and do so before long.

Upon the formation of China's democratic coalition government, its central
tasks will be: (1) to mop up the remnants of the reactionaries and suppress
their trouble-making; and (2) to do everything possible and make the utmost
effort to restore and develop the people's economy and, at the same time,
to restore and develop the people's culture and education.

The Chinese people will see that, once China's destiny is in the hands of
the people, China, like the sun rising in the east, will illuminate every
corner of the land with a brilliant flame, swiftly clean up the mire left
by the reactionary government, heal the wounds of war and build a new, powerful
and prosperous people's republic worthy of the name.

Long live the People's Republic of China!

Long live the democratic coalition government!

Long live the great unity of the people of the whole country!

NOTES


1. The meeting was held at Peiping from June 15 to 19,
1949. It was attended by 134 representatives from twenty-three organizations
and groups, including the Communist Party of China, the various democratic
parties, the people's organizations, democratic personages in all walks of
life, the minority nationalities of the country and the overseas Chinese.
It adopted the "Organic Rules of the Preparatory Committee of the New Political
Consultative Conference" and the "Provisions Regarding the Organizations
and Groups Participating in the New Political Consultative Conference and
the Size of Their Delegations" and elected a Standing Committee headed by
Chairman Mao Tse-tung. The Conference was called the New Political Consultative
Conference to distinguish it from the Political Consultative Conference which
had opened at Chungking on January 10, 1946. Its name was changed to the
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference at its first plenary session
on September 21, 1949.

2. See "On the September Meeting- Circular of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of China", Note 4, p. 276 of this volume.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## On the People's Democratic Dictatorship







ON THE PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC DICTATORSHIP



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

ON THE PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC DICTATORSHIP


In Commemoration of the Twenty-eighth Anniversary of the Communist Party
of China

June 30, 1949


The first of July 1949 marks the fact that the Communist Party of China has
already lived through twenty-eight years. Like a man, a political party has
its childhood, youth, manhood and old age. The Communist Party of China is
no longer a child or a lad in his teens but has become an adult. When a man
reaches old age, he will die; the same is true of a party. When classes
disappear, all instruments of class struggle -- parties and the state machinery
-- will lose their function, cease to be necessary, therefore gradually wither
away and end their historical mission; and human society will move to a higher
stage. We are the opposite of the political parties of the bourgeoisie. They
are afraid to speak of the extinction of classes, state power and parties.
We, on the contrary, declare openly that we are striving hard to create the
very conditions which will bring about their extinction. The leadership of
the Communist Party and the state power of the people's dictatorship are
such conditions. Anyone who does not recognize this truth is no communist.
Young comrades who have not studied Marxism-Leninism and have only recently
joined the Party may not yet understand this truth. They must understand
it -- only then can they have a correct world outlook. They must understand
that the road to the abolition of classes, to the abolition of state power
and to the abolition of parties is the road all mankind must take; it is
only a question of time and conditions. Communists the world over are wiser
than the bourgeoisie, they understand the laws governing the existence and
development of things, they understand dialectics and they can see farther.
The bourgeoisie does not welcome this truth because it does not want to be
overthrown. To be overthrown is painful and is unbearable to contemplate
for those overthrown, for example, for the Kuomintang reactionaries whom
we are now overthrowing and for Japanese imperialism which we together with
other peoples overthrew some time ago. But for the working class, the labouring
people and the Communist Party the question is not one of being overthrown,
but of working hard to create the conditions in which classes, state power
and political parties will die out very naturally and mankind will enter
the realm of Great Harmony.[1] We have mentioned
in passing the long-range perspective of human progress in order to explain
clearly the problems we are about to discuss.

As everyone knows, our Party passed through these twenty-eight years not
in peace but amid hardships, for we had to fight enemies, both foreign and
domestic, both inside and outside the Party. We thank Marx, Engels, Lenin
and Stalin for giving us a weapon. This weapon is not a machine-gun, but
Marxism-Leninism.

In his book "Left-Wing" Communism, an Infantile Disorder written
in 1920, Lenin described the quest of the Russians for revolutionary
theory.[2] Only after several decades of hardship
and suffering did the Russians find Marxism. Many things in China were the
same as, or similar to, those in Russia before the October Revolution. There
was the same feudal oppression. There was similar economic and cultural
backwardness. Both countries were backward, China even more so. In both countries
alike, for the sake of national regeneration progressives braved hard and
bitter struggles in their quest for revolutionary truth.

From the time of China's defeat in the Opium War of
1840,[3] Chinese progressives went through untold
hardships in their quest for truth from the Western countries. Hung
Hsiu-chuan,[4] Kang
Yu-wei,[5] Yen Fu[6]
and Sun Yat-sen were representative of those who had looked to the West for
truth before the Communist Party of China was born. Chinese who then sought
progress would read any book containing the new knowledge from the West.
The number of students sent to Japan, Britain, the United States, France
and Germany was amazing. At home, the imperial
examinations[7] were abolished and modern schools
sprang up like bamboo shoots after a spring rain; every effort was made to
learn from the West. In my youth, I too engaged in such studies. They represented
the culture of Western bourgeois democracy, including the social theories
and natural sciences of that period, and they were called "the new learning"
in contrast to Chinese feudal culture, which was called "the old learning".
For quite a long time, those who had acquired the new learning felt confident
that it would save China, and very few of them had any doubts on this score,
as the adherents of the old learning had. Only modernization could save China,
only learning from foreign countries could modernize China. Among the foreign
countries, only the Western capitalist countries were then progressive, as
they had successfully built modern bourgeois states. The Japanese had been
successful in learning from the West, and the Chinese also wished to learn
from the Japanese. The Chinese in those days regarded Russia as backward,
and few wanted to learn from her. That was how the Chinese tried to learn
from foreign countries in the period from the 1840s to the beginning of the
20th century.

Imperialist aggression shattered the fond dreams of the Chinese about learning
from the West. It was very odd -- why were the teachers always committing
aggression against their pupil? The Chinese learned a good deal from the
West, but they could not make it work and were never able to realize their
ideals. Their repeated struggles, including such a country-wide movement
as the Revolution of 1911,[8] all ended in failure.
Day by day, conditions in the country got worse, and life was made impossible.
Doubts arose, increased and deepened. World War I shook the whole globe.
The Russians made the October Revolution and created the world's first socialist
state. Under the leadership of Lenin and Stalin, the revolutionary energy
of the great proletariat and labouring people of Russia, hitherto latent
and unseen by foreigners, suddenly erupted like a volcano, and the Chinese
and all mankind began to see the Russians in a new light. Then, and only
then, did the Chinese enter an entirely new era in their thinking and their
life. They found Marxism-Leninism, the universally applicable truth, and
the face of China began to change.

It was through the Russians that the Chinese found Marxism. Before the October
Revolution, the Chinese were not only ignorant of Lenin and Stalin, they
did not even know of Marx and Engels. The salvoes of the October Revolution
brought us Marxism-Leninism. The October Revolution helped progressives in
China, as throughout the world, to adopt the proletarian world outlook as
the instrument for studying a nation's destiny and considering anew their
own problems. Follow the path of the Russians -- that was their conclusion.
In 1919, the May 4th Movement took place in China. In 1921, the Communist
Party of China was founded. Sun Yat-sen, in the depths of despair, came across
the October Revolution and the Communist Party of China. He welcomed the
October Revolution, welcomed Russian help to the Chinese and welcomed
co-operation of the Communist Party of China. Then Sun Yat-sen died and Chiang
Kai-shek rose to power. Over a long period of twenty-two years, Chiang Kai-shek
dragged China into ever more hopeless straits. In this period, during the
anti-fascist Second World War in which the Soviet Union was the main force,
three big imperialist powers were knocked out, while two others were weakened.
In the whole world only one big imperialist power, the United States of America,
remained uninjured. But the United States faced a grave domestic crisis.
It wanted to enslave the whole world; it supplied arms to help Chiang Kai-shek
slaughter several million Chinese. Under the leadership of the Communist
Party of China, the Chinese people, after driving out Japanese imperialism,
waged the People's War of Liberation for three years and have basically won
victory.

Thus Western bourgeois civilization, bourgeois democracy and the plan for
a bourgeois republic have all gone bankrupt in the eyes of the Chinese people.
Bourgeois democracy has given way to people's democracy under the leadership
of the working class and the bourgeois republic to the people's republic.
This has made it possible to achieve socialism and communism through the
people's republic, to abolish classes and enter a world of Great Harmony.
Kang Yu-wei wrote Ta Tung Shu, or the Book of Great Harmony,
but he did not and could not find the way to achieve Great Harmony.
There are bourgeois republics in foreign lands, but China cannot have a bourgeois
republic because she is a country suffering under imperialist oppression.
The only way is through a people's republic led by the working class.

All other ways have been tried and failed. Of the people who hankered after
those ways, some have fallen, some have awakened and some are changing their
ideas. Events are developing so swiftly that many feel the abruptness of
the change and the need to learn anew. This state of mind is understandable
and we welcome this worthy desire to learn anew.

The vanguard of the Chinese proletariat learned Marxism-Leninism after the
October Revolution and founded the Communist Party of China. It entered at
once into political struggles and only now, after a tortuous course of
twenty-eight years, has it won basic victory. From our twenty-eight years'
experience we have drawn a conclusion similar to the one Sun Yat-sen drew
in his testament from his "experience of forty years"; that is, we are deeply
convinced that to win victory, "we must arouse the masses of the people and
unite in a common struggle with those nations of the world which treat us
as equals". Sun Yat-sen had a world outlook different from ours and started
from a different class standpoint in studying and tackling problems; yet,
in the 1920s he reached a conclusion basically the same as ours on the question
of how to struggle against imperialism.

Twenty-four years have passed since Sun Yat-sen's death, and the Chinese
revolution, led by the Communist Party of China, has made tremendous advances
both in theory and practice and has radically changed the face of China.
Up to now the principal and fundamental experience the Chinese people have
gained is twofold: 

  (1) Internally, arouse the masses of the people. That is, unite the working
  class, the peasantry, the urban petty bourgeoisie and the national bourgeoisie,
  form a domestic united front under the leadership of the working class, and
  advance from this to the establishment of a state which is a people's democratic
  dictatorship under the leadership of the working class and based on the alliance
  of workers and peasants.


  (2) Externally, unite in a common struggle with those nations of the world
  which treat us as equals and unite with the peoples of all countries. That
  is, ally ourselves with the Soviet Union, with the People's Democracies and
  with the proletariat and the broad masses of the people in all other countries,
  and form an international united front.


"You are leaning to one side." Exactly. The forty years' experience of Sun
Yat-sen and the twenty-eight years' experience of the Communist Party have
taught us to lean to one side, and we are firmly convinced that in order
to win victory and consolidate it we must lean to one side. In the light
of the experiences accumulated in these forty years and these twenty-eight
years, all Chinese without exception must lean either to the side of imperialism
or to the side of socialism. Sitting on the fence will not do, nor is there
a third road. We oppose the Chiang Kai-shek reactionaries who lean to the
side of imperialism, and we also oppose the illusions about a third road.

"You are too irritating." We are talking about how to deal with domestic
and foreign reactionaries, the imperialists and their running dogs, not about
how to deal with anyone else. With regard to such reactionaries, the question
of irritating them or not does not arise. Irritated or not irritated, they
will remain the same because they are reactionaries. Only if we draw a clear
line between reactionaries and revolutionaries, expose the intrigues and
plots of the reactionaries, arouse the vigilance and attention of the
revolutionary ranks, heighten our will to fight and crush the enemy's arrogance
can we isolate the reactionaries, vanquish them or supersede them. We must
not show the slightest timidity before a wild beast. We must learn from Wu
Sung[9] on the Chingyang Ridge. As Wu Sung saw
it, the tiger on Chingyang Ridge was a man-eater, whether irritated or not.
Either kill the tiger or be eaten by him -- one or the other.

"We want to do business." Quite right, business will be done. We are against
no one except the domestic and foreign reactionaries who hinder us from doing
business. Everybody should know that it is none other than the imperialists
and their running dogs, the Chiang Kai-shek reactionaries, who hinder us
from doing business and also from establishing diplomatic relations with
foreign countries. When we have beaten the internal and external reactionaries
by uniting all domestic and international forces, we shall be able to do
business and establish diplomatic relations with all foreign countries on
the basis of equality, mutual benefit and mutual respect for territorial
integrity and sovereignty.

"Victory is possible even without international help." This is a mistaken
idea. In the epoch in which imperialism exists, it is impossible for a genuine
people's revolution to win victory in any country without various forms of
help from the international revolutionary forces, and even if victory were
won, it could not be consolidated. This was the case with the victory and
consolidation of the great October Revolution, as Lenin and Stalin told us
long ago. This was also the case with the overthrow of the three imperialist
powers in World War II and the establishment of the People's Democracies.
And this is also the case with the present and the future of People's China.
Just imagine! If the Soviet Union had not existed, if there had been no victory
in the anti-fascist Second World War, if Japanese imperialism had not been
defeated, if the People's Democracies had not come into being, if the oppressed
nations of the East were not rising in struggle and if there were no struggle
of the masses of the people against their reactionary rulers in the United
States, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and other capitalist countries
-- if not for all these in combination, the international reactionary forces
bearing down upon us would certainly be many times greater than now. In such
circumstances, could we have won victory? Obviously not. And even with victory,
there could be no consolidation. The Chinese people have had more than enough
experience of this kind. This experience was reflected long ago in Sun Yat-sen's
death-bed statement on the necessity of uniting with the international
revolutionary forces.

"We need help from the British and U.S. governments." This, too, is a naive
idea in these times. Would the present rulers of Britain and the United States,
who are imperialists, help a people's state? Why do these countries do business
with us and, supposing they might be willing to lend us money on terms of
mutual benefit in the future, why would they do so? Because their capitalists
want to make money and their bankers want to earn interest to extricate
themselves from their own crisis -- it is not a matter of helping the Chinese
people. The Communist Parties and progressive groups in these countries are
urging their governments to establish trade and even diplomatic relations
with us. This is goodwill, this is help, this cannot be mentioned in the
same breath with the conduct of the bourgeoisie in the same countries. Throughout
his life, Sun Yat-sen appealed countless times to the capitalist countries
for help and got nothing but heartless rebuffs. Only once in his whole life
did Sun Yat-sen receive foreign help, and that was Soviet help. Let readers
refer to Dr. Sun Yat-sen's testament; his earnest advice was not to look
for help from the imperialist countries but to "unite with those nations
of the world which treat us as equals". Dr. Sun had experience; he had suffered,
he had been deceived. We should remember his words and not allow ourselves
to be deceived again. Internationally, we belong to the side of the
anti-imperialist front headed by the Soviet Union, and so we can turn only
to this side for genuine and friendly help, not to the side of the imperialist
front.

"You are dictatorial." My dear sirs, you are right, that is just what we
are. All the experience the Chinese people have accumulated through several
decades teaches us to enforce the people's democratic dictatorship, that
is, to deprive the reactionaries of the right to speak and let the people
alone have that right.

Who are the people? At the present stage in China, they are the working class,
the peasantry, the urban petty bourgeoisie and the national bourgeoisie.
These classes, led by the working class and the Communist Party, unite to
form their own state and elect their own government; they enforce their
dictatorship over the running dogs of imperialism -- the landlord class and
bureaucrat-bourgeoisie, as well as the representatives of those classes,
the Kuomintang reactionaries and their accomplices -- suppress them, allow
them only to behave themselves and not to be unruly in word or deed. If they
speak or act in an unruly way, they will be promptly stopped and punished.
Democracy is practiced within the ranks of the people, who enjoy the rights
of freedom of speech, assembly, association and so on. The right to vote
belongs only to the people, not to the reactionaries. The combination of
these two aspects, democracy for the people and dictatorship over the
reactionaries, is the people's democratic dictatorship.

Why must things be done this way? The reason is quite clear to everybody.
If things were not done this way, the revolution would fail, the people would
suffer, the country would be conquered.

"Don't you want to abolish state power?" Yes, we do, but not right now; we
cannot do it yet. Why? Because imperialism still exists, because domestic
reaction still exists, because classes still exist in our country. Our present
task is to strengthen the people's state apparatus -- mainly the people's
army, the people's police and the people's courts -- in order to consolidate
national defence and protect the people's interests. Given this condition,
China can develop steadily, under the leadership of the working class and
the Communist Party, from an agricultural into an industrial country and
from a new-democratic into a socialist and communist society, can abolish
classes and realize the Great Harmony. The state apparatus, including the
army, the police and the courts, is the instrument by which one class oppresses
another. It is an instrument for the oppression of antagonistic classes,
it is violence and not "benevolence". "You are not benevolent!" Quite so.
We definitely do not apply a policy of benevolence to the reactionaries and
towards the reactionary activities of the reactionary classes. Our policy
of benevolence is applied only within the ranks of the people, not beyond
them to the reactionaries or to the reactionary activities of reactionary
classes.

The people's state protects the people. Only when the people have such a
state can they educate and remould themselves by democratic methods on a
country-wide scale, with everyone taking part, and shake off the influence
of domestic and foreign reactionaries (which is still very strong, will survive
for a long time and cannot be quickly destroyed), rid themselves of the bad
habits and ideas acquired in the old society, not allow themselves to be
led astray by the reactionaries, and continue to advance -- to advance towards
a socialist and communist society.

Here, the method we employ is democratic, the method of persuasion, not of
compulsion. When anyone among the people breaks the law, he too should be
punished, imprisoned or even sentenced to death; but this is a matter of
a few individual cases, and it differs in principle from the dictatorship
exercised over the reactionaries as a class.

As for the members of the reactionary classes and individual reactionaries,
so long as they do not rebel, sabotage or create trouble after their political
power has been overthrown, land and work will be given to them as well in
order to allow them to live and remould themselves through labour into new
people. If they are not willing to work, the people's state will compel them
to work. Propaganda and educational work will be done among them too and
will be done, moreover, with as much care and thoroughness as among the captured
army officers in the past. This, too, may be called a "policy of benevolence"
if you like, but it is imposed by us on the members of the enemy classes
and cannot be mentioned in the same breath with the work of self-education
which we carry on within the ranks of the revolutionary people.

Such remoulding of members of the reactionary classes can be accomplished
only by a state of the people's democratic dictatorship under the leadership
of the Communist Party. When it is well done, China's major exploiting classes,
the landlord class and the bureaucrat-bourgeoisie (the monopoly capitalist
class), will be eliminated for good. There remain the national bourgeoisie;
at the present stage, we can already do a good deal of suitable educational
work with many of them. When the time comes to realize socialism, that is,
to nationalize private enterprise, we shall carry the work of educating and
remoulding them a step further. The people have a powerful state apparatus
in their hands -- there is no need to fear rebellion by the national bourgeoisie.

The serious problem is the education of the peasantry. The peasant economy
is scattered, and the socialization of agriculture, judging by the Soviet
Union's experience, will require a long time and painstaking work. Without
socialization of agriculture, there can be no complete, consolidated socialism.
The steps to socialize agriculture must be co-ordinated with the development
of a powerful industry having state enterprise as its
backbone.[10] The state of the people's democratic
dictatorship must systematically solve the problems of industrialization.
Since it is not proposed to discuss economic problems in detail in this article,
I shall not go into them further.

In 1924 a famous manifesto was adopted at the Kuomintang's First National
Congress, which Sun Yat-sen himself led and in which Communists participated.
The manifesto stated: 

  The so-called democratic system in modern states is usually monopolized by
  the bourgeoisie and has become simply an instrument for oppressing the common
  people. On the other hand, the Kuomintang's Principle of Democracy means
  a democratic system shared by all the common people and not privately owned
  by the few.


Apart from the question of who leads whom, the Principle of Democracy stated
above corresponds as a general political programme to what we call People's
Democracy or New Democracy. A state system which is shared only by the common
people and which the bourgeoisie is not allowed to own privately -- add to
this the leadership of the working class, and we have the state system of
the people's democratic dictatorship.

Chiang Kai-shek betrayed Sun Yat-sen and used the dictatorship of the
bureaucrat-bourgeoisie and the landlord class as an instrument for oppressing
the common people of China. This counter-revolutionary dictatorship was enforced
for twenty-two years and has only now been overthrown by the common people
of China under our leadership.

The foreign reactionaries who accuse us of practicing "dictatorship" or
"totalitarianism" are the very persons who practice it. They practice the
dictatorship or totalitarianism of one class, the bourgeoisie, over the
proletariat and the rest of the people. They are the very persons Sun Yat-sen
spoke of as the bourgeoisie of modern states who oppress the common people.
And it is from these reactionary scoundrels that Chiang Kai-shek learned
his counter-revolutionary dictatorship.

Chu Hsi, a philosopher of the Sung Dynasty, wrote many books and made many
remarks which are now forgotten, but one remark is still remembered, "Deal
with a man as he deals with you." [11] This is
just what we do; we deal with the imperialists and their running dogs, the
Chiang Kai-shek reactionaries, as they deal with us. That is all there is
to it!

Revolutionary dictatorship and counter-revolutionary dictatorship are by
nature opposites, but the former was learned from the latter. Such learning
is very important. If the revolutionary people do not master this method
of ruling over the counter-revolutionary classes, they will not be able to
maintain their state power, domestic and foreign reaction will overthrow
that power and restore its own rule over China, and disaster will befall
the revolutionary people.

The people's democratic dictatorship is based on the alliance of the working
class, the peasantry and the urban petty bourgeoisie, and mainly on the alliance
of the workers and the peasants, because these two classes comprise 80 to
90 per cent of China's population. These two classes are the main force in
overthrowing imperialism and the Kuomintang reactionaries. The transition
from New Democracy to socialism also depends mainly upon their alliance.

The people's democratic dictatorship needs the leadership of the working
class. For it is only the working class that is most farsighted, most selfless
and most thoroughly revolutionary. The entire history of revolution proves
that without the leadership of the working class revolution fails and that
with the leadership of the working class revolution triumphs. In the epoch
of imperialism, in no country can any other class lead any genuine revolution
to victory. This is clearly proved by the fact that the many revolutions
led by China's petty bourgeoisie and national bourgeoisie all failed.

The national bourgeoisie at the present stage is of great importance.
Imperialism, a most ferocious enemy, is still standing alongside us. China's
modern industry still forms a very small proportion of the national economy.
No reliable statistics are available, but it is estimated, on the basis of
certain data, that before the War of Resistance Against Japan the value of
output of modern industry constituted only about 10 per cent of the total
value of output of the national economy. To counter imperialist oppression
and to raise her backward economy to a higher level, China must utilize all
the factors of urban and rural capitalism that are beneficial and not harmful
to the national economy and the people's livelihood; and we must unite with
the national bourgeoisie in common struggle. Our present policy is to regulate
capitalism, not to destroy it. But the national bourgeoisie cannot be the
leader of the revolution, nor should it have the chief role in state power.
The reason it cannot be the leader of the revolution and should not have
the chief role in state power is that the social and economic position of
the national bourgeoisie determines its weakness; it lacks foresight and
sufficient courage and many of its members are afraid of the masses.

Sun Yat-sen advocated "arousing the masses of the people" or "giving assistance
to the peasants and workers". But who is to "arouse" them or "give assistance"
to them? Sun Yat-sen had the petty bourgeoisie and the national bourgeoisie
in mind. As a matter of fact, they cannot do so. Why did forty years of
revolution under Sun Yat-sen end in failure? Because in the epoch of imperialism
the petty bourgeoisie and the national bourgeoisie cannot lead any genuine
revolution to victory.

Our twenty-eight years have been quite different. We have had much valuable
experience. A well-disciplined Party armed with the theory of Marxism-Leninism,
using the method of self-criticism and linked with the masses of the people,
an army under the leadership of such a Party; a united front of all revolutionary
classes and all revolutionary groups under the leadership of such a Party
-- these are the three main weapons with which we have defeated the enemy.
They distinguish us from our predecessors. Relying on them, we have won basic
victory. We have travelled a tortuous road. We have struggled against opportunist
deviations in our Party, both Right and "Left". Whenever we made serious
mistakes on these three matters, the revolution suffered setbacks. Taught
by mistakes and setbacks, we have become wiser and handle our affairs better.
It is hard for any political party or person to avoid mistakes, but we should
make as few as possible. Once a mistake is made, we should correct it, and
the more quickly and thoroughly the better.

To sum up our experience and concentrate it into one point, it is the people's
democratic dictatorship under the leadership of the working class (through
the Communist Party) and based upon the alliance of workers and peasants.
This dictatorship must unite as one with the international revolutionary
forces. This is our formula, our principal experience, our main programme.

Twenty-eight years of our Party are a long period, in which we have accomplished
only one thing -- we have won basic victory in the revolutionary war. This
calls for celebration, because it is the people's victory, because it is
a victory in a country as large as China. But we still have much work to
do; to use the analogy of a journey, our past work is only the first step
in a long march of ten thousand li. Remnants of the enemy have yet
to be wiped out. The serious task of economic construction lies before us.
We shall soon put aside some of the things we know well and be compelled
to do things we don't know well. This means difficulties. The imperialists
reckon that we will not be able to manage our economy, they are standing
by and looking on, awaiting our failure.

We must overcome difficulties, we must learn what we do not know. We must
learn to do economic work from all who know how, no matter who they are.
We must esteem them as teachers, learning from them respectfully and
conscientiously. We must not pretend to know when we do not know. We must
not put on bureaucratic airs. If we dig into a subject for several months,
for a year or two, for three or five years, we shall eventually master it.
At first some of the Soviet Communists also were not very good at handling
economic matters and the imperialists awaited their failure too. But the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union emerged victorious and, under the leadership
of Lenin and Stalin, it learned not only how to make the revolution but also
how to carry on construction. It has built a great and splendid socialist
state. The Communist Party of the Soviet Union is our best teacher and we
must learn from it. The situation both at home and abroad is in our favour,
we can rely fully on the weapon of the people's democratic dictatorship,
unite the people throughout the country, the reactionaries excepted, and
advance steadily to our goal.

NOTES


1. Also known as the world of Great Harmony. It refers
to a society based on public ownership, free from class exploitation and
oppression -- a lofty ideal long cherished by the Chinese people. Here the
realm of Great Harmony means communist society.

2. See V. 1. Lenin, "Left-Wing" Communism, an Infantile
Disorder, Chapter 2. Lenin said: "for nearly half a century -- approximately
from the 'forties to the 'nineties -- advanced thinkers in Russia, under
the oppression of an unparalleled, savage and reactionary tsardom, eagerly
sought for the correct revolutionary theory and followed each and every 'last
word' in Europe and America in this sphere with astonishing diligence and
thoroughness. Russia achieved Marxism, the only correct revolutionary theory,
veritably through suffering, by half a century of unprecedented
torment and sacrifice, of unprecedented revolutionary heroism, incredible
energy, devoted searching, study, testing in practice, disappointment,
verification and comparison with European experience."

3. Faced with the opposition of the Chinese people to her
traffic in opium, Britain sent forces in 1840-42 to invade Kwangtung and
other coastal regions of China under the pretext of protecting trade. The
troops in Kwangtung, led by Lin Tse-hsu, fought a war of resistance.

4. Hung Hsiu-chuan (1814-64), who was born in Kwangtung,
was the leader of a peasant revolutionary war in the middle of the 19th century.
In 1851 he led a mass uprising in Kwangsi and proclaimed the establishment
of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom, which held many provinces and fought the
Ching Dynasty for fourteen years. In 1864 this revolutionary war failed and
Hung Hsiu-chuan committed suicide by poison.

5. Kang Yu-wei (1858-1927), of Nanhai County, Kwangtung
Province. In 1895, after China had been defeated by Japanese imperialism
in the previous year, he led thirteen hundred candidates for the third grade
in the imperial examinations at Peking in submitting a "ten thousand word
memorial" to Emperor Kuang Hsu, asking for "constitutional reform and
modernization" and asking that the autocratic monarchy be changed into a
constitutional monarchy. In 1898, in an attempt to introduce reforms, the
emperor promoted Kang Yu-wei together with Tan Sze-tung, Liang Chi-chao and
others to key posts in the government. Later, the Empress Dowager Tzu Hsi,
representing the die-hards, again took power and the reform movement failed.
Kang Yu-wei and Liang Chi-chao fled abroad and formed the Protect-the-Emperor
Party, which became a reactionary political faction in opposition to the
bourgeois and petty bourgeois revolutionaries represented by Sun Yat-sen.
Among Kang's works were Forgeries in the Classics of the Confucian Canon,
Confucius as a Reformer, and Ta Tung Shu or the Book of
Great Harmony. 

6. Yen Fu (1853-1921), of Foochow, Fukien Province, studied
at a naval academy in Britain. After the Sino-Japanese War of 1894, he advocated
constitutional monarchy and reforms to modernize China. His translations
of T. H. Huxley's Evolution and Ethics, Adam Smith's The Wealth
of Nations, J. S. Mill's System of Logic, Montesquieu's
L'Esprit des Lois, and other works were vehicles for the spread
of European bourgeois thought in China.

7. A system of examinations adopted by China's autocratic
dynasties. It was a method used by the feudal ruling class for selecting
personnel to govern the people and also for enticing the intellectuals. The
system, dating from the 7th century, persisted into the early 20th century.

8. The Revolution of 1911 overthrew the autocratic regime
of the Ching Dynasty. On October 10 of that year, a section of the New Army,
at the urging of the revolutionary societies of the bourgeoisie and petty
bourgeoisie, staged an uprising in Wuchang. This was followed by uprisings
in other provinces, and very soon the rule of the Ching Dynasty crumbled.
On January 1, 1912, the Provisional Government of the Republic of China was
set up in Nanking, and Sun Yat-sen was elected Provisional President. The
revolution achieved victory through the alliance of the bourgeoisie, peasants,
workers and urban petty bourgeoisie. But because the group which led the
revolution was compromising in nature, failed to bring real benefits to the
peasants and yielded to the pressure of imperialism and the feudal forces,
state power fell into the hands of the Northern warlord Yuan Shih-kai, and
the revolution failed.

9. A hero in the novel, Shui Hu Chuan (Heroes of the
Marshes), who killed a tiger with his bare hands on the Chingyang Ridge.
This is one of the most popular episodes in that famous novel.

10. For the relation between the socialization of agriculture
and the industrialization of the country, see On the Question of Agricultural
Co-operation (Sections 7 and 8), a report made by Comrade Mao Tse-tung
on July 31, 1955 at the Conference of the Secretaries of the Provincial,
Municipal and Autonomous Region Committees of the Chinese Communist Party.
In this report Comrade Mao Tse-tung, on the basis of Soviet experience and
our own country's practice, greatly developed the thesis that socialization
of agriculture should proceed in step with socialist industrialization.

11. The quotation is from Chu Hsi's commentary on the
Confucian Doctrine of the Mean, Chapter 13. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Cast Away Illusions, Prepare for Struggle







CAST AWAY ILLUSIONS, PREPARE FOR STRUGGLE



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

CAST AWAY ILLUSIONS, PREPARE FOR STRUGGLE


August 14, 1949

[This article and the four that follow -- "Farewell, Leighton Stuart!", "Why
It Is Necessary to Discuss the White Paper", "'Friendship' or Aggression?"
and "The Bankruptcy of the Idealist Conception of History" -- were commentaries
written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung for the Hsinhua News Agency on the U.S. State
Department's White Paper and Dean Acheson's Letter of Transmittal. They exposed
the imperialist nature of United States policy towards China, criticized
the illusions about U.S. imperialism harboured by some of the bourgeois
intellectuals in China and gave a theoretical explanation of the reasons
for the rise of the Chinese revolution and for its victory.] 
  

It is no accident that the U.S. State Department's White Paper on China-U.S.
Relations and Secretary of State Acheson's Letter of Transmittal to President
Truman [1] have been released at this time. The
publication of these documents reflects the victory of the Chinese people
and the defeat of imperialism, it reflects the decline of the entire world
system of imperialism. The imperialist system is riddled with insuperable
internal contradictions, and therefore the imperialists are plunged into
deep gloom.

Imperialism has prepared the conditions for its own doom. These conditions
are the awakening of the great masses of the people in the colonies and
semi-colonies and in the imperialist countries themselves. Imperialism has
pushed the great masses of the people throughout the world into the historical
epoch of the great struggle to abolish imperialism.

Imperialism has prepared the material as well as the moral conditions for
the struggle of the great masses of the people.

The material conditions are factories, railways, firearms, artillery, and
the like. Most of the powerful equipment of the Chinese People's Liberation
Army comes from U.S. imperialism, some comes from Japanese imperialism and
some is of our own manufacture.

The British aggression against China in 1840
[2] was followed by the wars of aggression against
China by the Anglo-French allied forces, [3] by
France, [4] by Japan,
[5] and by the allied forces of the eight powers
(Britain, France, Japan, tsarist Russia, Germany, the United States, Italy
and Austria); [6] by the war between Japan and
tsarist Russia on Chinese territory; [7] by Japan's
war of aggression against China in China's Northeast, which began in 1931;
by Japan's war of aggression against all China, which began in 1937 and lasted
eight long years; and, finally, by the latest war of aggression against the
Chinese people, which has gone on for three years, waged to all appearances
by Chiang Kai-shek but in reality by the United States. As stated in Acheson's
Letter, the United States in this last war has given the Kuomintang government
material aid to the value of "more than 50 percent" of the latter's "monetary
expenditures" and "furnished the Chinese armies" (meaning the Kuomintang
armies) with "military supplies". It is a war in which the United States
supplies the money and guns and Chiang Kai-shek supplies the men to fight
for the United States and slaughter the Chinese people. All these wars of
aggression, together with political, economic and cultural aggression and
oppression, have caused the Chinese to hate imperialism, made them stop and
think, "What is all this about?" and compelled them to bring their revolutionary
spirit into full play and become united through struggle. They fought, failed,
fought again, failed again and fought again and accumulated long years of
experience, accumulated the experience of hundreds of struggles, great and
small, military and political, economic and cultural, with bloodshed and
without bloodshed -- and only then won today's basic victory. These are the
moral conditions without which the revolution could not be victorious.

To serve the needs of its aggression, imperialism created the comprador system
and bureaucrat-capital in China. Imperialist aggression stimulated China's
social economy, brought about changes in it and created the opposites of
imperialism -- the national industry and national bourgeoisie of China, and
especially the Chinese proletariat working in enterprises run directly by
the imperialists, those run by bureaucrat-capital and those run by the national
bourgeoisie. To serve the needs of its aggression, imperialism ruined the
Chinese peasants by exploiting them through the exchange of unequal values
and thereby created great masses of poor peasants, numbering hundreds of
millions and comprising 70 per cent of China's rural population. To serve
the needs of its aggression, imperialism created for China millions of big
and small intellectuals of a new type, differing from the old type of
literatus or scholar-bureaucrat. But imperialism and its running
dogs, the reactionary governments of China, could control only a part of
these intellectuals and finally only a handful, such as Hu Shih, Fu Sze-nien
and Chien Mu;[8] all the rest got out of control
and turned against them. Students, teachers, professors, technicians, engineers,
doctors, scientists, writers, artists and government employees, all are revolting
against or parting company with the Kuomintang. The Communist Party is the
party of the poor and is described in the Kuomintang's widespread, all-pervasive
propaganda as a band of people who commit murder and arson, who rape and
loot, who reject history and culture, renounce the motherland, have no filial
piety or respect for teachers and are impervious to all reason, who practice
community of property and of women and employ the military tactics of the
"human sea" -- in short, a horde of fiendish monsters who perpetrate every
conceivable crime and are unpardonably wicked. But strangely enough, it is
this very horde that has won the support of several hundred million people,
including the majority of the intellectuals, and especially the student youth.

Part of the intellectuals still want to wait and see. They think: the Kuomintang
is no good and the Communist Party is not necessarily good either, so we
had better wait and see. Some support the Communist Party in words, but in
their hearts they are waiting to see. They are the very people who have illusions
about the United States. They are unwilling to draw a distinction between
the U.S. imperialists, who are in power, and the American people, who are
not. They are easily duped by the honeyed words of the U.S. imperialists,
as though these imperialists would deal with People's China on the basis
of equality and mutual benefit without a stern, long struggle. They still
have many reactionary, that is to say, anti-popular, ideas in their heads,
but they are not Kuomintang reactionaries. They are the middle-of-the-roaders
or the right-wingers in People's China. They are the supporters of what Acheson
calls "democratic individualism". The deceptive manoeuvres of the Achesons
still have a flimsy social base in China.

Acheson's White Paper admits that the U.S. imperialists are at a complete
loss as to what to do about the present situation in China. The Kuomintang
is so impotent that no amount of help can save it from inevitable doom; the
U.S. imperialists are losing grip over things and feel helpless. Acheson
says in his Letter of Transmittal: 

The unfortunate but inescapable fact is that the ominous result of the civil
war in China was beyond the control of the government of the United States.
Nothing that this country did or could have done within the reasonable limits
of its capabilities could have changed that result; nothing that was left
undone by this country has contributed to it. It was the product of internal
Chinese forces, forces which this country tried to influence but could not.

According to logic, Acheson's conclusion should be, as some muddle-headed
Chinese intellectuals think or say, to act like "the butcher who lays down
his knife and at once becomes a Buddha" or "the robber who has a change of
heart and becomes a virtuous man", that is, he should treat People's China
on the basis of equality and mutual benefit and stop making trouble. But
no, says Acheson, troublemaking will continue, and definitely so. Will there
be any result? There will, says he. On what group of people will he rely?
On the supporters of "democratic individualism". Says Acheson: 

. . . ultimately the profound civilization and the democratic individualism
of China will reassert themselves and she will throw off the foreign yoke.
I consider that we should encourage all developments in China which now and
in the future work toward this end.

How different is the logic of the imperialists from that of the people! Make
trouble, fail, make trouble again, fail again . . . till their doom; that
is the logic of the imperialists and all reactionaries the world over in
dealing with the people's cause, and they will never go against this logic.
This is a Marxist law. When we say "imperialism is ferocious", we mean that
its nature will never change, that the imperialists will never lay down their
butcher knives, that they will never become Buddhas, till their doom.

Fight, fail, fight again, fail again, fight again . . . till their victory;
that is the logic of the people, and they too will never go against this
logic. This is another Marxist law. The Russian people's revolution followed
this law, and so has the Chinese people's revolution.

Classes struggle, some classes triumph, others are eliminated. Such is history,
such is the history of civilization for thousands of years. To interpret
history from this viewpoint is historical materialism; standing in opposition
to this viewpoint is historical idealism.

The method of self-criticism can be applied only within the ranks of the
people; it is impossible to persuade the imperialists and the Chinese
reactionaries to show kindness of heart and turn from their evil ways. The
only course is to organize forces and struggle against them, as in our People's
War of Liberation and the agrarian revolution, to expose the imperialists,
"irritate"[9]them, overthrow them, punish them
for offences against the law and "allow them only to behave themselves and
not to be unruly in word or deed". Only then will there be any hope of dealing
with imperialist foreign countries on the basis of equality and mutual benefit.
Only then will there be any hope that those landlords, bureaucrat-capitalists,
members of the reactionary Kuomintang clique and their accomplices, who have
laid down their arms and surrendered, can be given education for transforming
the bad into the good and be transformed, as far as possible, into good people.
Many Chinese liberals -- the old-type democratic elements, i.e., the supporters
of "democratic individualism", whom Truman, Marshall, Acheson, Leighton Stuart
and the like count on and have been trying to win over -- often find themselves
in a passive position and are often wrong in their judgements on the U.S.
rulers, on the Kuomintang, on the Soviet Union and also on the Communist
Party of China. The reason is precisely that they do not look at, or disapprove
of looking at, problems from the standpoint of historical materialism.

It is the duty of progressives -- the Communists, members of the democratic
parties, politically conscious workers, the student youth and progressive
intellectuals -- to unite with the intermediate strata, middle-of-the-roaders
and backward elements of various strata, with all those in People's China
who are still wavering and hesitating (these people will waver for a long
time to come and, even after they have once become steady, will waver again
as soon as they meet difficulties), give them sincere help, criticize their
wavering character, educate them, win them over to the side of the masses,
prevent the imperialists from pulling them over and tell them to cast away
illusions and prepare for struggle. Let no one think that there is no more
work to do now that victory is won. We still have to work, to do a great
deal of patient work, before we can truly win these people over. When they
are won over, imperialism will be entirely isolated, and Acheson will no
longer be able to play any of his tricks.

The slogan, "Prepare for struggle", is addressed to those who still cherish
certain illusions about the relations between China and the imperialist
countries, especially between China and the United States. With regard to
this question, they are still passive, their minds are still not made up,
they are still not determined to wage a long struggle against U.S. (and British)
imperialism because they still have illusions about the United States. There
is still a very wide, or fairly wide, gap between these people and ourselves
on this question.

The publication of the U.S. White Paper and Acheson's Letter of Transmittal
is worthy of celebration, because it is a bucket of cold water and a loss
of face for those who have ideas of the old type of democracy or democratic
individualism, who do not approve of, or do not quite approve of, or are
dissatisfied with, or are somewhat dissatisfied with, or even resent, people's
democracy, or democratic collectivism, or democratic centralism, or collective
heroism, or patriotism based on internationalism -- but who still have patriotic
feelings and are not Kuomintang reactionaries. It is a bucket of cold water
particularly for those who believe that everything American is good and hope
that China will model herself on the United States.

Acheson openly declares that the Chinese democratic individualists will be
"encouraged" to throw off the so-called "foreign yoke". That is to say, he
calls for the overthrow of Marxism-Leninism and the people's democratic
dictatorship led by the Communist Party of China. For this "ism" and this
system, it is alleged, are "foreign", with no roots in China, imposed on
the Chinese by the German, Karl Marx (who died sixty-six years ago), and
the Russians, Lenin (who died twenty-five years ago) and Stalin (who is still
alive); this "ism" and this system, moreover, are downright bad, because
they advocate the class struggle, the overthrow of imperialism, etc.; hence
they must be got rid of. In this connection, it is alleged, "the democratic
individualism of China will reassert itself" with the "encouragement" of
President Truman, the backstage Commander-in-Chief Marshall, Secretary of
State Acheson (the charming foreign mandarin responsible for the publication
of the White Paper) and Ambassador Leighton Stuart who has scampered off.
Acheson and his like think they are giving "encouragement", but those Chinese
democratic individualists who still have patriotic feelings, even though
they believe in the United States, may quite possibly feel this is a bucket
of cold water thrown on them and a loss of face; for instead of dealing with
the authorities of the Chinese people's democratic dictatorship in the proper
way, Acheson and his like are doing this filthy work and, what is more, they
have openly published it. What a loss of face! What a loss of face! To those
who are patriotic, Acheson's statement is no "encouragement" but an insult.

China is in the midst of a great revolution. All China is seething with
enthusiasm. The conditions are favourable for winning over and uniting with
all those who do not have a bitter and deep-seated hatred for the cause of
the people's revolution, even though they have mistaken ideas. Progressives
should use the White Paper to persuade all these persons.

NOTES


1. The U.S. White Paper, United States Relations with
China, was published by the U.S. State Department on August 5, 1949.
Acheson's Letter of Transmittal to Truman was dated July 30, 1949. The main
body of the White Paper, divided into eight chapters, deals with Sino-U.S.
relations in the period from 1844, when the United States forced China to
sign the "Treaty of Wanghia", to 1949, when victory was basically won throughout
the country in the Chinese people's revolution. The White Paper goes into
particular detail about how, in the five years from the last part of the
War of Resistance Against Japan to 1949, the United States pursued a policy
of support for Chiang Kai-shek and of anti-communism, opposed the Chinese
people by every possible means and finally met with defeat. The White Paper
and Acheson's Letter of Transmittal are full of distortions, omissions and
fabrications, and also of venomous slanders and deep hatred against the Chinese
people. In the quarrel within the U.S. reactionary camp over its policy towards
China, imperialists like Truman and Acheson were compelled to reveal publicly
through the White Paper some of the truth about their counter-revolutionary
activities in an attempt to convince their opponents. Thus, in its objective
effect, the White Paper became a confession by U.S. imperialism of its crimes
of aggression against China.

2. See "On the People's Democratic Dictatorship", Note
3, p. 42, of this volume.

3. From 1856 to 1860 Britain and France jointly carried
on a war of aggression against China, with the United States and tsarist
Russia supporting them from the side-lines. The government of the Ching Dynasty
was then devoting all its energy to suppressing the peasant revolution of
the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom and adopted a policy of passive resistance towards
the foreign aggressors. The Anglo-French allied forces occupied such major
cities as Canton, Tientsin and Peking, plundered and burned down Yuan Ming
Yuan Palace in Peking and forced the Ching government to conclude the "Treaty
of Tientsin" and the "Treaty of Peking". The main provisions of these treaties
included the opening as treaty ports of Tientsin, Newchwang, Tengchow, Taiwan,
Tanshui, Chaochow, Chiungchow, Nanking, Chinkiang, Kiukiang and Hankow and
the granting to foreigners of the special privileges of travel and missionary
activities in China's interior and of inland navigation. From then on foreign
forces of aggression extended over all China's coastal provinces and penetrated
deep into the hinterland.

4. In 1884-85 the French aggressors invaded Vietnam and
the Chinese provinces of Kwangsi, Fukien, Taiwan and Chekiang. Chinese troops
resisted vigorously and won a series of victories. Notwithstanding the victories
in the war, the corrupt Ching government signed the humiliating "Treaty of
Tientsin", which recognized the occupation of Vietnam by the French and permitted
their forces of aggression to penetrate southern China.

5. The Sino-Japanese War of 1894. The war broke out as
a result of Japan's aggression against Korea and her provocations to the
Chinese land and naval forces. In this war the Chinese forces put up a heroic
fight, but China suffered defeat owing to the corruption of the Ching government
and its lack of preparation for resistance. As a result, the Ching government
concluded the shameful "Treaty of Shimonoseki" with Japan, under which it
ceded Taiwan and the Penghu Islands, paid war reparations of 200 million
taels of silver, permitted the Japanese to set up factories in China, opened
Shasi, Chungking, Soochow and Hangchow as treaty ports and recognized Japan's
domination over Korea.

6. In 1900 eight imperialist powers, Britain, Prance, Japan,
tsarist Russia, Germany, the United States, Italy and Austria, sent a joint
force to attack China in an attempt to suppress the Yi Ho Tuan Uprising of
the Chinese people against aggression. The Chinese people resisted heroically.
The allied forces of the eight powers captured Taku and occupied Tientsin
and Peking. In 1901 the Ching government concluded a treaty with the eight
imperialist countries; its main provisions were that China had to pay those
countries the enormous sum of 450 million taels of silver as war reparations
and grant them the special privilege of stationing troops in Peking and in
the area from Peking to Tientsin to Shanhaikuan.

7. This was the imperialist war fought between Japan and
tsarist Russia in 1904-05 to grab China's Northeast and Korea. As the war
was fought mainly in the area of Fengtien (now Shenyang) and Liaoyang and
around the port of Lushun in China's Northeast, it caused enormous losses
to the Chinese people. As a result of the war tsarist Russia was defeated
and supplanted by Japanese imperialism in the dominant role in China's Northeast.
Under the peace treaty (the Treaty of Portsmouth) concluded at the end of
this war tsarist Russia also recognized Japan's exclusive control over Korea.

8. Hu Shih, who was formerly a university professor, university
president and ambassador of the Kuomintang government to the United States,
is a well-known apologist for U.S. imperialism among Chinese bourgeois
intellectuals. Fu Sze-nien and Chien Mu, also university professors, were
scholars serving the reactionary Kuomintang government.

9. See "On the People's Democratic Dictatorship", pp. 415-16
of this volume. 

  
Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Farewell, Leighton Stuart!







FAREWELL, LEIGHTON STUART!



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

FAREWELL, LEIGHTON STUART!


August 18, 1949


It is understandable that the date chosen for the publication of the U.S.
White Paper was August 5, a time when Leighton Stuart
[1] had departed from Nanking for Washington but
had not yet arrived there, since Leighton Stuart is a symbol of the complete
defeat of the U.S. policy of aggression. Leighton Stuart is an American born
in China; he has fairly wide social connections and spent many years running
missionary schools in China, he once sat in a Japanese gaol during the War
of Resistance; he used to pretend to love both the United States and China
and was able to deceive quite a number of Chinese. Hence, he was picked out
by George C. Marshall, was made U.S. ambassador to China and became a celebrity
in the Marshall group. In the eyes of the Marshall group he had only one
fault, namely, that the whole period when he was ambassador to China as an
exponent of their policy was the very period in which that policy was utterly
defeated by the Chinese people; that was no small responsibility. It is only
natural that the White Paper, which is designed to evade this responsibility,
should have been published at a time when Leighton Stuart was on his way
to Washington but had not yet arrived.

The war to turn China into a U.S. colony, a war in which the United States
of America supplies the money and guns and Chiang Kai-shek the men to fight
for the United States and slaughter the Chinese people, has been an important
component of the U.S. imperialist policy of world-wide aggression since World
War II. The U.S. policy of aggression has several targets. The three main
targets are Europe, Asia and the Americas. China, the centre of gravity in
Asia, is a large country with a population of 475 million; by seizing China,
the United States would possess all of Asia. With its Asian front consolidated,
U.S. imperialism could concentrate its forces on attacking Europe. U.S.
imperialism considers its front in the Americas relatively secure. These
are the smug over-all calculations of the U.S. aggressors.

But in the first place, the American people and the peoples of the world
do not want war. Secondly, the attention of the United States has largely
been absorbed by the awakening of the peoples of Europe, by the rise of the
People's Democracies in Eastern Europe, and particularly by the towering
presence of the Soviet Union, this unprecedentedly powerful bulwark of peace
bestriding Europe and Asia, and by its strong resistance to the U.S. policy
of aggression. Thirdly, and this is most important, the Chinese people have
awakened, and the armed forces and the organized strength of the people under
the leadership of the Communist Party of China have become more powerful
than ever before. Consequently, the ruling clique of U.S. imperialism has
been prevented from adopting a policy of direct, large-scale armed attacks
on China and instead has adopted a policy of helping Chiang Kai-shek fight
the civil war.

U.S. naval, ground and air forces did participate in the war in China. There
were U.S. naval bases in Tsingtao, Shanghai and Taiwan. U.S. troops were
stationed in Peiping, Tientsin, Tangshan, Chinwangtao, Tsingtao, Shanghai
and Nanking. The U.S. air force controlled all of China's air space and took
aerial photographs of all China's strategic areas for military maps. At the
town of Anping near Peiping, at Chiutai near Changchun, at Tangshan and in
the Eastern Shantung Peninsula, U.S. troops and other military personnel
clashed with the People's Liberation Army and on several occasions were
captured.[2] Chennault's air fleet took an extensive part
in the civil war.[3] Besides transporting troops for Chiang
Kai-shek, the U.S. air force bombed and sank the cruiser Chungking,
which had mutinied against the Kuomintang.[4]All these
were acts of direct participation in the war, although they fell short of
an open declaration of war and were not large in scale, and although the
principal method of U.S. aggression was the large-scale supply of money,
munitions and advisers to help Chiang Kai-shek fight the civil war.

The use of this method by the United States was determined by the objective
situation in China and the rest of the world, and not by any lack of desire
on the part of the Truman-Marshall group, the ruling clique of U.S. imperialism,
to launch direct aggression against China. Moreover, at the outset of its
help to Chiang Kai-shek in fighting the civil war, a crude farce was staged
in which the United States appeared as mediator in the conflict between the
Kuomintang and the Communist Party; this was an attempt to soften up the
Communist Party of China, deceive the Chinese people and thus gain control
of all China without fighting. The peace negotiations failed, the deception
fell through and the curtain rose on the war.

Liberals or "democratic individualists" who cherish illusions about the United
States and have short memories! Please look at Acheson's own words:

When peace came the United States was confronted with three possible alternatives
in China: (1) it could have pulled out lock, stock and barrel; (2) it could
have intervened militarily on a major scale to assist the Nationalists to
destroy the Communists, (3) it could, while assisting the Nationalists to
assert their authority over as much of China as possible, endeavor to avoid
a civil war by working for a compromise between the two sides.

Why didn't the United States adopt the first of these policies? Acheson says:

The first alternative would, and I believe American public opinion at the
time so felt, have represented an abandonment of our international
responsibilities and of our traditional policy of friendship for China before
we had made a determined effort to be of assistance.

So that's how things stand: the "international responsibilities" of the United
States and its "traditional policy of friendship for China" are nothing but
intervention against China. Intervention is called assuming international
responsibilities and showing friendship for China; as to non-intervention,
it simply won't do. Here Acheson defiles U.S. public opinion; his is the
"public opinion" of Wall Street, not the public opinion of the American people.

Why didn't the United States adopt the second of these policies? Acheson
says:

The second alternative policy, while it may look attractive theoretically
and in retrospect, was wholly impracticable. The Nationalists had been unable
to destroy the Communists during the 10 years before the war. Now after the
war the Nationalists were, as indicated above, weakened, demoralized, and
unpopular. They had quickly dissipated their popular support and prestige
in the areas liberated from the Japanese by the conduct of their civil and
military officials. The Communists on the other hand were much stronger than
they had ever been and were in control of most of North China. Because of
the ineffectiveness of the Nationalist forces which was later to be tragically
demonstrated, the Communists probably could have been dislodged only by American
arms. It is obvious that the American people would not have sanctioned such
a colossal commitment of our armies in 1945 or later. We therefore came to
the third alternative policy. . . .

What a splendid idea! The United States supplies the money and guns and Chiang
Kai-shek the men to fight for the United States and slaughter the Chinese
people, to "destroy the Communists" and turn China into a U.S. colony, so
that the United States may fulfil its "international responsibilities" and
carry out its "traditional policy of friendship for China".

Although the Kuomintang was corrupt and incompetent, "demoralized and unpopular",
the United States nevertheless supplied it with money and guns and made it
fight. Direct armed intervention was all right, "theoretically". It also
seems all right "in retrospect" to the rulers of the United States. For direct
armed intervention would really have been interesting and it might "look
attractive". But it would not have worked in practice, for "it is obvious
that the American people would not have sanctioned" it. Not that the imperialist
group of Truman, Marshall, Acheson and their like did not desire it -- they
very much desired it -- but the situation in China, in the United States
and in the world as a whole (a point Acheson does not mention) did not permit
it; they had to give up their preference and take the third way.

Let those Chinese who believe that "victory is possible even without
international help" listen. Acheson is giving you a lesson. Acheson is a
good teacher, giving lessons free of charge, and he is telling the whole
truth with tireless zeal and great candour. The United States refrained from
dispatching large forces to attack China, not because the U.S. government
didn't want to, but because it had worries. First worry: the Chinese people
would oppose it, and the U.S. government was afraid of getting hopelessly
bogged down in a quagmire. Second worry: the American people would oppose
it, and so the U.S. government dared not order mobilization. Third worry:
the people of the Soviet Union, of Europe and of the rest of the world would
oppose it, and the U.S. government would face universal condemnation. Acheson's
charming candour has its limits and he is unwilling to mention the third
worry. The reason is he is afraid of losing face before the Soviet Union,
he is afraid that the Marshall Plan in Europe,
[5] which is already a failure despite pretences
to the contrary, may end dismally in total collapse.

Let those Chinese who are short-sighted, muddle-headed liberals or democratic
individualists listen. Acheson is giving you a lesson; he is a good teacher
for you. He has made a clean sweep of your fancied U.S. humanity, justice
and virtue. Isn't that so? Can you find a trace of humanity, justice or virtue
in the White Paper or in Acheson's Letter of Transmittal?

True, the United States has science and technology. But unfortunately they
are in the grip of the capitalists, not in the hands of the people, and are
used to exploit and oppress the people at home and to perpetrate aggression
and to slaughter people abroad. There is also "democracy" in the United States.
But unfortunately it is only another name for the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie
by itself. The United States has plenty of money. But unfortunately it is
willing to give money only to the Chiang Kai-shek reactionaries, who are
rotten to the core. The United States, it is said, is and will be quite willing
to give money to its fifth column in China, but is unwilling to give it to
the ordinary run of liberals or democratic individualists, who are much too
bookish and do not know how to appreciate favours, and naturally it is even
more unwilling to give money to the Communists. Money may be given, but only
conditionally. What is the condition? Follow the United States. The Americans
have sprinkled some relief flour in Peiping, Tientsin and Shanghai to see
who will stoop to pick it up. Like Chiang Tai Kung fishing,
[6] they have cast the line for the fish who want
to be caught. But he who swallows food handed out in contempt
[7] will get a bellyache.

We Chinese have backbone. Many who were once liberals or democratic
individualists have stood up to the U.S. imperialists and their running dogs,
the Kuomintang reactionaries. Wen Yi-to rose to his full height and smote
the table, angrily faced the Kuomintang pistols and died rather than
submit.[8] Chu Tse-ching, though seriously ill,
starved to death rather than accept U.S. "relief
food".[9] Han Yu of the Tang Dynasty wrote a "Eulogy
of Po Yi", [10] praising a man with quite a few
"democratic individualist" ideas, who shirked his duty towards the people
of his own country, deserted his post and opposed the people's war of liberation
of that time, led by King Wu. He lauded the wrong man. We should write eulogies
of Wen Yi-to and Chu Tse-ching who demonstrated the heroic spirit of our
nation.

What matter if we have to face some difficulties? Let them blockade us! Let
them blockade us for eight or ten years! By that time all of China's problems
will have been solved. Will the Chinese cower before difficulties when they
are not afraid even of death? Lao Tzu said, "The people fear not death, why
threaten them with it?" [11] U.S. imperialism
and its running dogs, the Chiang Kai-shek reactionaries, have not only
"threatened" us with death but actually put many of us to death. Besides
people like Wen Yi-to, they have killed millions of Chinese in the last three
years with U.S. carbines, machine-guns, mortars, bazookas, howitzers, tanks
and bombs dropped from aeroplanes. This situation is now coming to an end.
They have been defeated. It is we who are going in to attack them, not they
who are coming out to attack us. They will soon be finished. True, the few
problems left to us, such as blockade, unemployment, famine, inflation and
rising prices, are difficulties, but we have already begun to breathe more
easily than in the past three years. We have come triumphantly through the
ordeal of the last three years, why can't we overcome these few difficulties
of today? Why can't we live without the United States?

When the People's Liberation Army crossed the Yangtse River, the U.S. colonial
government at Nanking fled helter-skelter. Yet His Excellency Ambassador
Stuart sat tight, watching wide-eyed, hoping to set up shop under a new signboard
and to reap some profit. But what did he see? Apart from the People's Liberation
Army marching past, column after column, and the workers, peasants and students
rising in hosts, he saw something else -- the Chinese liberals or democratic
individualists turning out in force, shouting slogans and talking revolution
together with the workers, peasants, soldiers and students. In short, he
was left out in the cold, "standing all alone, body and shadow comforting
each other". [12] There was nothing more for him
to do, and he had to take to the road, his briefcase under his arm.

There are still some intellectuals and other people in China who have muddled
ideas and illusions about the United States. Therefore we should explain
things to them, win them over, educate them and unite with them, so they
will come over to the side of the people and not fall into the snares set
by imperialism. But the prestige of U.S. imperialism among the Chinese people
is completely bankrupt, and the White Paper is a record of its bankruptcy.
Progressives should make good use of the White Paper to educate the Chinese
people.

Leighton Stuart has departed and the White Paper has arrived. Very good.
Very good. Both events are worth celebrating.

NOTES


1. John Leighton Stuart, who was born in China in 1876,
was always a loyal agent of U.S. cultural aggression in China. He started
missionary work in China in 1905 and in 1919 became president of Yenching
University, which was established by the United States in Peking. On July
11, 1946, he was appointed U.S. ambassador to China. He actively supported
the Kuomintang reactionaries in prosecuting the civil war and carried out
various political intrigues against the Chinese people. On August 2, 1949,
because all the efforts of U.S. imperialism to obstruct the victory of the
Chinese people's revolution had completely failed, Leighton Stuart had to
leave China quietly.

2. Following the Japanese surrender in 1945, the armed
forces of the United States, with the purpose of aggression against China's
territory and sovereignty and of interference in her domestic affairs, landed
in China and stationed themselves at Peiping, Shanghai, Nanking, Tientsin,
Tangshan, Kaiping, Chinwangtao, Chinghai, Tsingtao and other places. In addition,
they repeatedly invaded the Liberated Areas. On July 29, 1946, U.S. troops
in Tientsin, in co-ordination with Chiang Kai-shek's bandit troops, assaulted
the town of Anping, Hsiangho County, Hopei Province; this is the Anping Incident
referred to in the text. On March 1, 1947, U.S. troops made a military
reconnaissance of the position of the People's Liberation Army at Hohsipao,
situated between Changchun and Chintai in northeastern China. On June 16,
1946, U.S. troops at Tangshan, Hopei Province, raided Sungchiaying and other
places; in July they raided Sanho Village, Luanhsien County, and Hsihonan
Village, Changli County, both near Tangshan. Of the numerous attacks on the
Eastern Shantung Peninsula, the most widely-known were two, one by U.S. aircraft
and warships on Langnuankou and Hsiaoli Island, Mouping County, on August
28, 1947, and the other by U.S. forces on Wanglintao Village, north of Chimo
County, on December 25, 1947 in co-ordination with Chiang Kai-shek's bandit
troops. In all these cases in which the U.S. forces committed acts of aggression
by invading the Liberated Areas, the Chinese People's Liberation Army or
the local people's armed forces took just action in self-defence.

3. Claire Lee Chennault was at one time U.S. adviser to
the Kuomintang government's air force. After the Japanese surrender, he organized
a group of the U.S. 14th Air Force personnel into an air transport corps
to help the Kuomintang fight the civil war. His air transport corps took
a direct part in the criminal reconnoitring and bombing of the Liberated
Areas.

4. See "On the Outrages by British Warships -- Statement
by the Spokesman of the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation
Army", Note 4, p. 403 of this volume.

5. On June 5, 1947, U.S. Secretary of State George C. Marshall
made a speech at Harvard University, putting forward a plan for so-called
U.S. "aid" to rehabilitate Europe. The "European Recovery Programme" subsequently
drawn up by the U.S. government on the basis of the speech was known as the
"Marshall Plan".

6. Chiang Tai Kung lived in the Chou Dynasty. According
to a legend, he once fished in the Weishui River, holding a rod without hook
or bait three feet above the water, and saying, "The fish that is destined
to be caught will come up." (From Stories About King Wu's Expedition
Against the Yin Dynasty.) 

7. "Food handed out in contempt" refers to alms handed
out as an insult. It is an allusion to a story in the Book of
Rites, which tells of a hungry man in the State of Chi, who would
rather starve to death than accept food given him insultingly.

8. Wen Yi-to (1899-1946), famed Chinese poet, scholar and
university professor. In 1943 he began to take an active part in the struggle
for democracy out of bitter hatred for the reaction and corruption of the
Chiang Kai-shek government. After the War of Resistance Against Japan, he
vigorously opposed the Kuomintang's conspiracy with U.S. imperialism to start
civil war against the people. On July 15, 1946, he was assassinated in Kunming
by Kuomintang thugs.

9. Chu Tse-ching (1898-1948) Chinese man of letters and
university professor. After the War of Resistance, he actively supported
the student movement against the Chiang Kai-shek regime. In June 1948 he
signed a declaration protesting against the revival of Japanese militarism,
which was being fostered by the United States, and rejecting "U.S. relief"
flour. He was then living in great poverty. He died in Peiping on August
l2, 1948, from poverty and illness, but even on his death-bed he enjoined
his family not to buy the U.S. flour rationed by the Kuomintang government.

10. Han Yu (768-824) was a famous writer of the Tang Dynasty.
"Eulogy of Po Yi" was a prose piece written by him. Po Yi, who lived towards
the end of the Yin Dynasty, opposed the expedition of King Wu of Chou against
the House of Yin. After the downfall of the House of Yin, he fled to the
Shouyang Mountain and starved to death rather than eat of Chou grain.

11. A quotation from Lao Tzu Chapter LXXIV.

12. A quotation from Li Mi's "Memorial to the Emperor".

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## Why it is Necessary to Discuss the White Paper







WHY IT IS NECESSARY TO DISCUSS THE WHITE PAPER



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

WHY IT IS NECESSARY TO DISCUSS THE WHITE PAPER


August 28, 1949


We have criticized the U.S. White Paper and Acheson's Letter of Transmittal
in three articles ("A Confession of Helplessness",
[1] "Cast Away Illusions, Prepare for Struggle"
and "Farewell, Leighton Stuart!"). Our criticism has aroused widespread attention
and discussion in all democratic parties, people's organizations, the press,
universities and schools, and among democratic personages in all walks of
life throughout the country; they have issued many correct and useful
declarations, statements and comments. Forums on the White Paper are being
held and the entire discussion is still developing. The discussion covers
Sino-U.S. relations, Sino-Soviet relations, China's foreign relations in
the past hundred years, the mutual relation between the Chinese revolution
and the revolutionary forces of the world, the relation between the Kuomintang
reactionaries and the Chinese people, the proper attitude to be adopted by
the democratic parties, people's organizations and democratic personages
in all walks of life in the struggle against imperialism, the proper attitude
to be adopted by liberals or so-called democratic individualists on the country's
internal and external relations as a whole, the ways of dealing with new
imperialist intrigues, and so on. All this is very good and is of great
educational value.

The whole world is now discussing the Chinese revolution and the U.S. White
Paper. This is no accident, this shows the great significance of the Chinese
revolution in world history. As for us Chinese, though we have basically
won victory in our revolution, we have had no opportunity for a long time
to discuss thoroughly the interrelations of this revolution and various forces
at home and abroad. Such a discussion is necessary, and now an opportunity
has been found in the discussion of the U.S. White Paper. We had no opportunity
for this kind of discussion before because we had not won basic victory in
the revolution, because Chinese and foreign reactionaries had cut off the
big cities from the People's Liberated Areas and because some aspects of
the contradictions had not yet been fully revealed by the development of
the revolution. Now the situation is different. The greater part of China
has been liberated, all aspects of the internal and external contradictions
have been fully revealed, and just at this moment the United States has published
the White Paper. Thus the opportunity for the discussion has been found.

The White Paper is a counter-revolutionary document which openly demonstrates
U.S. imperialist intervention in China. In this respect, imperialism has
departed from its normal practice. The great, victorious Chinese revolution
has compelled one section or faction of the U.S. imperialist clique to reply
to attacks from another by publishing certain authentic data on its own actions
against the Chinese people and drawing reactionary conclusions from the data,
because otherwise it could not get by. The fact that public revelation has
replaced concealment is a sign that imperialism has departed from its normal
practice. Until a few weeks ago, before the publication of the White Paper,
the governments of the imperialist countries, though they engaged in
counter-revolutionary activities every day, had never told the truth in their
statements or official documents but had filled or at least flavoured them
with professions of humanity, justice and virtue. This is still true of British
imperialism, an old hand at trickery and deception, as well as of several
other smaller imperialist countries. Opposed by the people on the one hand
and by another faction in their own camp on the other, the newly arrived,
upstart and neurotic U.S. imperialist group -- Truman, Marshall, Acheson,
Leighton Stuart and others -- have considered it necessary and practicable
to reveal publicly some (but not all) of their counter-revolutionary doings
in order to argue with opponents in their own camp as to which kind of
counter-revolutionary tactics is the more clever. In this way they have tried
to convince their opponents so that they can go on applying what they regard
as the cleverer counter-revolutionary tactics. Two factions of
counter-revolutionaries have been competing with each other. One said, "Ours
is the best method." The other said, "Ours is the best." When the dispute
was at its hottest, one faction suddenly laid its cards on the table and
revealed many of its treasured tricks of the past -- and there you have the
White Paper.

And so the White Paper has become material for the education of the Chinese
people. For many years, a number of Chinese (at one time a great number)
only half-believed what we Communists said on many questions, mainly on the
nature of imperialism and of socialism, and thought, "It may not be so."
This situation has undergone a change since August 5, 1949. For Acheson gave
them a lesson and he spoke in his capacity as U.S. Secretary of State. In
the case of certain data and conclusions, what he said coincides with what
we Communists and other progressives have been saying. Once this happened,
people could not but believe us, and many had their eyes opened -- "So that's
the way things really were!"

Acheson begins his Letter of Transmittal to Truman with the story of how
he compiled the White Paper. His White Paper, he says, is different from
all others, it is very objective and very frank:

  This is a frank record of an extremely complicated and most unhappy period
  in the life of a great country to which the United States has long been attached
  by ties of closest friendship. No available item has been omitted because
  it contains statements critical of our policy or might be the basis of future
  criticism. The inherent strength of our system is the responsiveness of the
  Government to an informed and critical public opinion. It is precisely this
  informed and critical public opinion which totalitarian governments, whether
  Rightist or Communist, cannot endure and do not tolerate.


Certain ties do exist between the Chinese people and the American people.
Through their joint efforts, these ties may develop in the future to the
point of the "closest friendship". But the obstacles placed by the Chinese
and U.S. reactionaries were and still are a great hindrance to these ties.
Moreover, because the reactionaries of both countries have told many lies
to their peoples and played many filthy tricks, that is, spread much bad
propaganda and done many bad deeds, the ties between the two peoples are
far from close. What Acheson calls "ties of closest friendship" are those
between the reactionaries of the two countries, not between the peoples.
Here Acheson is neither objective nor frank, he confuses the relations between
the two peoples with those between the reactionaries. For the peoples of
the two countries the victory of the Chinese revolution and the defeat of
the Chinese and U.S. reactionaries are the most joyful events that have ever
happened, and the present period is the happiest of their lives. Conversely,
it is only for Truman, Marshall, Acheson, Leighton Stuart and other U.S.
reactionaries and for Chiang Kai-shek, H. H. Kung, T. V. Soong, Chen Li-fu,
Li Tsung-jen, Pai Chung-hsi and other Chinese reactionaries that it is truly
"an extremely complicated and most unhappy period" in their lives.

In considering public opinion, the Achesons have mixed up the public opinion
of the reactionaries with that of the people. Towards the public opinion
of the people, the Achesons have no "responsiveness" whatsoever and are blind
and deaf. For years they have turned a deaf ear to the opposition voiced
by the people of the United States, China and the rest of the world to the
reactionary foreign policy of the U.S. government. What does Acheson mean
by "informed and critical public opinion"? Nothing but the numerous instruments
of propaganda, such as the newspapers, news agencies, periodicals and
broadcasting stations which are controlled by the two reactionary parties
in the United States, the Republicans and the Democrats, and which specialize
in the manufacture of lies and in threats against the people. Of these things
Acheson says rightly that the Communists "cannot endure and do not tolerate"
them (nor do the people). That is why we have closed down the imperialist
offices of information, stopped the imperialist news agencies from distributing
their dispatches to the Chinese press and forbidden them the freedom to go
on poisoning the souls of the Chinese people on Chinese soil.

To say that a government led by the Communist Party is a "totalitarian
government" is also half true. It is a government that exercises dictatorship
over domestic and foreign reactionaries and does not give any of them any
freedom to carry on their counter-revolutionary activities. Becoming angry,
the reactionaries rail: "Totalitarian government!" Indeed, this is absolutely
true so far as the power of the people's government to suppress the reactionaries
is concerned. This power is now written into our programme; it will also
be written into our constitution. Like food and clothing, this power is something
a victorious people cannot do without even for a moment. It is an excellent
thing, a protective talisman, an heirloom, which should under no circumstances
be discarded before the thorough and total abolition of imperialism abroad
and of classes within the country. The more the reactionaries rail "totalitarian
government", the more obviously is it a treasure. But Acheson's remark is
also half false. For the masses of the people, a government of the people's
democratic dictatorship led by the Communist Party is not dictatorial or
autocratic but democratic. It is the people's own government. The working
personnel of this government must respectfully heed the voice of the people.
At the same time, they are teachers of the people, teaching the people by
the method of self-education or self-criticism.

As to what Acheson calls a "Rightist totalitarian government", the U.S.
government has ranked first in the world among such governments since the
downfall of the fascist governments of Germany, Italy and Japan. All bourgeois
governments, including the governments of the German, Italian and Japanese
reactionaries which are being shielded by imperialism, are governments of
this type. The Tito government of Yugoslavia has now become an accomplice
of this gang. The U.S. and British governments belong to the type in which
the bourgeoisie, and this class alone, exercises dictatorship over the people.
Contrary in all respects to the people's government, this type of government
practices so-called democracy for the bourgeoisie but is dictatorial towards
the people. The governments of Hitler, Mussolini, Tojo, Franco and Chiang
Kai-shek discarded the veil of democracy for the bourgeoisie or never used
it because the class struggle in their countries was extremely intense and
they found it advantageous to discard, or not to use, this veil lest the
people too should make use of it. The U.S. government still has a veil of
democracy, but it has been cut down to a tiny patch by the U.S. reactionaries
and become very faded, and is not what it used to be in the days of Washington,
Jefferson and Lincoln.[2] The reason is that the class
struggle has become more intense. When the class struggle becomes still more
intense, the veil of U.S. democracy will inevitably be flung to the four
winds.

As everybody can see, Acheson makes a great many mistakes the moment he opens
his mouth. This is inevitable because he is a reactionary. As to how much
of a "frank record" the White Paper is, we think it is frank and not frank
at the same time. The Achesons are frank where they imagine that frankness
will benefit their party or faction. Otherwise, they are not. To feign frankness
is a ruse of war. 

NOTES


1. A commentary by the editorial department of the Hsinhua
News Agency published on August 12, 1949.

2. George Washington (1732-99), Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826)
and Abraham Lincoln (1809-65) were well-known bourgeois statesmen in the
early days of the United States. Washington was the commander-in-chief of
the revolutionary army of the colonies during the American War of Independence
(1775-83) and the first president of the United States. Jefferson drafted
the American Declaration of Independence and became president of the United
States. Lincoln advocated the abolition of Negro slavery in the United States
and during his presidency led the war against the slave-owners of the southern
states (1861-65); he issued the "Emancipation Proclamation" in 1862. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## "Friendship" or Aggression?







"FRIENDSHIP" OR AGGRESSION?



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

"FRIENDSHIP" OR AGGRESSION?


August 30, 1949


Seeking to justify aggression, Dean Acheson harps on "friendship" and throws
in lots of "principles".

Acheson says:

  The interest of the people and the Government of the United States in China
  goes far back into our history. Despite the distance and broad differences
  in background which separate China and the United States, our friendship
  for that country has always been intensified by the religious, philanthropic
  and cultural ties which have united the two peoples, and has been attested
  by many acts of good will over a period of many years, including the use
  of the Boxer indemnity for the education of Chinese students, the abolition
  of extraterritoriality during the Second World War, and our extensive aid
  to China during and since the close of the War. The record shows that the
  United States has consistently maintained and still maintains those fundamental
  principles of our foreign policy toward China which include the doctrine
  of the Open Door, respect for the administrative and territorial integrity
  of China, and opposition to any foreign domination of China.


Acheson is telling a bare-faced lie when he describes aggression as "friendship".

The history of the aggression against China by U.S. imperialism, from 1840
when it helped the British in the Opium War to the time it was thrown out
of China by the Chinese people, should be written into a concise textbook
for the education of Chinese youth. The United States was one of the first
countries to force China to cede extraterritoriality
[1] -- witness the Treaty of Wanghia
[2] of 1844, the first treaty ever signed between
China and the United States, a treaty to which the White Paper refers. In
this very treaty, the United States compelled China to accept American missionary
activity, in addition to imposing such terms as the opening of five ports
for trade. For a very long period, U.S. imperialism laid greater stress than
other imperialist countries on activities in the sphere of spiritual aggression,
extending from religious to "philanthropic" and cultural undertakings. According
to certain statistics, the investments of U.S. missionary and "philanthropic"
organizations in China totalled 41,900,000 U.S. dollars, and 14.7 per cent
of the assets of the missionary organizations were in medical service, 38.2
per cent in education and 47.1 per cent in religious
activities.[3] Many well-known educational institutions
in China, such as Yenching University, Peking Union Medical College, the
Huei Wen Academies, St. John's University, the University of Nanking, Soochow
University, Hangchow Christian College, Hsiangya Medical School, West China
Union University and Lingnan University, were established by
Americans.[4] It was in this field that Leighton
Stuart made a name for himself; that was how he became U.S. ambassador to
China. Acheson and his like know what they are talking about, and there is
a background for his statement that "our friendship for that country has
always been intensified by the religious, philanthropic and cultural ties
which have united the two peoples". It was all for the sake of "intensifying
friendship", we are told, that the United States worked so hard and deliberately
at running these undertakings for 105 years after the signing of the Treaty
of 1844.

Participation in the Eight-Power Allied Expedition to defeat China in 1900,
the extortion of the "Boxer indemnity" and the later use of this fund "for
the education of Chinese students" for purposes of spiritual aggression --
this too counts as an expression of "friendship".

Despite the "abolition" of extraterritoriality, the culprit in the raping
of Shen Chung was declared not guilty and released by the U.S. Navy Department
on his return to the United States[5] -- this counts as
another expression of "friendship".

"Aid to China during and since the close of the War", totalling over 4,500
million U.S. dollars according to the White Paper, but over 5,914 million
U.S. dollars according to our computation, was given to help Chiang Kai-shek
slaughter several million Chinese -- this counts as yet another expression
of "friendship".

All the "friendship" shown to China by U.S. imperialism over the past 109
years (since 1840 when the United States collaborated with Britain in the
Opium War), and especially the great act of "friendship" in helping Chiang
Kai-shek slaughter several million Chinese in the last few years -- all this
had one purpose, namely, it "consistently maintained and still maintains
those fundamental principles of our foreign policy toward China which include
the doctrine of the Open Door, respect for the administrative and territorial
integrity of China, and opposition to any foreign domination of China".

Several million Chinese were killed for no other purpose than first, to maintain
the Open Door, second, to respect the administrative and territorial integrity
of China and, third, to oppose any foreign domination of China.

Today, the only doors still open to Acheson and his like are in small strips
of land, such as Canton and Taiwan, and only in these places is the first
of these sacred principles "still maintained". In other places, in Shanghai
for instance, the door was open after liberation, but now some one is using
U.S. warships and their big guns to enforce the far from sacred principle
of the Blockaded Door.

Today, it is only in small strips of land, such as Canton and Taiwan, that
thanks to Acheson's second sacred principle administrative and territorial
"integrity" is "still maintained". All other places are out of luck, and
administration and territory have fallen to pieces.

Today, it is only in places such as Canton and Taiwan that thanks to Acheson's
third sacred principle all "foreign domination", including U.S. domination,
has been successfully done away with through the "opposition" of Acheson
and his like; therefore such places are still dominated by the Chinese. The
rest of the land of China -- the mere mention makes one weep -- is all gone,
all dominated by foreigners, and the Chinese there have one and all been
turned into slaves. Up to this point in his writing, His Excellency Dean
Acheson did not have time to indicate what country these foreigners came
from, but it becomes clear as one reads on, so there is no need to ask.

Whether non-interference in China's domestic affairs also counts as a principle,
Acheson didn't say; probably it does not. Such is the logic of the U.S.
mandarins. Anyone who reads Acheson's Letter of Transmittal to the end will
attest to its superior logic. 

NOTES


1. "Extraterritoriality" here refers to consular jurisdiction.
It was one of the special privileges for aggression which the imperialists
wrested from China. Under the so-called consular jurisdiction, nationals
of imperialist countries residing in China were not subject to the jurisdiction
of Chinese law; when they committed crimes or became defendants in civil
lawsuits, they could be tried only in their respective countries' consular
courts in China, and the Chinese government could not intervene.

2. The "Treaty of Wanghia" was the first unequal treaty
signed as a result of U.S. aggression against China. The United States, taking
advantage of China's defeat in the Opium War, compelled the Ching Dynasty
to sign this treaty, also called the "Sino-American Treaty on the Opening
of Five Ports for Trade", in Wanghia Village near Macao in July 1844. Its
thirty-four articles stipulated that whatever rights and privileges, including
consular jurisdiction, were gained by Britain through the Treaty of Nanking
and its annexes would also accrue to the United States.

3. See C. F. Remer, Foreign Investments in China,
Chapter 15.

4. Yenching University was in Peiping; the Huei Wen Academies,
in Peiping and Nanking; St. John's University, in Shanghai; Hsiangya Medical
School (Yale in China), in Changsha; West China Union University, in Chengtu;
and Lingnan University, in Canton.

5. William Pierson, a corporal, and other U.S. marines
raped Shen Chung, a girl student of Peking University, in Peiping on December
24, 1946. This aroused the great indignation of the people throughout the
country against the atrocities of the U.S. forces. In January 1947, brushing
aside the people's protests, the Kuomintang government handed over the chief
criminal, Pierson, to the Americans to be dealt with at their discretion.
In August the U.S. Navy Department set this criminal free with a verdict
of "not guilty". 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung




==========

## The Bankruptcy of the Idealist Conception of History







THE BANKRUPTCY OF THE IDEALIST CONCEPTION OF HISTORY



Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

THE BANKRUPTCY OF THE IDEALIST CONCEPTION OF HISTORY


September 16, 1949


The Chinese should thank Acheson, spokesman of the U.S. bourgeoisie, not
merely because he has explicitly confessed to the fact that the United States
supplied the money and guns and Chiang Kai-shek the men to fight for the
United States and slaughter the Chinese people and because he has thus given
Chinese progressives evidence with which to convince the backward elements.
You see, hasn't Acheson himself confessed that the great, sanguinary war
of the last few years, which cost the lives of millions of Chinese, was planned
and organized by U.S. imperialism? The Chinese should thank Acheson, again
not merely because he has openly declared that the United States intends
to recruit the so-called "democratic individualists" in China, organize a
U.S. fifth column and overthrow the People's Government led by the Communist
Party of China and has thus alerted the Chinese, especially those tinged
with liberalism, who are promising each other not to be taken in by the Americans
and are all on guard against the underhand intrigues of U.S. imperialism.
The Chinese should thank Acheson also because he has fabricated wild tales
about modern Chinese history; and his conception of history is precisely
that shared by a section of the Chinese intellectuals, namely, the bourgeois
idealist conception of history. Hence, a refutation of Acheson may benefit
many Chinese by widening their horizon. The benefit may be even greater to
those whose conception is the same, or in certain respects the same, as
Acheson's.

What are Acheson's wild fabrications about modern Chinese history? First
of all, he tries to explain the occurrence of the Chinese revolution in terms
of economic and ideological conditions in China. Here he has recounted many
myths.

Acheson says:

  The population of China during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries doubled,
  thereby creating an unbearable pressure upon the land. The first problem
  which every Chinese Government has had to face is that of feeding this
  population. So far none has succeeded. The Kuomintang attempted to solve
  it by putting many land-reform laws on the statute books. Some of these laws
  have failed, others have been ignored. In no small measure, the predicament
  in which the National Government finds itself today is due to its failure
  to provide China with enough to eat. A large part of the Chinese Communists'
  propaganda consists of promises that they will solve the land problem.


To those Chinese who do not reason clearly the above sounds plausible. Too
many mouths, too little food, hence revolution. The Kuomintang has failed
to solve this problem and it is unlikely that the Communist Party will be
able to solve it either. "So far none has succeeded."

Do revolutions arise from over-population? There have been many revolutions,
ancient and modern, in China and abroad; were they all due to over-population?
Were China's many revolutions in the past few thousand years also due to
over-population? Was the American Revolution against Britain 174 years
ago[1] also due to overpopulation? Acheson's knowledge
of history is nil. He has not even read the American Declaration of Independence.
Washington, Jefferson and others made the revolution against Britain because
of British oppression and exploitation of the Americans, and not because
of any over-population in America. Each time the Chinese people overthrew
a feudal dynasty it was because of the oppression and exploitation of the
people by that feudal dynasty, and not because of any over-population. The
Russians made the February Revolution and the October Revolution because
of oppression and exploitation by the tsar and the Russian bourgeoisie, not
because of any overpopulation, for to this day in Russia there is a great
abundance of land as compared with people. In Mongolia, where the land is
so vast and the population so sparse, a revolution would be inconceivable
according to Acheson's line of reasoning, yet it took place some time
ago.[2]

According to Acheson, China has no way out at all. A population of 475 million
constitutes an "unbearable pressure" and, revolution or no revolution, the
case is hopeless. Acheson pins great hope on this; although he has not voiced
this hope, it has often been revealed by a number of American journalists
-- through the allegation that the Communist Party of China will not be able
to solve its economic problems, that China will remain in perpetual chaos
and that her only way out is to live on U.S. flour, in other words, to become
a U.S. colony.

Why did the Revolution of 1911 not succeed and why did it not solve the problem
of feeding the population? Because it overthrew only the Ching Dynasty but
did not overthrow imperialist and feudal oppression and exploitation.

Why did the Northern Expedition of 1926-27 not succeed and why did it not
solve the problem of feeding the population? Because Chiang Kai-shek betrayed
the revolution, surrendered to imperialism and became the chieftain of the
counter-revolution which oppressed and exploited the Chinese.

Is it true that "so far none has succeeded"? In the old Liberated Areas in
northwestern, northern, northeastern and eastern China, where the land problem
has already been solved, does the problem of "feeding this population", as
Acheson puts it, still exist? The United States has kept quite a number of
spies or so-called observers in China. Why have they not ferreted out even
this fact? In places like Shanghai, the problem of unemployment, or of feeding
the population, arose solely because of cruel, heartless oppression and
exploitation by imperialism, feudalism, bureaucrat-capitalism and the reactionary
Kuomintang government. Under the People's Government, it will take only a
few years for this problem of unemployment, or of feeding the population,
to be solved as completely as in the northern, northeastern and other parts
of the country.

It is a very good thing that China has a big population. Even if China's
population multiplies many times, she is fully capable of finding a solution;
the solution is production. The absurd argument of Western bourgeois economists
like Malthus[3] that increases in food cannot keep pace
with increases in population was not only thoroughly refuted in theory by
Marxists long ago, but has also been completely exploded by the realities
in the Soviet Union and the Liberated Areas of China after their revolutions.
Basing itself on the truth that revolution plus production can solve the
problem of feeding the population, the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China has issued orders to Party organizations and the People's
Liberation Army throughout the country not to dismiss but to retain all former
Kuomintang personnel, provided they can make themselves useful and are not
confirmed reactionaries or notorious scoundrels. Where things are very difficult,
food and housing will be shared. Those who have been dismissed and have no
means of support will be reinstated and provided with a living. According
to the same principle, we shall maintain all Kuomintang soldiers who have
revolted and come over to us or been captured. All reactionaries, except
the major culprits, will be given a chance to earn their living, provided
they show repentance.

Of all things in the world, people are the most precious. Under the leadership
of the Communist Party, as long as there are people, every kind of miracle
can be performed. We are refuters of Acheson's counter-revolutionary theory.
We believe that revolution can change everything, and that before long there
will arise a new China with a big population and a great wealth of products,
where life will be abundant and culture will flourish. All pessimistic views
are utterly groundless.

"The impact of the West" is given by Acheson as the second reason why the
Chinese revolution occurred. Acheson says:

  For more than three thousand years the Chinese developed their own high culture
  and civilization, largely untouched by outside influences. Even when subjected
  to military conquest the Chinese always managed in the end to subdue and
  absorb the invader. It was natural therefore that they should come to look
  upon themselves as the center of the world and the highest expression of
  civilized mankind. Then in the middle of the nineteenth century the heretofore
  impervious wall of Chinese isolation was breached by the West. These outsiders
  brought with them aggressiveness, the unparalleled development of Western
  technology, and a high order of culture which had not accompanied previous
  foreign incursions into China. Partly because of these qualities and partly
  because of the decay of Manchu rule, the Westerners, instead of being absorbed
  by the Chinese, introduced new ideas which played an important part in
  stimulating ferment and unrest.


To those Chinese who do not reason clearly, what Acheson says sounds plausible
-- the influx of new ideas from the West gave rise to the revolution.

Against whom was the revolution directed? Because there was "decay of Manchu
rule" and because it is the weak point that is attacked, it would seem that
the revolution was directed against the Ching Dynasty. But what Acheson says
here is not quite right. The Revolution of 1911 was directed against imperialism.
The Chinese directed the revolution against the Ching regime because it was
the running dog of imperialism. The war against Britain's opium aggression,
the war against the aggression of the Anglo-French allied forces, the war
against the Ching regime, the running dog of imperialism, by the Taiping
Heavenly Kingdom,[4] the war against French aggression,
the war against Japanese aggression and the war against the aggression of
the allied forces of the eight powers -- all ended in failure; hence the
Revolution of 1911. broke out against the running dog of imperialism, the
Ching Dynasty. That is modern Chinese history up to 1911. What is the "impact
of the West", as Acheson calls it? It is the effort of the Western bourgeoisie,
as Marx and Engels said in the Manifesto of the Communist Party of
1848,[5] to remould the world after its own image by means
of terror. In the process of this impact or remoulding, the Western bourgeoisie,
which needed compradors and flunkeys familiar with Western customs, had to
let countries like China open schools and send students abroad, and thus
"new ideas were introduced" into China. Concurrently the national bourgeoisie
and the proletariat were born in countries like China. At the same time,
the peasantry was bankrupted, and a huge semi-proletariat was brought into
existence. Thus the Western bourgeoisie created two categories of people
in the East, a small minority, the flunkeys of imperialism, and a majority
which is opposed to imperialism and consists of the working class, the peasantry,
the urban petty bourgeoisie, the national bourgeoisie and the intellectuals
coming from these classes. Those in the majority group are all grave-diggers
of imperialism, who were created by imperialism itself, and the revolution
originates from them. It was not that the so-called influx of ideas from
the West stirred up "ferment and unrest", but that imperialist aggression
provoked resistance.

For a long time in the course of this resistance movement, that is, for over
seventy years from the Opium War of 1840 to the eve of the May 4th Movement
of 1919, the Chinese had no ideological weapon with which to defend themselves
against imperialism. The ideological weapons of the old die-hard feudalism
were defeated, had to give way and were declared bankrupt. Having no other
choice, the Chinese were compelled to arm themselves with such ideological
weapons and political formulas as the theory of evolution, the theory of
natural rights and of the bourgeois republic, which were all borrowed from
the arsenal of the revolutionary period of the bourgeoisie in the West, the
native home of imperialism. The Chinese organized political parties and made
revolutions, believing that they could thus resist foreign powers and build
a republic. However, all these ideological weapons, like those of feudalism,
proved very feeble and in their turn had to give way and were withdrawn and
declared bankrupt.

The Russian Revolution of 1917 awakened the Chinese, and they learned something
new, Marxism-Leninism. In China, the Communist Party was born, an epoch-making
event. Sun Yat-sen, too, advocated "learning from Russia" and "alliance with
Russia and the Communist Party". In a word, from that time China changed
her orientation.

Being the spokesman of an imperialist government, Acheson naturally does
not want to breathe even a word about imperialism. He describes imperialist
aggression thus: "These outsiders brought with them aggressiveness...."
"Aggressiveness" -- what a beautiful name! Having learned this "aggressiveness",
the Chinese did not aggress into Britain or the United States but only created
"ferment and unrest" inside China, i.e., carried out revolutions
against imperialism and its running dogs. But unfortunately they never once
succeeded; each time, they were defeated by the imperialists, the inventors
of "aggressiveness". The Chinese therefore turned around to learn something
else and, strangely enough, they immediately found that it worked.

The Chinese Communist Party "had been organized in the early twenties under
the ideological impetus of the Russian revolution". Here Acheson is right.
This ideology was none other than Marxism-Leninism. This ideology is immeasurably
superior to that of the Western bourgeoisie, which Acheson calls a "high
order of culture which had not accompanied previous foreign incursions into
China". The clinching proof of the effectiveness of this ideology is that
Western bourgeois culture, which the Achesons can boast of as a "high order
of culture" compared with China's old feudal culture, was defeated the moment
it encountered the new Marxist-Leninist culture, the scientific world outlook
and the theory of social revolution, which the Chinese people had acquired.
In its first battle, this scientific and revolutionary new culture acquired
by the Chinese people defeated the Northern warlords, the running dogs of
imperialism; in the second, it defeated the attempts by another running dog
of imperialism, Chiang Kai-shek, to intercept the Chinese Red Army during
its 25,000-li Long March;[6] in the third, it
defeated Japanese imperialism and its running dog, Wang Ching-wei, and in
the fourth, it finally put an end to the domination of China by the United
States and all other imperialist powers as well as to the rule of their running
dogs, Chiang Kai-shek and all the other reactionaries.

The reason why Marxism-Leninism has played such a great role in China since
its introduction is that China's social conditions call for it, that it has
been linked with the actual practice of the Chinese people's revolution and
that the Chinese people have grasped it. Any ideology -- even the very best,
even Marxism-Leninism itself -- is ineffective unless it is linked with objective
realities, meets objectively existing needs and has been grasped by the masses
of the people. We are historical materialists, opposed to historical idealism.

Oddly enough, "Soviet doctrine and practice had a measurable effect upon
the thinking and principles of Dr. Sun Yat-sen, particularly in terms of
economics and Party organization". What was the effect produced on Dr. Sun
by the "high order of culture" of the West, of which Acheson and his like
are so proud? Acheson doesn't say. Was it an accident that Dr. Sun, who devoted
the greater part of his life to seeking from Western bourgeois culture the
truth that would save the nation, was finally disappointed and turned to
"learning from Russia"? Obviously not. Of course it was no accident that
Dr. Sun and the long suffering Chinese people he represented were all infuriated
by the "impact of the West" and resolved to form an "alliance with Russia
and the Communist Party" in order to wage a life-and-death struggle against
imperialism and its running dogs. Acheson dare not say here that the Soviet
people are imperialist aggressors and that Sun Yat-sen learned from aggressors.
Well, then, if Sun Yat-sen could learn from the Soviet people and the Soviet
people are not imperialist aggressors, why can't his successors, the Chinese
who live after him, learn from the Soviet people? Why are the Chinese, Sun
Yat-sen excepted, described as "dominated by the Soviet Union" and as "the
fifth column of the Comintern" and "lackeys of Red imperialism" for learning
the scientific world outlook and the theory of social revolution through
Marxism-Leninism, linking these with China's specific characteristics, starting
the Chinese People's War of Liberation and the great people's revolution
and founding a republic of the people's democratic dictatorship? Can there
be such superior logic anywhere in the world? 


Since they learned Marxism-Leninism, the Chinese people have ceased to be
passive in spirit and gained the initiative. The period of modern world history
in which the Chinese and Chinese culture were looked down upon should have
ended from that moment. The great, victorious Chinese People's War of Liberation
and the great people's revolution have rejuvenated and are rejuvenating the
great culture of the Chinese people. In its spiritual aspect, this culture
of the Chinese people already stands higher than any in the capitalist world.
Take U.S. Secretary of State Acheson and his like, for instance. The level
of their understanding of modern China and of the modern world is lower than
that of an ordinary soldier of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.

Up to this point, Acheson, like a bourgeois professor lecturing on a tedious
text, has pretended to trace the causes and effects of events in China.
Revolution occurred in China, first, because of over-population and, second,
because of the stimulus of Western ideas. You see, he appears to be a champion
of the theory of causation. But in what follows, even this bit of tedious
and phoney theory of causation disappears, and one finds only a mass of
inexplicable events. Quite unaccountably, the Chinese fought among themselves
for power and money, suspecting and hating each other. An inexplicable change
took place in the relative moral strength of the two contending parties,
the Kuomintang and the Communist Party; the morale of one party dropped sharply
to below zero, while that of the other rose sharply to white heat. What was
the reason? Nobody knows. Such is the logic inherent in the "high order of
culture" of the United States as represented by Dean Acheson. 

NOTES


1. The bourgeois revolution of 1775-83, known as the War
of Independence, in which the people of North America opposed British colonial
rule.

2. In their struggle for liberation in 1921-24 the Mongolian
people, under the leadership of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party,
drove out the Russian Whiteguard bandit troops and the armed forces of the
Northern warlords of China, both of which were backed by Japanese imperialism,
overthrew Mongolian feudal rule and founded the Mongolian People's Republic.

3. T. R. Malthus (1766-1834), Anglican clergyman and
reactionary economist. In his Essay on Population (1798), he wrote
that "population unchecked . . . increases in geometrical ratio . . . [while]
the means of subsistence . . . could not possibly be made to increase faster
than in an arithmetical ratio". Basing himself on this arbitrary assumption,
he came to the conclusion that all poverty and all evils in human society
are permanent phenomena of nature. According to him, the only ways to solve
the problem of poverty of the working people were to shorten their life-span,
reduce the population or stop its increase. He regarded famine, pestilence
and war as means to cut down population.

4. The War of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom was a peasant
revolutionary war waged against the feudal rule and national oppression of
the Ching Dynasty in the middle of the 19th century. Hung Hsiu-chuan, Yang
Hsiu-ching and others, the leaders of this revolution, staged an uprising
in Kwangsi in January 1851 and proclaimed the founding of the Taiping Heavenly
Kingdom. In 1852 the peasant army proceeded northward from Kwangsi and marched
through Hunan, Hupeh, Kiangsi and Anhwei and in 1853 it captured Nanking,
the main city on the lower Yangtse. Part of its forces then continued the
drive north and pushed to the vicinity of Tientsin, a major city in northern
China. Because the Taiping army failed to build stable base areas in the
places it occupied and also because, after establishing its capital in Nanking,
the leading group in the army committed many political and military errors,
it could not withstand the joint attack of the counter-revolutionary troops
of the Ching government and the aggressors, Britain, the United States and
France, and suffered defeat in 1864.

5. See Manifesto of the Communist Party, Chapter
1, "Bourgeois and Proletarians". The bourgeoisie "compels all nations, on
pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels
them to introduce what it calls civilization into their midst, i.e.,
to become bourgeois themselves. In one word, it creates a world after
its own image".

6. In October 1934 the First, Third and Fifth Army Groups
of the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army (that is, the First Front
Army of the Red Army, also known as the Central Red Army) set out from Changting
and Ninghua in western Fukien and from Juichin, Yutu and other places in
southern Kiangsi and started a major strategic movement. In traversing the
eleven provinces of Fukien, Kiangsi, Kwangtung, Hunan, Kwangsi, Kweichow,
Szechuan, Yunnan, Sikang, Kansu and Shensi, crossing perpetually snow-capped
mountains and trackless grasslands, sustaining untold hardships and frustrating
the enemy's repeated encirclements, pursuits, obstructions and interceptions,
the Red Army covered 25,000 li (12,500 kilometres) on this march
and finally arrived triumphantly at the revolutionary base area in northern
Shensi in October 1935. 

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.  
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung


